Iraq’s armed forces recaptured Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province, which fell to Islamic State in May and is just 100km from Baghdad. The country’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, said that IS would be driven from his country by the end of 2016. IS also suffered fresh reverses in Syria; on December 26th it lost the important power-generating Tishreen dam to a mainly Kurdish force. See article.  Saudi Arabia’s stockmarkets fell sharply after it announced swingeing spending cuts to close a gaping budget deficit. Saudi public finances have been hurt by declining oil revenues. In the middle of 2015 Brent crude was trading at $65 a barrel; now it is under $38. An outbreak of Ebola that rampaged through three African countries officially ended when the World Health Organisation declared that Guinea was free of the disease. The outbreak, which started two years ago, killed some 11,000 people, most of them in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Stockmarkets responded positively to the Federal Reserve’s decision on December 16th to raise interest rates for the first time since 2006. After months of dithering the central bank lifted the range for its benchmark rate by a quarter of a percentage point to between 0.25% and 0.5%. Martin Shkreli was arrested by the FBI on December 17th and charged with securities fraud. Mr Shkreli made the headlines in 2015 when a drugs company he ran bought the rights to a medicine and raised its price by 5,000%. The (unrelated) charges against Mr Shkreli, which he denies, pertain to his time as a hedge-fund manager. Poland’s right-wing government passed a law requiring the constitutional court to approve decisions by a two-thirds majority, and with at least 13 of the 15 judges present. The law will force the court to accept disputed new judges whom the government has appointed. It will also make it much harder to strike down new laws. The opposition staged furious demonstrations. See article.  Spain held an election before Christmas, which resulted in no stable majority. The ruling People’s Party of Mariano Rajoy came first and the Socialists second. Two smaller parties took seats, breaking the traditional two-party system. Brazil’s finance minister, Joaquim Levy, resigned on December 18th. He came into office in January 2015 with a mandate to slash the budget deficit but was thwarted by a severe recession and political turmoil. His successor is Nelson Barbosa, who was the planning minister. A group of Central American countries plus Mexico reached an agreement to allow some of the 7,000 migrants from Cuba who are stuck on Costa Rica’s border with Nicaragua to travel to the United States. Nicaragua had blocked their entry. The migrants will now be airlifted to El Salvador and continue by bus. The number of migrants from Cuba has increased since a diplomatic thaw with the United States began in 2014. Many fear that the rapprochement will end the United States’ policy of accepting émigrés from Cuba if they reach American soil. Argentina lifted exchange controls and allowed the peso to float freely, days after the inauguration of its new president, Mauricio Macri. This forms part of a liberalisation programme to reverse populist policies of the outgoing government of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. See article.  Carlos Rosales Mendoza, the founder of La Familia Michoacana, a Mexican drug gang, was found dead along with the bodies of three other people near a motorway in western Mexico. He was on the most-wanted list of the Drug Enforcement Agency in the United States. A landslide in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen killed seven people and left dozens of others missing. Officials called it an “industrial safety accident”, caused by a collapsing heap of construction waste. An official who had once overseen the site committed suicide. The chairman of one of China’s largest state-owned mobile operators, China Telecom, is being investigated by anti-graft officials. The businessman, Chang Xiaobing, is among several senior executives who have been targeted in an anti- corruption campaign being waged by President Xi Jinping. Japan and South Korea agreed to settle a long-standing dispute over women forced to work in Japanese brothels during the second world war. Japan apologised and said it would pay ¥1 billion ($8.3m) to help victims. The bodies of six American troops killed by a Taliban suicide-bomber near Bagram air base in Afghanistan were flown home. It was the deadliest attack on American personnel in the country in years. A sizeable contingent of troops is to remain in Afghanistan until at least the start of 2017. The season of goodwill extended to America’s House of Representatives, which passed a $1.8 trillion spending measure before Christmas with little argument and thus avoided a government shutdown. Paul Ryan, the new Speaker, was commended for his adroit handling of the bill.More KAL's cartoonsAT THE start of 2016 Brazil should be in an exuberant mood. Rio de Janeiro is to host South America’s first Olympic games in August, giving Brazilians a chance to embark on what they do best: throwing a really spectacular party. Instead, Brazil faces political and economic disaster. On December 16th Fitch became the second of the three big credit-rating agencies to downgrade Brazil’s debt to junk status. Days later Joaquim Levy, the finance minister appointed by the president, Dilma Rousseff, to stabilise the public finances, quit in despair after less than a year in the job. Brazil’s economy is predicted to shrink by 2.5-3% in 2016, not much less than it did in 2015. Even oil-rich, sanction-racked Russia stands to do better. At the same time, Brazil’s governing coalition has been discredited by a gargantuan bribery scandal surrounding Petrobras, a state-controlled oil company. And Ms Rousseff, accused of hiding the size of the budget deficit, faces impeachment proceedings in Congress. As the B in BRICS, Brazil is supposed to be in the vanguard of fast-growing emerging economies. Instead it faces political dysfunction and perhaps a return to rampant inflation. Only hard choices can put Brazil back on course. Just now, Ms Rousseff does not seem to have the stomach for them. Dismal Dilma Brazil’s suffering, like that of other emerging economies, stems partly from the fall in global commodity prices. But Ms Rousseff and her left-wing Workers’ Party (PT) have made a bad situation much worse. During her first term, in 2011-14, she spent extravagantly and unwisely on higher pensions and unproductive tax breaks for favoured industries. The fiscal deficit swelled from 2% of GDP in 2010 to 10% in 2015. Brazil’s crisis managers do not have the luxury of waiting for better times to begin reform (see article). At 70% of GDP, public debt is worryingly large for a middle-income country and rising fast. Because of high interest rates, the cost of servicing it is a crushing 7% of GDP. The Central Bank cannot easily use monetary policy to fight inflation, currently 10.5%, as higher rates risk destabilising the public finances even more by adding to the interest bill. Brazil therefore has little choice but to raise taxes and cut spending. Mr Levy made a game attempt to renovate the building while putting out the fire. He trimmed discretionary spending by a record 70 billion reais ($18 billion) in 2015 and tightened eligibility for unemployment insurance. But it was not enough. The recession dragged down tax revenues. Ms Rousseff gave her finance minister only lukewarm support and the PT was hostile towards him. The opposition, intent on ousting the president, was in no mood to co-operate. Although he was a senior treasury official during Ms Rousseff’s disastrous first term, Nelson Barbosa may be able to accomplish more as finance minister. He has political support within the PT. He also has bargaining power, because Ms Rousseff cannot afford to lose another finance minister. One early test will be whether Mr Barbosa persuades a recalcitrant Congress to reinstate an unpopular financial-transactions tax. A central target should be pensions. The minimum benefit is the same as the minimum wage, which has risen by nearly 90% in real terms over the past decade. Women typically retire when they are 50 and men stop work at 55, nearly a decade earlier than the average in the OECD (a club of mostly rich countries). Brazil’s government pays almost 12% of GDP to pensioners, a bigger share than older, richer Japan. If Brazil is to fulfil its promise, much, much more is needed. A typical manufacturing firm spends 2,600 hours a year complying with the country’s ungainly tax code; the Latin American average is 356. Labour laws modelled on those of Mussolini make it expensive for firms to fire even incompetent employees. Brazil has shielded its firms from international competition. That is one reason why, among 41 countries whose performance was measured by the OECD, its manufacturing productivity is the fourth-lowest. To reform work and pensions, Ms Rousseff must face up to problems that have been decades in the making. Some 90% of public spending is protected from cuts, partly by the constitution which, in 1988, celebrated the end of military rule by enshrining generous job protection and state benefits. Because it is so hard to reform, Brazil’s public sector rivals European welfare states for size but emerging ones for inefficiency. Long a drain on economic vitality, Brazil’s overbearing state is now a chief cause of the fiscal crisis. Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts Overcoming such deep-rooted practices would be hard for any government. In Brazil it is made all the harder by a daft political system, which favours party fragmentation and vote-buying and attracts political mercenaries who have little commitment either to party or to programme. The threshold for a party to enter the lower house of Congress is low; today 28 are represented, adding to the legislative gridlock. Congressmen represent entire states, some as populous as neighbouring Latin American countries, which makes campaigning ruinously expensive—one reason why politicians skimmed off huge amounts of money from Petrobras. It is therefore hard, despite Mr Barbosa’s advantages, to feel optimistic about the prospects for deep reform. Voters hold politicians in contempt. The opposition is bent on impeaching Ms Rousseff, a misguided battle that could dominate the political agenda for months. The PT has no appetite for austerity. Achieving the three-fifths support in both houses of Congress needed for constitutional reforms will be a tall order. Reckless Rousseff And if Ms Rousseff fails to bring about change? Most of Brazil’s borrowing is in local currency, which makes default unlikely. Instead, the country may end up inflating away its debts. Brazil’s achievement has been to lift tens of millions of people out of rag-and-flip-flop poverty. Recession will halt that, or even begin to reverse it. The hope is that Brazil, which has achieved hard-won economic and democratic stability, does not lapse once again into chronic mismanagement and turmoil.VISAS are necessary evils. They offer governments a way to control their borders, whether to regulate the flow of immigrants or to pick out threats to security. But the paperwork and fees they entail also deter legitimate tourists and business travellers. Researchers at the Cato Institute, a libertarian think-tank, reckon that eliminating all travel visas to the United States would add between $90 billion and $123 billion in annual tourist spending. By one estimate, introducing visa restrictions can lower trade and foreign direct investment between a pair of countries by as much as 25%. The job of policymakers is to strike the right balance between such costs and benefits. On short-term business and tourist visas, they have failed. Take security. Visas, proponents say, keep countries safer by controlling who is able to enter. That is true, but they are not very efficient. Terrorists can be home-grown as well as foreign, qualify for visas (as the 9/11 attackers did) or slip across borders illegally. Imposing restrictions on the basis of nationality is the bluntest of instruments, scooping up legions of ordinary tourists and travellers as well as the occasional suspect. America’s decision to tighten the rules for anyone who has recently been to Iran, Iraq, Sudan and Syria will affect aid workers and plotters alike. It is a similar story with unauthorised migration. Identifying visitors who might overstay their welcome is a core duty of visa officers. Western countries often require several months’ bank statements, pay slips, proof of financial and property holdings, tax returns and letters from bosses promising that their employees will return (see article). These strictures also put off legitimate travellers. When Canada lifted visa requirements for Czech citizens in 2007, the number of Czech tourists jumped by a third; when restrictions were reintroduced in 2009, after a rise in asylum applications, arrivals fell by 70% over three years. Rather than gumming up all travel, it made more sense to process asylum claims faster. The rules have subsequently been relaxed again. Governments can take three steps to ease the burden of visas without simply throwing borders open to all-comers. The first is to slash the length of their forms. Britain, a grave offender when it comes to high fees and piles of paperwork, requires visa applicants to fill in a ten-page form, provide a list of every foreign trip over the past decade and declare that they have never incited terrorism to boot. This is absurd. Schengen-area bureaucrats in continental Europe manage to screen visitors in just two pages. America’s visa-waiver programme allows citizens of 28 countries to visit by filling out a simple online form with basic personal information. Second, government departments need to get better at sharing that information, both within borders and across them. Most big receiving countries now demand biometric data such as fingerprints and retinal scans. Many also require “advance passenger information” before a traveller is allowed to board an aeroplane. Cross-checking these data against intelligence and criminal databases will usually obviate the need for lengthy inquisitions. La visa loca Usually, but not always. Countries will want to investigate some applicants in greater detail. So the third step is to grant longer visas to those people who have easily cleared the necessary hurdles. America routinely grants ten-year visas; Europe routinely grants ten-day ones. That means travellers to the Schengen area must repeatedly prove their good intentions, leading to more otiose paperwork, and fewer visits. Necessary as they are, visas need not be so evil.A MONTH before the first primary contest in Iowa, the Republican race is more warlike than wonkish. Yet the candidates have found time to write sometimes intricate plans to reform America’s taxes (see article). Though no one blueprint will become law, if America chooses a Republican president, he may well have a Republican Congress to work with. At that point, the winner’s tax plan will seem less like a campaign gimmick and more like a promise to be kept. Republicans are right to seek to reform America’s incoherent, tangled-up tax system. America’s corporate tax is a toxic combination of a high rate—the highest in the OECD—and a series of complex distortions, which encourage bad behaviour such as gorging on debt and stashing cash in foreign subsidiaries. Republicans rightly want to cut the rate and put an end to most of the distortions. Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush would also let businesses deduct the cost of their investments from their taxes immediately, rather than as their assets deteriorate and lose value. This would encourage investment and boost economic growth. The candidates have interesting ideas for helping low earners, too. Mr Bush and Donald Trump want to raise the standard deduction (the amount Americans can earn before paying income tax). That would be a simple way to encourage work and to help low- and middle-income households: a similar policy has proved a success in Britain. Mr Bush would also double the earned-income tax credit, a wage top-up for low-earners, for childless workers. Mr Rubio wants to replace the standard deduction with a universal payment to those in work, which would help even those who earn too little to benefit from an increased tax allowance.  These ideas, though, are mere footnotes to the plans’ central chapters: huge tax cuts for high earners. At 39.6%, America’s top federal income-tax rate is hardly high by global standards. Yet the candidates are racing to see who can promise to cut it most. Mr Bush aims for 28%; Mr Trump 25%. Ted Cruz wants to replace income tax entirely with a 10% flat tax and a value-added tax. Mr Rubio, whose promise of a 35% top rate seems timid by comparison, serves up largesse elsewhere by promising to abolish levies on capital gains and dividends. The first problem with these schemes is their cost. On today’s growth forecasts, even Mr Bush’s relatively moderate plan would reduce revenues by $715 billion, or 13.5%, a year by 2026—more than the projected national defence budget. Paying for Mr Trump’s plan with reduced day-to-day spending (as opposed to mandatory spending on things like pensions and health care) would require cutting budgets by a staggering 82%. The candidates claim that tax cuts will spur the economy, filling the government’s coffers with new revenue. But the pace of any economic acceleration is uncertain. The evidence that income-tax cuts for high earners boost growth is thin at best. Predictions that tax cuts in the early 2000s would cause enough growth to pay for themselves look foolish today. This is no time to be taking chances with America’s budget. Retiring baby-boomers are increasing the cost of providing pensions and health care for the old. There is no appetite among Republicans for defence cuts, and other day-to-day spending has already been cut by 22% in real terms since 2010. If tax cuts were paid for with more borrowing rather than lower spending, they would end up as deadweight for the economy rather than as fuel. The plans would also greatly exacerbate inequality, which has increased in the 15 years since George W. Bush cut taxes for high earners. Under Mr Trump’s plan, for instance, the top 1% of earners would receive a windfall worth 18% of their after-tax income. Middle-earners have to settle for a 5% boost; the bottom fifth, just 1%. This belies Mr Trump’s claim to champion the cause of ordinary working people. The other plans are little better; Mr Rubio’s plan is probably more generous at the bottom than at the top, but he gives middle-income Americans little to cheer about. The Republicans have spent much of Barack Obama’s presidency denouncing debt and deficits. Yet their proposals to introduce unaffordable tax cuts for the rich would send both ballooning. So long as such schemes are a prerequisite for winning the Republican nomination, a party that prides itself on economic management will lack a credible policy.ECONOMISTS don’t forecast because they know, said J.K. Galbraith; they forecast because they’re asked. A question that is increasingly put to them is whether inflation, which has been remarkably quiescent for years, will spring a surprise in 2016. After all, the debt troubles that have weighed down rich economies since 2007 are fading; labour markets in America, Britain and Germany are increasingly tight; housing markets are gathering steam; and the Federal Reserve has just raised interest rates for the first time in almost a decade. Inflation in America and Europe should indeed pick up from its present, near-zero state as the big declines in energy prices at the turn of 2015 drop out of the headline rate. But a glut in the supply of crude means that oil prices are falling again. If debt is receding as a problem in rich countries, it looms larger in emerging markets, where overcapacity brought on by binge-borrowing exerts a downward force on prices. There is inflation in commodity-exporting countries, such as Brazil, whose currencies have been trashed. But global inflation is a tug-of-war between bottlenecks in parts of the rich world and imported deflation from emerging markets, and the enduring fall or stagnation of prices looks set to dominate for a while yet (see article). Indeed, this “lowflation” means that three aspects of the world economy are worth watching in 2016. Start with Saudi Arabia. The falling price of crude is in part a consequence of its commitment (reiterated by OPEC ministers on December 4th) to produce at full tilt. The idea is to flush out the weaker producers in America’s shale-oil industry and elsewhere. This is proving a costly gambit. Saudi Arabia needs a barrel of oil to fetch around $85 to finance public spending and around $60 to keep its current account in balance. Yet the oil price recently fell below $36, to an 11-year low, before rebounding a little. America has sustained oil production of above 9m barrels a day, despite a sharp fall in the number of oil rigs, suggesting that shale firms are becoming more efficient. This week Saudi Arabia said that it would cut local subsidies on petrol, electricity and water in order to chip away at a budget deficit that reached 367 billion riyals ($98 billion), or 15% of GDP, in 2015. The Saudis are burning through their (ample) foreign-exchange reserves to pay for imports while maintaining the riyal’s peg with the dollar. But the cost of this strategy has already forced two other oil exporters, Kazakhstan and, more recently, Azerbaijan, to abandon their dollar pegs. The public finances of other big oil producers, such as Russia and Nigeria, are also under pressure. No wonder a devaluation of the riyal this year is a favoured tail-risk for currency forecasters. A second place to watch is China. A construction boom has left it with a mountain of debt and excess capacity in some industries—notably steel, whose falling global price has claimed jobs in Europe’s industry and led to growing complaints of Chinese dumping. Factory-gate prices have fallen in China for 45 consecutive months. Further fiscal and monetary stimulus should help to boost demand, but will also hinder the management of China’s exchange rate, which is already under pressure from an outflow of capital. As with the riyal, the yuan has just about kept pace with the dollar’s ascent over the past two years, leaving it looking expensive. Beijing has signalled that it wants to benchmark the yuan against a basket of currencies, and some forecasters expect a gradual decline in its value against the dollar in 2016. But there is an understandable fear that the yuan may slip anchor, potentially touching off a round of devaluations in Asia. A third outcome from continued lowflation will be increasingly lopsided economies in the rich world, particularly in America, where recovery is more advanced than in Europe. If productivity stays as weak as it has been recently, unemployment is likely to fall still further. At the same time, slow growth in emerging markets is likely to keep downward pressure on commodity prices and on their currencies. A strong dollar has already driven a wedge between the performance of America’s manufacturing and service industries. Further appreciation would make it harder for the Federal Reserve to push through more increases in interest rates. Strong on jobs, weak on prices All this would make for a strangely configured economy by the end of the year. An unemployment rate of 4%, a Fed Funds rate below 1%, an overvalued dollar, a strong housing market and inflation below the Fed’s target of 2% is a plausible, if very odd, mix, which could portend either a sudden burst of inflation or enduringly feeble demand (see article). An honest economist will admit the uncertainties in any forecast. But another year of lowflation will surely tax policymakers.
