Nice sash, horrible inheritance MAURICIO MACRI, who took office as Argentina’s president in December, has wasted little time in undoing the populist policies of his predecessor. On December 14th he scrapped export taxes on agricultural products such as wheat, beef and corn and reduced them on soyabeans, the biggest export. Two days later Alfonso Prat-Gay, the new finance minister, lifted currency controls, allowing the peso to float freely. A team from the new government then met the mediator in a dispute with foreign bondholders in an attempt to end Argentina’s isolation from the international credit markets.  This flurry of decisions is the first step towards normalising an economy that had been skewed by the interventionist policies of ex-president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner, who governed before her. They carry an immediate cost, which Mr Macri will seek to pin on the Kirchners. Some of the new president’s other early initiatives are proving more controversial. The economic reforms seem to be working. Farmers who had hoarded grain in the hope that the tariffs would be lifted are now selling, replenishing foreign-exchange reserves that had been drained to defend the artificially strong peso. The newly freed currency fell by more than 30%, a further boost to exporters. It has stabilised at around 13 pesos to the dollar. “Substantive” talks with holdout bondholders starting in early January could lead to a return to credit markets in 2016. But the devaluation has pushed up the inflation rate, already more than 25% when Mr Macri took office. To rein it back, on December 15th the central bank raised interest rates on short-term fixed deposits by eight percentage points to 38%. The government hopes to persuade business and trade-union leaders to keep tight control of prices and wages. But that may prove difficult: the unions are fragmented and little disposed to help Mr Macri, a centre-right politician; businesses may balk at holding down prices. Barclays, a bank, expects the economy to contract by 1.1% in 2016. But increased foreign investment should lead to renewed growth of 3.5% in 2017. Mr Macri’s attempts to bring fresh talent into institutions dominated by Ms Fernández’s kirchneristas have run into resistance, from both foes and allies. On December 14th, with the Senate in recess, Mr Macri temporarily appointed by decree two Supreme Court judges. He then booted out the chief of the media regulator, Martín Sabbatella. In both cases his motives were worthy. He wants independent jurists in the courts. Mr Sabbatella had clashed with Grupo Clarín, a big media group. Mr Macri thinks his removal will strengthen press freedom. But critics say he misused his authority. On the judges, at least, he has relented. He will now wait for the Senate’s approval. Touring northern Argentina, where 20,000 people have been displaced from their homes by floods, Mr Macri blamed the former president, saying she had failed to invest in flood defences (see article). For now, Argentines are likely to believe their new president. However, if the economic slowdown is prolonged, the honeymoon will not be.THE bronze statue of a teenage “comfort woman” in Seoul, South Korea’s capital, is intended as a daily rebuke to the Japanese embassy opposite. The figure represents one of many thousands of Korean women who were forced to serve as prostitutes in wartime military brothels catering to imperial Japanese soldiers. Citizens’ groups paid for the figure to be erected in 2011 when relations between Japan and South Korea were at a nadir. Well-wishers bring her flowers, shoes and, in stormy weather, even a hat and raincoat. Yet now the statue is meant to move elsewhere as part of a landmark agreement struck between the two countries on December 28th to try to settle their dispute over comfort women once and for all—and transform dangerously strained relations. Of former sex slaves who have come forward in South Korea, only 46 survive. Under the deal, South Korea will set up a fund for them into which the Japanese government will pay $8.3m for their medical and nursing care. The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has expressed “sincere apologies and remorse” for their suffering, which was appalling. In all, there were tens of thousands of comfort women. Many were raped dozens of times a day, beaten and infected with venereal diseases. It is a big change for Mr Abe, who has in the past questioned whether the comfort women were coerced at all. But he hopes to have found what the two countries’ foreign ministers called a “final and irrevocable” resolution to an issue that has poisoned the relationship for years. South Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye, hailed the deal—hastened by the two leaders’ first bilateral meeting in November—as a key to improved relations. The administration of Barack Obama is cock-a-hoop that its two closest Asian allies are making up. It had long pressed South Korea to do so. Better relations between the two should help America’s strategy to balance China’s rise. But some South Korean policymakers had also grown uneasy that relations with Japan were at a dead end and—though they would not say it out loud—that Ms Park sometimes seemed to hew too closely to China. Meanwhile, a stronger trilateral relationship with Japan and America would help in dealing with dangerous North Korea. It has taken time for Ms Park to see all this, and her family history helps explain why. Her late father, Park Chung-hee, was a star officer in the Japanese imperial army, and later the South Korean dictator who normalised relations with Japan. These were liabilities for the cautious Ms Park as anti-Japanese hysteria grew. A question now is whether a deal will hold. Some of Japan’s loony ultranationalists will feel betrayed by Mr Abe. But he is too politically dominant at home to be worried by that. Besides, the government can argue that saying sorry does not imply legal responsibility, which was settled in Japan’s normalisation treaty with South Korea in 1965. “We didn’t give an inch,” says a government adviser. Indeed, one observer critical of Japan’s attitudes towards history, Tessa Morris-Suzuki of the Australian National University, says that the agreement rows back from the landmark Kono statement of 1993, Japan’s first official acknowledgment of wartime coercion. For it refers only to the imperial army’s “involvement” in the recruitment of comfort women, while excluding references to the use of deception or force. The agreement is more likely to face problems in South Korea. Groups representing the survivors say that the women were not consulted, and at least one of them has already railed against it as a betrayal. South Korean activists will oppose moving the statue, something Japan cares deeply about. Calls may grow for Mr Abe to come and make a personal apology to survivors, rather than through Ms Park. Whether he would swallow his pride to do so is unclear. Chung-in Moon of Yonsei University in Seoul says it is a fragile deal born of diplomatic necessity. Make it work Yet both sides have good reason to try to make it stick, for the bilateral relationship could quickly improve, on military matters as well as others. For instance, an agreement to share military intelligence that was scuppered in 2012 could be revived. The benefits could also show in trade diplomacy, with Japan and America working together to bring South Korea into the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free-trade grouping recently agreed among a dozen countries. With luck, the idea of two democracies in a dangerous corner of the world not talking to each other will soon look too absurd to go back to.Voiding the topic ain’t gonna stop it BRIGHTLY coloured plastic flowers greet patients at the reception desk of Nguyen To Hao’s abortion clinic. Yet the mood in her waiting room is grim. Ms Hao, an obstetrician and gynaecologist, says that many of her patients are teenagers who know shockingly little about sex or its consequences. Some young women with late-term pregnancies are sent to a nearby hospital for abortions; others carry their pregnancies to term and leave their newborn babies in the care of Buddhist monks. Unwanted pregnancies could be avoided if only Vietnam had better sex education in secondary schools. A Vietnamese adage claims that avoiding discussions of sex is the surest way to “prevent the deer from running”. Yet the deer are “already running”, Dr Hao insists, and the government is failing to guide them. Vietnam’s abortion rate is not known for certain, but is thought to be among the world’s highest. According to researchers at the Central Obstetrics Hospital in Hanoi, the capital, two-fifths of all pregnancies in Vietnam end in abortion—double the government’s tally. Ignorance about sex and contraception is one glaring factor. Some women who have abortions never meant to get pregnant. Others desperately wanted a boy, since male children keep the family bloodline going and are traditionally expected to look after their elderly parents. Sex-selective abortions have been illegal since 2003, but the ban is hard to enforce. Ultrasounds are widely available. Nguyen Thi Hien, a mother of two in Hanoi, says that for $75 doctors at the capital’s private clinics are happy to tell couples the sex of their fetus. So for every 100 girls, 111 boys are born in Vietnam, according to the UN Population Fund—a sex ratio at birth nearly as lopsided as neighbouring China’s. Vietnam’s Communist Party worries that this sex imbalance will leave a generation of men struggling to find a mate. As in other societies with lots of frustrated single men, that may mean more trafficking and prostitution, more rape and a greater risk of political instability. Vietnam’s reproductive and demographic policies are in flux. China’s recent decision to relax its one-child policy may prompt Vietnam to reconsider its own (more loosely enforced) two-child policy, says a former official from Vietnam’s health ministry. The ministry is now soliciting public comments for a revision of that law, and the National Assembly may take it up this spring. It is not a moment too soon. A whopping two-thirds of the country’s 90m people are of working age. That gives Vietnam a chance to boom economically over the next three decades. But the “demographic dividend” may then stop abruptly. Fertility rates in some Vietnamese cities have fallen to below the population replacement rate, a trend that could eventually lead to a shortage of workers, as Japan and other rich countries have learnt to their cost. The difference is that Vietnam risks growing old before it grows rich. The new population law, in its current wording, would not help. It proposes to leave the two-child policy in place and ban abortion after 12 weeks, down from the current limit of 22 weeks, except in cases of rape. That may send even more pregnant Vietnamese into shadowy abortion clinics. In September some 17 public-health professionals complained about the proposed law in a letter to the health minister. Such pressure may prompt the government to extend the proposed 12-week limit. However, the population-control measures being mulled by the ministry contain another troubling feature: a pre-natal focus on “population quality”. That sounds harmless enough, but the underlying idea, according to a foreign health-policy expert in Hanoi, is that health officials could encourage mothers to abort fetuses showing signs of disability. Some in the ministry have also proposed lifting the two-child policy in cities while continuing to enforce it in the countryside—ie, encouraging the better-educated and better-off to have more children while denying the same right to poor folk, including ethnic minorities, who view their children and grandchildren as their only social safety net. That would allow the bureaucrats in charge of the two-child policy to keep their jobs. But the idea is regressive, unfair and needs to be junked.He’s backed by a fat budget SITTING on the floor with neighbours, Sakariya uses a mobile phone to flick through photos of his son. In one, Kholid stands dressed in his school uniform. In another he sits hunched over his university work. In a third he is dead—lying cold on a mortuary slab. The picture was taken in March, only hours after soldiers surrounded a group of men at a construction site in Toh Chud, their home in Thailand’s restive south. Seven bullet holes perforate his chest. Kholid was one of four to die that day—victims of a botched operation seeking to collar murderous separatists who for years have dreamed of resurrecting an independent sultanate in Thailand’s southern borderlands. Nearly two dozen villagers were detained and interrogated but later released. The men who were shot may have tried to run, perhaps for fear of being found with soft drugs on them. A fact-finding panel says the killings were an error. Compensation is promised. But what the families want is justice, says Mohammad, another parent whose son is among the dead. Toh Chud up in the hills had mostly managed to escape the nightmares suffered by so many communities in Thailand’s southernmost provinces. Of 2m-odd people in the region, over four-fifths are ethnic-Malay Muslims. Hotheads among them have long agitated against the Thai government in Bangkok and its policies of assimilation—denying the region autonomy, for instance, and even recognition of the local Malay language. In 2004 secretive insurgent groups began a campaign of exceptionally violent attacks on security forces as well as on their own Buddhist neighbours. Since then about 6,500 people have died in this lush coastal strip, most of them civilians. Terrorists have bombed shops and restaurants and murdered scores of schoolteachers, who are seen as agents of the state; victims’ bodies are sometimes beheaded or set alight. Moderate ethnic-Malays considered to be collaborators are also targets. On December 13th an ethnic-Malay Thai soldier and his father were blown up in a graveyard, where they had gone to bury his mother.  State violence has done much to boost the body count. The apparent legal immunity enjoyed by trigger-happy soldiers and pro-government vigilantes continues to radicalise new generations of combatants. Kholid’s family say his killers placed an assault rifle next to his body to make him look like an insurgent. Over the past decade seven Thai governments, swept in and out of power by broader political problems, have grasped for a resolution. Officials say that regional autonomy of the type that has soothed Islamist insurgencies in Indonesia and the Philippines is off the table. But so are smaller concessions, such as formal recognition of the region’s odd Malay language. Some argue that the fat budget the security forces get to prosecute the conflict gives them little incentive to end it. Three checkpoints clog the road out of Pattani, a seaside town, each manned by a different force. Some energy has gone into boosting the deep south’s economy, which depends greatly on its rubber trees. Though it remains far poorer than Bangkok, the region is not as hard-up as some other far-flung parts of Thailand. But locals tend to compare their fortunes with those of ethnic kin across the border in Malaysia, where laws grant the Malay majority a host of advantages over ethnic-Chinese and Indian minorities. Christopher Joll, an academic, says the region is like “meat in a sandwich”, squeezed by inflexible nationalisms from either side. Thailand’s ruling junta, which had said it would try to fix the conflict by the end of 2015, trumpets progress. Lured by the promise of fresh peace talks, a gaggle of once-shadowy separatist groups has formed a common political wing. The violence has ebbed markedly in recent months. But Don Pathan, a local security analyst, speculates that militants may be swapping frequent small assaults for better planned and more lethal ones. As for dialogue, hardliners within BRN, the most powerful rebel group, say they will play no part in the junta’s proposed talks. Peace-builders on the ground complain that it is getting harder to discuss unpopular solutions. The army has long refused to countenance international mediation, one of the separatists’ principal demands, for fear of legitimising separatist claims. And it is hardly likely to consider devolving powers when it is busily recentralising the state, in part to neuter the government’s opponents in other provinces and in part to keep a lid on the dissent which may follow a looming royal succession. Matt Wheeler of the International Crisis Group, a research outfit, thinks the generals are simply “kicking the can down the road”. Yet that carries two risks. Although the insurgents have largely rejected international jihadism, some people fret that Islamic State’s flashy propaganda may yet find an audience among the region’s unhappy young. Lately someone in cyberspace has been adding Thai subtitles to the jihadists’ video-nasties. In graphics: Explaining Thailand’s volatile politics A deeper worry is that the bubbling southern war may fuel Buddhist chauvinism. Perhaps a tenth of Thais are Muslim, most of them living well-integrated lives far from the conflict zone. On a recent public holiday girls in black headscarves cycled cheerfully around the Haroon mosque, one of Bangkok’s oldest, which was festooned with royal flags. Yet Thailand’s Muslims are gradually growing more conservative under the influence of Middle Eastern doctrines, which unnerves their Buddhist compatriots. And some people think that Buddhist authorities are growing more strident as the influence of Thailand’s royal establishment, which has traditionally checked them, begins to wane. In October a senior Buddhist monk said that Thais should set fire to a mosque every time southern “bandits” kill a monk. The locals gathered at the house in Toh Chud worry that outsiders are seeking to sow division. Unlike nearby ghettos, their village of 300 households includes 30 Buddhist families, and the tragedy in March has tightened their village bonds. On the day of the raid local Buddhists helped to conceal one young man who had escaped the soldiers’ cordon. As lunch approaches, Somkhuan, a Buddhist who once served as village headman, joins the group for a smoke. When his daughter got married he threw two parties, his neighbours recall enthusiastically, one of them halal. Such good relations are not a big deal, Somkhuan says: it has always been this way. But what if Toh Chud started to become the exception?NARENDRA MODI likes to make a splash abroad. On December 25th he turned up in Pakistan, the first visit by an Indian prime minister in more than a decade, for an impromptu summit with his counterpart, Nawaz Sharif. At home, though, Mr Modi appears less impressive. Despite his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)’s thumping general-election victory in 2014, his promises of business-friendly reforms are stuck. The passage of an all-embracing value-added tax, known as the goods and services tax (GST), has become the litmus test of his liberalising credentials. It is the one reform that both the BJP and the opposition Congress party ostensibly agree on. Raising funds for both the federal government at the centre and the states, it is meant to replace a monstrous excrescence of taxes, duties, surcharges and cesses levied by the centre, the states and local authorities—a system that fragments the economy and gives huge scope for corruption by officials and politicians. Replacing most taxes with a GST would, for the first time, create a single market in India—of 1.3 billion people. The latest and perhaps most promising attempt to pass the necessary constitutional amendment failed with the closing of the winter session of parliament in December. Mr Modi will try again in the budget session, which opens in February. But if he is to succeed, he will have to overcome India’s cynical politics. The economy grew at a pleasing annualised rate of 7.4% from July to September—faster than China’s. Yet many economists cast doubt on the official figures, and Mr Modi’s attempt to boost manufacturing is not making much progress. Indeed, the best chance of turning his slogan of “Make in India” into reality is through a single market—“Make in India by Making One India”, as a recent government report put it. The existing system, senior officials say, taxes production more than consumption and, in effect, subsidises importers at the expense of domestic producers. Perversely, trade between states is taxed, through a central sales tax of 2%. Some states also impose duties on products entering from elsewhere in India. Lorries are held up at internal checkpoints (see picture). An executive from a prominent Indian firm explains that, because trade between one state and another is subject to the central sales tax while the transfers of inventory are not, his company has set up warehouses in every state to avoid the tax. And because duties paid on inputs often cannot be claimed back, there is a “cascade” of taxes levied upon previous ones. Among other things, it discourages investment in machinery. “The entire ecosystem”, he says, “works to optimise tax, not productivity.” One study suggests that a “flawless” GST—with a single rate for all goods and services, and minimal exemptions—could boost Indian growth by anything between 0.9 and 1.7 percentage points a year. Another benefit would be to create a paper trail and an incentive for firms to declare transactions in order to claim tax credits, so reducing overall tax evasion. Attempts to streamline indirect taxes date back to liberalisations in the 1990s, yet moves towards forms of value-added taxes have been partial at best. A version of a more encompassing GST bill was passed by the lower house in May. Unwisely, it postponed imposing the tax on oil products (a vital input) till an unspecified future date. It exempted alcohol entirely. That these two categories currently account for a large share of states’ revenues (and of illicit party funding) is no coincidence. The bill also still stipulates a temporary central sales tax, of 1%, on interstate trade. Even this watered-down law has been stuck in Parliament’s upper house, where the BJP lacks a majority. When Congress was in office, its own attempt to introduce a GST was blocked by the BJP. Now it acts as the spoiler. Congress rightly objects to the central sales tax. But its demand that the constitution should enshrine a maximum rate for the GST of 18% makes little sense. (A third demand is for a different mechanism to resolve disputes over the working of the tax.) For more than a year Mr Modi haughtily ignored the opposition. He no doubt hoped that the momentum from his general-election victory would carry him to wins in subsequent state elections, automatically sending delegates to the upper house and giving him a majority there, too. But lately the BJP has been defeated in key places, most recently in Bihar, the third-most-populous state. So Mr Modi has become a bit humbler. He belatedly invited Sonia Gandhi, president of Congress, and Manmohan Singh, his predecessor as prime minister, to tea in the hope of finding a deal on a GST. A committee led by the finance ministry’s chief economic adviser, Arvind Subramanian, offered some concessions: scrapping the central sales tax and setting two bands for the GST (a standard rate of 17-18% and a lower 12% rate for certain sensitive goods) which are within Congress’s declared ceiling. The committee also proposed that alcohol as well as property transactions should be subject to the GST; in return, states could levy “sin taxes” on things like alcohol and tobacco of up to 40%. Taxing times The committee’s report appeared to bring a much-improved GST bill within reach. But Congress took to disrupting the upper house. The cause of its rowdy outrage at first was the government’s “intolerance” of minorities (especially Muslims); then a minister’s allegedly derogatory remarks about low-caste dalits; then the BJP’s supposed “vendetta” in a court wrangle involving Mrs Gandhi, her son Rahul, and the allegedly corrupt disposal of a failed party newspaper; and lastly the party’s demand that the finance minister, Arun Jaitley, should step down over claims of corruption in cricket. Congress might have claimed victory in forcing Mr Modi to see sense over the GST, even as it challenged his excesses. Instead it chose obstructionism. If he is to secure any economic legacy, Mr Modi may now have to spend more time on the art of buttering up opponents at home rather than fellow leaders abroad.ON DECEMBER 25th, some three years after taking over as China’s leader, Xi Jinping posted his first tweet. For a man clearly rattled by the rapid spread of social media, and grimly determined to tame them, the venue was fitting. Uniformed military officials stood around as he typed his message into a computer in the office of an army-run newspaper (see picture). His new-year greeting was not to China’s more than 660m internet users, but to the armed forces—most of whose members are banned from tweeting. It was clearly in part to intimidate feistier members of the country’s online community that the authorities arrested one of the country’s most prominent civil-rights activists, Pu Zhiqiang, in 2014 and eventually put him on trial on December 14th. On the basis of seven messages posted on Weibo, China’s heavily censored version of Twitter, Mr Pu was charged with “picking quarrels and stirring up trouble” as well as “inciting ethnic hatred”. The court handed down a three-year suspended prison sentence, which means that Mr Pu will not be allowed to continue his widely acclaimed work as a lawyer (less than three years ago, he was the subject of a laudatory cover story in a state-controlled magazine). “It was not the worst outcome, but it set the most odious of precedents,” said a Weibo user in Beijing in a message to his nearly 57,000 online followers. Mr Xi is the first Chinese leader to come to power amid the rapid growth of a middle class whose members are equipped with a powerful means of airing dissent and linking up with like-minded malcontents. He inherited an army of internet censors, but despite his efforts to give them more legal muscle (the country’s first counter-terrorism law, passed on December 27th, includes restrictions on the reporting of terrorist incidents), Mr Xi is still struggling. Support for Mr Pu both online and off has shown the scale of the challenge he faces. Some had feared that Mr Pu would be jailed for years. It is possible, in the face of huge support for the activist and a lack of strong evidence, that officials blinked. Napping net nannies Social-media messages relating to Mr Pu were quickly purged from the internet. Yet it is likely that some were seen by many people before disappearing. Some sensitive postings were retweeted by users with large followings before they were eventually deleted, suggesting that censors occasionally failed to keep up. “If you can be found guilty on the basis of a few Weibo postings, then every Weibo user is guilty, everyone should be rounded up,” wrote a Beijing-based journalist to his more than 220,000 followers. “I don’t understand the law, but I do know that [handling Mr Pu this way] was absolutely against the spirit of rule by law,” said Zhang Ming, a politics professor in Beijing, to his following of nearly 790,000 people. Mr Pu’s prosecutors also provided evidence of the censors’ weaknesses. They said one of his allegedly criminal messages, which suggested that a terrorist attack in 2014 may have reflected failings in the government’s policies in the western region of Xinjiang, had garnered 1,930 retweets—remarkable given Mr Pu’s well-known propensity to criticise officialdom. Outside the court, dozens of Mr Pu’s supporters defied a heavy police presence, which included the deployment of thuggish men in plain clothes (oddly wearing smiley badges during the trial). Several protesters were dragged away, some after chanting “Pu Zhiqiang is innocent”. Internet users showed similar disdain for the censors on the anniversary on December 26th of the birth of Mao Zedong (“He wreaked greater destruction on human civilisation than any other villain,” one businessman told his more than 106,000 followers). They piped up, too, after an avalanche of construction waste on December 20th in the southern city of Shenzhen that killed at least seven people and left more than 70 others missing. One Weibo user with nearly 75,000 followers lamented how effective a modern city like Shenzhen was at downplaying such news. “What’s frightening is that this is the way China as a whole will be,” he said. Mr Xi need not worry about his own social-media pulling power. By the time The Economist went to press, his first post on Weibo—sent through the account of an unnamed journalist at the newspaper he visited—had been retweeted more than 380,000 times and had garnered more than 50,000 comments. Most of these are fawning—of those still visible, at least.RONALD REAGAN, a sworn enemy of communism, and Xi Jinping, a doughty defender of Communist rule in China, ought to have little in common. Lately, though, Mr Xi has seemed to channel the late American president. He has been speaking openly for the first time of a need for “supply-side reforms”—a term echoing one made popular during Reagan’s presidency in the 1980s. It is now China’s hottest economic catchphrase (even featuring in a state-approved rap song, released on December 26th: “Reform the supply side and upgrade the economy,” goes one catchy line). Reagan’s supply-side strategy was notable, at least at the outset, for its controversial focus on cutting taxes as a way of encouraging companies to produce and invest more. In Xiconomics, the thrust of supply-side policy is less clear, despite the term’s prominence at recent economic-planning meetings and its dissection in numerous articles published by state media. Investors, hoping the phrase might herald a renewed effort by the leadership to boost the economy, are eager for detail. Mr Xi’s first mentions of the supply side, or gongjice, in two separate speeches in November, were not entirely a surprise. For a couple of years think-tanks affiliated with government ministries had been promoting the concept (helped by a new institute called the China Academy of New Supply-Side Economics). Their hope is that such reforms will involve deep structural changes aimed at putting the economy on a sounder footing, rather than yet more stimulus. Since Mr Xi gave the term his public blessing, officials have been scrambling to fall in line with supply-side doctrine, designing policies that seem to fit it or, just as energetically, working to squeeze existing ones into its rubric. Mr Xi’s aim may be to reinvigorate reforms that were endorsed by the Communist Party’s 370-member Central Committee in 2013, a year after he took over as China’s leader. They called for a “decisive” role to be given to market forces, with the state and private sectors placed on an equal footing. But Mr Xi lacked a catchy phrase to sum up his economic vision. The one he most commonly used was simply that the economy had entered a “new normal” of slower, more mature, growth. That phrase had its detractors, for it seemed to imply passive acceptance of a more sluggish future. “Supply-side reform” is being made to sound like a call to action. Xinhua, a state news agency, neatly tied the two phrases together: “supply-side structural reform is the new growth driver under the new normal.”  But what does it mean? Those who first pushed supply-side reform onto China’s political agenda want a clean break with the credit-driven past. Jia Kang, an outspoken researcher in the finance ministry who co-founded the new supply-side academy, defines the term in opposition to the short-term demand management that has often characterised China’s economic policy—the boosting of consumption and investment with the help of cheap money and dollops of government spending. The result of the old approach has been a steep rise in debt (about 250% of GDP and counting) and declining returns on investment. Supply-siders worry that it is creating a growing risk of stagnation, or even a full-blown economic crisis. Mr Jia says the government should focus instead on simplifying regulations to make labour, land and capital more productive. Making it easier for private companies to invest in sectors currently reserved for bloated state-run corporations would be a good place to start, some of his colleagues argue. There are plenty of differences between China’s supply-siders and those who shaped Mr Reagan’s programme, not least in their diagnosis of their respective economies’ ills. The Americans thought that production bottlenecks were fuelling inflation and stifling growth. Their Chinese counterparts worry about the opposite: excessive production causing deflation and unsustainably rapid growth. Still, the language used in China can sound just as radical. “We can no longer delay the clean-up of zombie corporations,” Chen Changsheng of the Development Research Centre, a government think-tank, wrote recently. “Taking painkillers and performing blood transfusions is not enough. We need the determination to carry out surgery.” There may be another similarity as well: a revolution that falls short of its hype. Reagan had to work with a Congress controlled by his political opponents, and the policies he enacted were more moderate and muddled than supply-side purists had hoped. Mr Xi faces no such democratic checks, but China’s ruling party is split between rival interest groups, and economic policy is often implemented in fits and starts as party leaders try to reconcile their competing demands. Supply us with a slogan Mr Xi’s adoption of the supply-side mantra marks the start of protracted tiptoeing. Over the past two months, party propagandists have asked economists at top universities and research institutions to expound on their views of what supply-side reforms should entail, according to insiders. It is a slogan in search of content. In the recent proliferation of articles and speeches about supply-side reforms, there are clearly differences over what the emphasis should be. The National Development and Reform Commission, a powerful planning agency, argues that China needs to become more innovative and efficient in making the kinds of things its consumers want to buy. But its version of “supply-side reform” would look more like stimulus than surgery. Tax cuts since 2014 on purchases of electric cars offer a taste of what may lie ahead; sales of these vehicles have surged nearly fourfold this year. Some fret that the supply-side talk is a dangerous distraction. As Yao Yang of Peking University puts it, the economy’s main ailment now is a lack of demand, not a problem with supply. The cure for that, he believes, is a short-term burst of monetary easing, the very thing that ardent supply-siders have been hoping to banish. For all the recent debate, early signs are that the supply-side shift may not amount to a serious change of course. Measures proposed by the government in late December include lower corporate borrowing costs, an easing of entry barriers in underdeveloped sectors such as health care and a reduction of excess capacity in sectors such as property. It just so happens that all these policies have already been in place for months or even years. If nothing else, Mr Xi’s supply-side reforms will prove that China is among the world’s most accomplished suppliers of slogans.IT HAS been a long time in coming. But on December 27th Iraq’s security forces announced they had recaptured the city of Ramadi from Islamic State (IS), with only pockets of resistance remaining. This followed a week of heavy fighting by the Iraqi army, local police and Sunni tribal fighters, all backed by American air strikes. The expulsion of jihadists from the capital of Anbar, a mainly Sunni province, is a morale-boosting victory for the beleaguered government of Haider al-Abadi in Baghdad. It will go some way towards expunging the memory of the humiliating flight of the army from the city seven months ago, when a numerically inferior IS force launched a stunning assault, spearheaded by at least 30 vehicular suicide-bombs, some of them armoured bulldozers packing enough explosive to demolish entire streets. Outflanked and outgunned, even the army’s Golden Division, a highly regarded American-trained special-forces unit, succumbed to panic. The carefully orchestrated campaign to recover Ramadi, which saw much closer co-ordination between troops on the ground and coalition air power than in the past, is an indication of how other battles to expel IS from Iraqi cities may be conducted. Air strikes are claimed to have killed at least 350 IS fighters in the days before the ground offensive began in earnest. While it is true that Iraqi forces some 10,000 strong were needed to defeat no more than 1,000 IS fighters, the difficulties should not be underestimated. IS had time to construct a multilayered defence based on booby traps and a network of tunnels that allowed shooters and suicide-bombers to move around the town unseen by surveillance drones. The Iraqi army had to spend months encircling the city and slowly cutting IS off from outside help. This allowed Iraqi units to move cautiously into the ruined city, street by street. Significantly, Iranian-backed Shia militias, who have often been in the vanguard of the fight against IS during the past 18 months, were largely excluded from the battle. This was at the insistence of the Americans, who want to encourage a Sunni uprising against IS, like the one they fomented against its predecessor, al-Qaeda in Iraq, in 2006. But the results have been patchy, because the promised supply of American weapons to Anbari Sunni tribes has been blocked by the predominantly Shia government in Baghdad. Next stop, Fallujah Given the deep sectarian divisions, limiting the role of the Shia “Popular Mobilisation Forces” in Anbar remains a priority for the Americans. Most are backed and financed by Iran—and Mr Abadi has little influence over such groups. If the government is to build on its success in Ramadi, it must show displaced Sunni inhabitants that it can both hold the city and start rebuilding it. That means providing material support for the Sunni tribes and local police to garrison Ramadi, while freeing up the overstretched Iraqi army to take on IS elsewhere in Anbar. The jihadists still control not only Fallujah, but also Ana, Rawa, Hit and al-Qaim, towns which between them have (or had) a population of over 700,000. The Iraqi army will have little choice but to work with the Shia militias in the continuing attempt to recapture Fallujah, which has seen only intermittent progress in the past year. The tactics used in Ramadi—encirclement and air strikes—are being applied to the city, which is now more or less completely cut off. But Fallujah, which was al-Qaeda in Iraq’s first stronghold and the scene of bitter fighting with American troops in 2004, will be much harder to crack. Mr Abadi promised on December 28th that IS will be driven from his country by the end of 2016. “We are coming to liberate Mosul, which will be the fatal blow to [IS],” he said. A concerted attempt to retake Iraq’s second city (seized by IS 18 months ago) does now appear more likely, although it will have to wait until Fallujah is restored to government control and the Iraqi army can field more effective units to join with Kurdish Peshmerga fighters. Estimates differ as to how many IS combatants there are in Mosul. IS says it has 30,000. Iraqi government sources put the number at a more modest 1,500. But IS has had a long time to dig itself in to the northern city, and at least some of the people there are said to prefer the so-called caliphate, for all its brutality, to rule from Baghdad. Mosul is a huge source of funding for IS, because it has so many people for the jihadists to tax. If it should fall, IS’s pretensions to being a state will fall with it. But there is still quite a way to go.Cryin’ Christmas tears FAR from spreading cheer this holiday season, Pope Francis has been in a Grinch-like mood. “There will be lights, parties, Christmas trees and Nativity scenes,” he said in late November. “It’s all a charade.” As the Vatican unveiled its own giant spruce, he sounded downright depressed: “We should ask for the grace to weep for this world, which does not recognise the path to peace.” It is easy to see why the pope is so downhearted. Look no further than Bethlehem, where young Palestinians throw stones at Israeli soldiers manning the wall separating the West Bank from Israel. From afar, the Israeli tear gas looks like the smoke from frankincense, of the sort that pilgrims burn when visiting the Church of the Nativity. But there were few pilgrims this Christmas—they were too scared. Most victims of war and terrorism in the Middle East are Muslims, since they are by far the majority of the population. But the tiny Christian minority often feels singled out. Their numbers are declining where the fighting is worst (see chart). Overall, the proportion of Middle Easterners who are Christian has dropped from 14% in 1910 to 4% today. Church leaders and pundits have begun to ask whether Christianity will vanish from the Middle East, its cradle, after 2,000 years. An exodus is under way. Many Christians feel more at home in the West and have the means to get there. Some are leaving because of the general atmosphere of violence and economic malaise. Others worry about persecution. A recent video of three Assyrian Christians in orange jumpsuits being made to kneel before being shot in the head by Islamic State (IS) jihadists fuelled this fear—though IS treats many other groups equally badly. Fewer births, virgin or otherwise The Christians who remain tend to have fewer babies than their Muslim neighbours, according to the Pew Research Centre. Regional data are unreliable, but in Egypt the fertility rate for Muslims is 2.7; for Christians it is 1.9. Mosul, in northern Iraq, was once home to tens of thousands of Christians. Perceived as supporting the Americans, they were targeted by insurgents after the invasion. A wave of killings in 2008, including that of the local Chaldean archbishop, seemed to mark the low point for the community. Then came IS. When the jihadists entered the city in 2014, they reportedly tagged Christian houses with an “N” for “Nazarene”, and gave their occupants a choice: convert, pay the jizya, a tax on non-Muslims, or face possible death. Most fled. In July 2014 IS announced that the city was free of Christians. Many who left Mosul went to Erbil, the Kurdish capital of northern Iraq, where they have trouble finding work or obtaining public services. Even there, some refugees chafe at the enforcement of Muslim customs. “You wouldn’t want to live there,” says Samir, a Christian refugee now in Lebanon. In general, Christians complain that their Muslim neighbours are growing increasingly intolerant. Some retort that Westerners exaggerate tales of Christian persecution to justify interventionist policies. “There is talk as if the West is genuinely interested in Christians, but most of the time they only use them for their own political ends,” says Mitri Raheb, pastor of a church in Bethlehem. He says that the Israeli occupation hurts Palestinian Christians far more than persecution by Muslims, but provokes less outrage in the West. Christian leaders are in a tough spot. “I cannot preach to people: ‘Do not leave,’” says Father Raheb. But other priests have. In an open letter published in September one of Syria’s most senior Catholic leaders, Melkite Patriarch Gregory III, wrote: “Despite all your suffering, stay! Be patient! Don’t emigrate! Stay for the church, your homeland, for Syria and its future!” Rankling many, he then urged Europe not to “encourage Syrian Christians to emigrate”. A refugee from Mosul says the pleas go “in one ear, out the other”. In the decades before the Arab spring, many Christian leaders lent their support to authoritarian rulers in return for the protection of Christians—and their own lofty status. But the deals broke down when the dictators fell or wobbled, leaving Christians in a predicament. “In Iraq, when Saddam Hussein was removed, we lost a million Christians,” said Bechara Boutros al-Rahi, Lebanon’s Maronite Christian Patriarch, to AFP in 2012. “Why? Not because the regime fell, but because there was no more authority, there was a vacuum. In Syria, it’s the same thing, Christians do not back the regime [of Bashar al-Assad], but they are afraid of what may come next.” Christian leaders have often supported whichever strongman is in power. The late Pope Shenouda III, head of the Coptic church, the largest in the Middle East, backed Hosni Mubarak, Egypt’s former dictator, and discouraged Copts from joining the protests that would eventually topple him. In 2012 Shenouda was succeeded by Tawadros II, who supports the current strongman, Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi. He has described the Arab spring as being more like a “winter, plotted by malicious hands” in order to break up the region into smaller states. Yet the Copts have gained little from their leaders’ loyalty. Mr Mubarak stood by as relations between Christians and Muslims deteriorated and sectarian violence increased. Mr Sisi is seen as better than the Islamist government that he toppled. A draft law would make it easier to build churches. But Copts are still expelled from villages for such crimes as falling in love with a Muslim. Even in Lebanon, where Christians were once a majority and still hold considerable power, their political leaders have disappointed. Under the country’s unique system, government posts are shared out based on sect. The presidency goes to a Maronite, the largest group of Christians. But in recent decades many Christians have left. Muslims are now a majority, and want power to match their numbers. Christian political leaders complain of persecution, but many seem more concerned with enhancing their own power. Bickering between politicians has left the presidency vacant for 18 months. Oddly enough it is the Gulf, home to the most conservative brand of Islam, which has welcomed the largest number of Christians recently, though not from Iraq or Syria. A wave of migrant labourers from the Asia-Pacific has dramatically increased the share of Christians in countries such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), which had few before. Tolerance varies between countries. Saudi Arabia, for example, bans the practice of Christianity (though many Christians worship in private). The UAE restricts proselytisation, but has otherwise supported its Christians. The number of churches in the country has grown from 24 in 2005 to 40 today. The emirate’s rulers often provide churches with free land, water and electricity. But these new Christian enclaves may not last. Migrant workers in the Gulf cannot easily become citizens or put down roots. In any case it is the loss of ancient communities that most concerns church leaders. “Christians are not guests in the Middle East,” says Father Paul Karam, the president of Caritas, a Catholic charity, in Lebanon. “We are the original owners of the land.” But none of the Christian refugees who spoke with your correspondent plans to return home. “We don’t belong there,” says Samir, who expects Iraq soon to be empty of Christians altogether.Endangered pleasures IT WAS a disquieting announcement. On November 25th Egypt’s President Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi approved a committee tasked with “improving the morals and values” in his country. Efforts to reduce littering or sexual harassment, both plagues in Egypt, might be welcome. But experience in the Middle East suggests that the boot will be put into more harmless activities. In September, for example, Egypt locked up two belly-dancers for “inciting debauchery” after they showed a little skin in online videos; one of the dancers, known as “Egypt’s Shakira”, is most famous for a video which features much suggestive use of a pestle and mortar, but no more flesh than is revealed by a low-cut blouse and an above-the-knee skirt. A young Egyptian couple tells of police accusing them of being together without being married, something that is not banned in the country. Across the region gay people, atheists and dissidents are punished for their supposed moral transgressions. Saudi Arabia and Iran, regional and religious rivals, are the bossiest. Both regimes claim to be Islamic. Both have vice squads. In Iran they berate women for showing too much fringe; in Saudi Arabia, for wearing too flirty an abaya, the big, usually black, cloak that is mandatory for females there, or being in the company of unrelated males. They enforce bans on alcohol, parties and other things that normal people, even the most morally upright, enjoy. Saudi media recently reported that female bureaucrats wearing too much make-up would be fined 1000 riyals ($266). Police in Algeria, Morocco and Sudan, too, have powers to stamp out immorality. Sudan’s criminal code, which outlaws adultery and women wearing trousers, is particularly harsh. Vague laws across the region such as causing offence and encouraging indecency are broad and open to abuse. Violators can be flogged. In November Saudi Arabia sentenced Ashraf Fayadh, a poet, to death. He was accused of apostasy and of having illicit relations with women, whose images he stored in his phone. He denies the charges. He had previously posted a video showing the religious police whipping a man; his supporters think the police are taking revenge. Saudi Arabia beheads people for moral transgressions. Iran hangs them. Since the 1970s Arab populations have grown more devout. This makes it easier for rulers to use “morality” to keep them in line. Women, especially, are told how to dress and under what circumstances they may have sex. In Morocco and Algeria, women who are raped are sometimes made to marry their rapist. Social censure is pervasive, and can be deadly. Even in moderate countries such as Jordan, men sometimes kill women to uphold family “honour”. The murderers—usually a father or brother—often escape with light sentences. “If I go out with a boyfriend in Beirut it’s fine,” says a Lebanese Christian woman. “But in the villages, people will say, ‘Look, she’s seeing him and they’re not married’.” Some among the region’s ever more globalised young are pushing back. Grindr and Tinder, two hook-up apps for gays and straights respectively, have a fair number of users in the Middle East. Men and women mix and, more and more, choose their own partners. When parts of films are cut, such as an explicit scene in “The Wolf of Wall Street”, people go online to watch the full version. In Jeddah, if not Riyadh, colourful abayas swing open as unrelated men and women mingle in cafés. A few leaders say they want to give people a break. Hassan Rohani, Iran’s relatively moderate president, has talked about stopping the religious police from fining women for failing to conceal their hair, wrists and bottoms. Such small freedoms, so far only very partially implemented, would be popular. Some of the region’s moral arbiters do not practise what they preach, as bartenders and madams in posh parts of Europe can attest. Imagine if the vice police cracked down on hypocrisy.
