IT LOOKS like something out of a Gothic movie: a metre-long monster that emerges slowly through blistered human skin, its victim writhing in agony. No one is spared. It can creep out from between the toes of a child or from the belly of a pregnant woman. In the mid-1980s Dracunculus medinensis, the Guinea worm, as this horror is called, afflicted 3.5m people a year in 20 countries in Africa and Asia. But last year that number was down to just 22, all of them in Chad, Ethiopia, Mali and South Sudan. Dracunculiasis is thus poised to become the second human disease to be eradicated, after smallpox. This blessed state of affairs is thanks to a 30-year campaign led by the Carter Centre, a charity set up by Jimmy Carter, a former president of America. Mr Carter picked his target well. Most Guinea worms grow in human beings, and their only other host is the domestic dog. Both humans and dogs can be monitored closely, in ways wild animals cannot. This means, in principle, that every case of dracunculiasis can be tracked and the worm involved prevented from reproducing. The task the Carter Centre set itself was to turn this principle into reality. The worm releases its larvae as it emerges, a process that takes about ten weeks. These larvae normally become infectious only if swallowed by copepods, tiny crustaceans which live in stagnant water. If someone drinks such water, the larvae then migrate to his skin to grow, emerging about a year later. About 90% of worms emerge from the lower part of the leg. Sufferers spread the larvae when they dip their feet in water to relieve the pain. Breaking this cycle of transmission means doing two things: stopping the larvae reaching copepod-inhabited water, and stopping people ingesting infested copepods. To do so, local volunteers trained by the Carter Centre and its partners spread the message and tend the wounds of those with worms hanging out of them. They also distribute filters of cloth-like mesh for households’ drinking-water buckets, and straw-like filters equipped with a string, so that they can be worn around the neck for people to use when drinking away from home. These filters strain copepods from the water. They, as well as larvicide used for treating water sources suspected of contamination, are all donated by their manufacturers. These measures—and meticulous surveillance—have brought the Guinea worm close to extinction. Mr Carter’s star power has helped, too. He and his wife, Rosalynn, have travelled to dozens of affected villages, bringing the attention of health ministers and wealthy benefactors to an otherwise neglected disease. In 1995 Mr Carter negotiated the longest humanitarian ceasefire in history: the six-month “Guinea worm ceasefire” in Sudan, which was used to distribute filters, and also medicines and vaccines for other diseases. Mr Carter says he hopes to outlive the last Guinea worm. Though he is now 91, that is a plausible ambition. All 22 of the worms that were recorded last year have now emerged, and are dead. It is therefore likely that Mali, Ethiopia and South Sudan are now rid of the awful creature, though there needs to be a worm-free period of three years to be sure. That leaves only Chad, where an unusual development is keeping eradicators on their toes. There, disease detectives found that the worm’s nine human victims last year had ingested the larvae by eating raw fish, rather than by drinking unfiltered water. Worryingly, hundreds of dogs were infested this way, too. Measures to prevent new cases were swiftly deployed. Eradication teams have been urging people to make sure the fish they eat is fully cooked, to bury raw fish entrails (to prevent dogs from eating them) and to tether infested canines. The Carter Centre’s field workers reckon people are 70-80% compliant with the second and third measures on this list. Compliance with the first is harder to estimate, since it would mean a mass invasion of people’s kitchens. Whether these measures will be enough to break the chain of transmission remains to be seen. But those workers’ vigilance is such that any new cases, whether human or canine, are likely to be noticed quickly. With luck, it will not be long before the world’s last Guinea worm becomes a celebrity—preserved for posterity in a formalin-filled jar at the Carter Centre’s headquarters, in Atlanta.Ring my chimes IMPLANTED devices, such as heart pacemakers, are a valuable part of modern medicine’s armamentarium. Their use, however, is limited by the need to renew their batteries—and this is a particular problem for those, such as cochlear implants (which improve hearing), that are inside the wearer’s head. For obvious reasons, surgeons do not like opening heads up unless it is strictly necessary. Sometimes, therefore, the battery packs that power head implants are put in the wearer’s chest. But this means running a wire up through the patient’s neck, from the one to the other, which is scarcely satisfactory either. A way to power such implants without replacing their batteries at all would thus be welcome. And Hyuck Choo of the California Institute of Technology and his colleagues think they have one. They plan to scavenge the necessary energy from the vibrations of the vocal cords that occur when someone is talking. Dr Choo’s power plants are small sheets of lead zirconate titanate, a substance that is piezoelectric—meaning it generates electricity when it vibrates. He knew from past work that sheets of the size he chose (just under 1cm2) resonate at around 690Hz. This is close to the F in the octave above middle C, and thus well above the normal range of the human voice. Using larger sheets would lower the resonant frequency, just as long organ pipes produce lower notes than short ones. Larger sheets, though, would be less deployable inside the body. So, instead, he sought to lower a sheet’s resonant frequency without increasing its area by carving a sinusoidal shape out of it (see picture). Such a shape must inevitably be longer than its parent rectangle’s longest sides, albeit that its length is now zigzagged. A sinusoidal sheet should thus have a lower resonant frequence than its rectangular parent. It worked. When Dr Choo and his colleagues tested the carved sheets by exposing them to a range of frequencies and monitoring the amount of electricity generated, they found that the voltage spiked at between 100Hz and 120Hz (approximately the dominant frequencies of adult male voices), and also between 200Hz and 250Hz (the female voice’s dominant frequencies). And, although the amount of power produced is not huge, it seems adequate for the task proposed. As Dr Choo reported on January 26th, to the International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems in Shanghai, he and his team were able to harvest a tenth of a milliwatt per square centimetre of lead zirconate titanate from the voice of a man talking at 70 decibels, which is normal speaking volume, and three-tenths from someone shouting at 100 decibels. Implants usually require a tenth of a milliwatt or less to function, so this prototype’s performance suggests a practical device might be within reach—especially as the vibrations produced by the voice travel efficiently up through the skull, meaning the generator could be integrated into an implant, rather than having to be separate from it. Since most people are not chatterboxes, talking all the time, a practical system will still need batteries to build up charge so that the surplus can be used when needed. Intriguingly, this might even be possible when someone is asleep. Part of the sound of snoring is in the experimental device’s sweet spot. That may not be much consolation for the partners of snorers. But at least their bedmates will no longer be able to turn a deaf ear to their complaints.THE murky world of sports doping has been in the news recently, as accusations fly concerning the use, on a scale previously unacknowledged, of performance-enhancing drugs in athletics. But human beings are not the only animals doped to enhance their performance. Racehorses are similarly afflicted. Catching cheats in the world of horse-racing has, however, proved hard. Human and equestrian biology are different, and techniques developed for the one do not necessarily transfer to the other. Terence See Ming Wan, of the Hong Kong Jockey Club’s Racing Laboratory, hopes to change that. As he explains in a paper in Analytical Chemistry, he has developed a technique for spotting doped horses that should make it easier to catch cheats. These days, artificial anabolic steroids are easily detected, so athletes (male ones, anyway) are turning instead to compounds like luteinising hormone to bulk up their muscles. This hormone does not act directly. Rather, it stimulates a man’s testes to produce natural testosterone, which then does the muscle-bulking. For those doping male racehorses, though, this option is often not available, because many such horses are geldings. Instead, gelding-dopers tinker with another source of testosterone, the adrenal glands—their weapons of choice being drugs that enhance the effect of this more meagre testosterone supply. In the natural course of events, testosterone levels are regulated by an enzyme called aromatise, which converts the hormone into oestrogens. There are, however, two drugs—androstanediol and androstadienedione—that block aromatase’s action, increasing testosterone levels, and therefore muscle mass. Using androstanediol and androstadienedione is particularly desirable from the doper’s point of view because their levels become undetectable two to four days after administration. Dr Wan suspected, however, that these aromatise inhibitors might not affect just testosterone levels; they might also alter concentrations of other steroids, such as androstane, androstadien and androsterone. That would be a sign that a horse had been dosed with them. To test this, he and his colleagues ran a study that monitored 31 naturally produced steroids in the urine of 32 thoroughbred geldings over the course of nine days. Before the study started, four of the animals were deliberately doped with the two aromatise inhibitors. Dr Wan, however, did not know which four. As he and his colleagues had hoped, they were able to pick the doped horses from the others on the basis of the creatures’ steroid profiles. Seven steroids differed significantly in concentration between doped and control animals. Most important, these differences were detectable for between four and nine days after the horses had been given the inhibitors. Even though the drugs themselves were no longer present, the impressions they had left behind were—which is good news for those who believe that racecourses should also be level playing fields.The fossil on the right-hand side of this picture is not, as comparison with the modern insect on the left might suggest, a butterfly. It is a lacewing called Oregramma illecebrosa. It and its relatives, the kalligrammatids, flew in the forests of the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods between 165m and 125m years ago, dying out 69m years before the first-known butterfly fossil. They are thus, as Conrad Labandeira of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC, and his colleagues describe in the Proceedings of the Royal Society, examples of convergent evolution: the emergence in unrelated groups of similar bodies, to permit the pursuit of similar ways of life. Just as ichthyosaurs (marine reptiles contemporary with the kalligrammatids) and dolphins evolved basically the same shapes, in order to hunt fish and other sea creatures, so kalligrammatids seem to have evolved “butterfly-ness”, complete with large, scale-covered wings, eye spots to distract predators and mouth parts formed into a proboscis. They acted, Dr Labandeira thinks, as pollinators for the gymnosperm trees that preceded modern angiosperms, now the food plants of real butterflies.THE Journal of Irreproducible Results is a long-running satirical magazine, designed for the amusement of scientists. If the title were not already taken, though, it would be a good one for another, more serious publication that is being launched on February 4th. The Preclinical Reproducibility and Robustness Channel, an electronic rather than a paper journal, is dedicated to the task, found tedious by most academic researchers, of replicating and testing the experiments of others. Professional egos, the exigencies of career-building and the restricted sizes of grants and budgets all conspire against the rerunning, in universities, of old studies instead of the conducting of new ones. Commercial researchers cannot afford to be so choosy. If they pick an idea up from academia, they have to be sure that it works. Often, it doesn’t. For example, when staff at Amgen, a Californian drug company, attempted to reproduce the results of 53 high-profile cancer-research papers they found that only six lived up to their original claims. This figure is probably typical. What was not typical was that Amgen actually offered it for publication, and it was, indeed, published (in 2012, by Nature). Mostly, journal editors, like academic scientists, are more interested in new work than in the refutation of old stuff. Amgen’s submission was spectacular, because so many papers were involved at one go. This may have been what got it over the bar. If each refutation had been written up and submitted separately, the outcome would probably have been different. As for the six successful replications it included, why would anyone bother to publish work confirming what was already known? Yet knowing which previous research is and is not correct is crucial to the progress of science, and a repository of such information would be useful. Hence the Preclinical Reproducibility and Robustness Channel. Its publishers, Faculty of 1000, based in London, hope to provide an outlet for the accumulated replications gathering dust in commercial laboratories (Amgen has promised its trove to the venture), and also to stimulate academic scientists to follow suit and provide more. The problem, though, is not restricted to medicine. An analysis of 98 psychology papers, published in 2015 by 90 teams of researchers co-ordinated by Brian Nosek of the University of Virginia, managed to replicate satisfactorily the results of only 39% of the studies investigated. Again, it was the very size of this project that got it into print, as smaller studies languished. Things may now be changing. Both reproducibility and the whole openness of the scientific process are discussed much more than once they were. An entire institute dedicated to the matter, the Meta-Research Innovation Centre at Stanford, in California, opened for business in 2014. If this institute flourishes—and even more so if it is emulated—it may even become possible to make a career out of being a buster of others’ questionable efforts: a forensic scientist of science, as it were. That is by no means certain, and there will probably be few Nobel prizes in it. But mopping up messes is an honourable activity, and this week’s launch of a new outlet for the publication of duplication is part of the clean-up.Beethoven for a Later Age: The Journey of a String Quartet. By Edward Dusinberre. Faber & Faber; 262 pages; £18.99. To be published in America by University of Chicago Press in May; $30. THE string quartet is an invention of the classical age, brought to perfection by Mozart and Haydn. Goethe once defined it as “four rational people conversing with each other”, which suggests that a book on the subject might not be very exciting. But that would do an injustice to Edward Dusinberre’s memoir “Beethoven for a Later Age: The Journey of a String Quartet”. Mr Dusinberre is the lead violinist of the Takacs Quartet, one of the world’s most highly regarded string ensembles, and he has written a fascinating book about the musical life of this group of players. Interwoven with that is the story of Beethoven’s 16 string quartets, works of extraordinary power written over a quarter-century that moved the genre on from the earlier masters and are now regarded as the apogee of the chamber-music repertoire. In Beethoven’s day many of them met with incomprehension and dismay, which the short-tempered composer had to learn to accommodate. When his now famous “Grosse Fuge”, originally the last movement of one of his late quartets, was shredded by critics, Beethoven grudgingly wrote a new ending. At a performance of another quartet he got his musicians to play the whole thing twice over, hoping that the audience might gain a better insight into the music the second time. And when a player complained in the composer’s hearing that the quartets were “not music” at all, he replied: “Oh, they are not for you; they are for a later age.” A century later, Igor Stravinsky still judged the quartets “contemporary”, and thought they always would be. Another century on, Mr Dusinberre clearly feels the same way. He links each chapter in his memoir to a particular quartet, moving back and forth between the story of the composition (and the personal, social and political context it was written in) and the life of his quartet. Founded in 1975, the Takacs Quartet still retains two of its original members. Mr Dusinberre joined more than 20 years ago to replace the founding first violinist, Gabor Takacs-Nagy. Even the most recent arrivals have been around for more than ten years, so all four musicians know each other very well, both musically and personally. The book is admirably kind about every one of the players, but at times the constant enforced proximity must become claustrophobic. When the four are on tour together they generally try to keep away from each other as much as possible. When Mr Dusinberre auditioned for the part in 1993 he was only 23, almost a generation younger than the rest. He was English, everyone else was Hungarian, and he soon realised that he was being put to the test not so much for his prowess on the violin—given his training, that was taken for granted—but for his musical ideas, his personal qualities and his ability and willingness to work with colleagues. He felt green and rather nervous about playing with such a cohesive and experienced group, and also conscious that the others came from a different and somewhat more laid-back culture. But they offered him the job, or so he thought; it was only later that one of them told him that what he was taking on was not a job but a family and a life. A lot of the time the work is just hard grind. The Takacs Quartet plays about 100 concerts annually, does a lot of recording and tours for around half the year. This is hard on spouses and children (who barely get a mention). When not touring, the players practise on their own and then rehearse together for hours every day. They endlessly debate their different approaches to the music, often argue, and try out each other’s ideas even if they don’t think they are very good. Every time they play they try to do something new, which may help explain why they have been so successful. Anyone who has ever watched a good string quartet in concert will be familiar with the subtly effective way the players communicate—here a raised eyebrow, there a glance or a nearly imperceptible nod. It is almost as though they were a single instrument, not four working in harmony. And at its best, the experience of playing in a quartet can be sublime. In a performance of Beethoven’s quartet in A minor, Mr Dusinberre explains: “We were taken far out of ourselves, liberated from the confines of individual personalities as we surrendered to the music, a blissful state.” An achievement that makes all the grind worthwhile. They’ve had enough of patriarchs and patronisingHomer, a father of Latin literature Beyond Greek: The Beginnings of Latin Literature. By Denis Feeney. Harvard University Press; 377 pages; $35 and £25. IN RECENT years there has been a revival of interest in the classics. Still, things are not what they were. In the 1930s Latin might consume almost half of a 12-year-old boy’s lessons at a British private school. Today, university classics courses accept students with little Latin and no Greek. It takes “a good classics undergraduate” to tell you what every child used to know, that the Minotaur was “the half-brother of Ariadne, and that he was killed by Theseus”. With over 120 pages of notes and references, Denis Feeney’s study of the beginnings of Latin literature is not designed to attract more first-year students. It is written by the professor of Latin at Princeton University for other academics. However, his bold theme and vigorous writing render “Beyond Greek” of interest to anyone intrigued by the history and literature of the classical world. With hindsight—since the Romans followed the Greeks, as even today’s schoolchildren know—it can seem obvious that the Latin works of Cicero, Virgil and Horace would succeed those of Homer, Sophocles and Aeschylus. Not so, says Mr Feeney. It was “one of the strangest…events in Mediterranean history” that the Romans began producing Greek-style tragedies, comedies and epics before developing a fresh vernacular literature of their own. After all, other powers such as Persia and Egypt, also in contact and conflict with Greece, did nothing of the sort. It probably started in 240BC when the Ludi Romani, the great annual festival, allowed a Greek play to be staged in Latin translation. The Romans were no strangers to other cultures. With their defeat of Carthage and emergence as the dominant power, they were confident and suffered no “cultural cringe”. But it was the translations, in a Latin metre, of Homer and Attic drama by Livius Andronicus, “not a natural or inevitable thing to happen”, that paved the way for later literature. They were helped by Greeks accommodating the rising power. Whereas translators today mostly convert texts into their first language, Livius was a Greek, a native speaker of the source language, and Naevius, who followed him, though born in Italy, had Greek as a childhood language. Only later did it become the norm for a Roman such as Cicero to translate into Latin. A colonising power tends to impose its language on a subject land. However, for several generations, the relative status of Greek and Latin was in flux: to Romans, “Greek” was both the vernacular of slaves and the classical Attic standard of revered literature. But by the time Ennius, considered the father of Latin poetry, died in 169BC, Latin literature “had achieved escape velocity”. Self-assured Roman elites had become happily bilingual and biliterate, and in time this helped them rule a widespread and polyglot empire. Mr Feeney contrasts the Romans with the Etruscans and the Carthaginians, neither of whom appear to have possessed a literature; and he provides interesting comparisons, for example with Japan’s borrowing of Chinese characters, first to write in Chinese and only later adapted to write Japanese. What was astonishing about Ennius’s “Annales” is that he superimposed Roman history upon that of the Greeks, “in a Homeric epic written in a language that was not Homer’s”. By now the growth of Latin literature was as certain as the expansion of Roman power.Their Promised Land: My Grandparents in Love and War. By Ian Buruma. Penguin Press; 320 pages; $26.95. To be published in Britain by Atlantic Books in March; £18.99. IAN BURUMA begins his biography of his grandparents Win and Bernard with a recollection of picture-book Christmases in the English countryside. As a child he, his parents and various aunts and uncles would descend upon their Berkshire vicarage to indulge in “a day-long feast of Edwardian gluttony”. Later the reader is told that Mr Buruma’s grandparents, and almost everyone else present, were Jewish. This tension between an Englishness embraced with an immigrant’s touching fervour, but also with the immigrant’s anxiety, is at the heart of this affectionate, well-told memoir. It is a tension most acutely felt at moments of crisis, when dual loyalties can be hard to maintain. At the end of the first world war, Win wrote to her future fiancé how pleased she was that “the two countries to which we both owe all that we have, are no longer enemies.” A distinguished historian, Mr Buruma approaches his subject with the loving eye of a grandchild and an awareness of the larger forces that shaped their lives. His sensitive portrayal of the immigrant’s divided loyalties and divided identity is timely in light of Europe’s current struggle with colliding national, religious and ethnic identities. While the Schlesingers’ story does not directly parallel today’s refugee crisis, it does shed light on the fault-lines that remain even in the most successful of cultural mergings. As Mr Buruma puts it, “a Jew in a society of mostly Gentiles, a Muslim in Europe, a black in a predominantly white country, or a homosexual, especially in places where love of your own sex is unaccepted, is forced to consider his or her place more deeply, to make up his or her own story.” The ability of these Jews to thrive in their adopted land represents something of a storybook ideal. Grandpa Bernard was the rugby-playing, Cambridge-educated son of a prosperous London stockbroker who had emigrated from Germany. Despite battles with persistent antiSemitism—described euphemistically in letters as “the old, old story”—Bernard became a successful doctor, taking time off from a busy career to serve king and country in two world wars. After marrying his childhood sweetheart, Winifred Regensburg—from an almost identical background—the two embarked on a long, happy life together, filled with more joy than loss, united in love of family and country. Win spells out her creed in a letter written to Bernard in 1940 while he was serving in the Norway campaign. “Next to you,” she declared, “I love England more than anything else in the world.” For all their fervent Britishness, they admirably refused to deny their heritage, often at great personal cost. Marking Yom Kippur, Judaism’s holiest day, Bernard told Win, “is only a matter of policy on my part in which ‘I tell the world’, as the Yank would say, that I am by birth a Jew, a Jew still and proud of it too.” He maintained this stance even in the face of prejudice that shut him out of many of London’s best hospitals. And in 1938, shortly after Kristallnacht, they rescued 12 German-Jewish children, whom Win cared for while Bernard went off to war. “Their Promised Land” is about love and loyalty, to family and to country, even when that country fails to reward that devotion as fully as it should. As Mr Buruma concludes, “For many Jews, Israel is the ultimate safe haven…This was not true for Bernard and Win…England was their safe haven, England and the Family.”When Breath Becomes Air. By Paul Kalanithi. Random House; 238 pages; $25. Bodley Head; £12.99. MANY people avoid discussing death. Doctors face it daily, reading scans blotted by tumours the way others scour market data. But years of training cannot dull the pang when, glancing at a scan and seeing a patient’s dim chances, those prospects happen to be his own. Paul Kalanithi died at 37. He had spent years training to be a neurosurgeon; his doctor first ascribed his sharp pains and dwindling frame to the demands of residency. But instead it was cancer, which had spread from his lungs to his spine and liver. Faced with such news, Kalanithi said, a person’s understanding of time changes. In his last months of life he chose to become a father. He also chose to write. His essays were published by Stanford University, where he worked, and by the New York Times. “When Breath Becomes Air” is a deeper exploration of the themes he raised, less a memoir than a reflection on life and purpose. It is an unusual little book, written by an unusual man. Kalanithi was a doctor by training and a philosopher by temperament, the type of person who, inspired by Aldous Huxley, used his university-admissions essay to argue that happiness was not the point of life. As a 20-year-old camp counsellor, he read a book called “Death and Philosophy” while using his inert body in a children’s game. At university he studied literature, “the richest material for moral reflection”, and human biology, for laying out “the most elegant rules of the brain”. This was a person obsessed by the way people find meaning. Kalanithi writes about the small events that are the meat of human experience: his wanderings through the Arizona desert as a boy, his joy at reading Thoreau and Camus, conversations with his wife and the strange sense of normality felt while dissecting a cadaver. At work he faced not intimations of mortality but the constant reality of it. He describes his mild shame when, having abandoned an ice-cream sandwich to treat a dying patient, unsuccessfully, he gingerly reclaims the melting dessert. He writes about what science can explain and “its inability to grasp the most central aspects of human life: hope, fear, love, hate, beauty, envy, honour, weakness, striving, suffering, virtue”. Most interestingly, he writes about language, about the parts of the brain that control it and its centrality to what makes us human. This is an urgent missive, the power of words revered by a man whose words were leaving him. He describes the birth of his daughter movingly—frail, he lay swaddled as his wife laboured beside him—and the soul-filling love for his new baby. This vital book is dedicated to her.
