IN 1968 the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London held an exhibition called “Cybernetic Serendipity”, Britain’s first show exploring connections between art and new technology. It was hugely popular and in hindsight, well timed. It coincided with two crucial developments in the relationship between art and technology: the pop-art movement, which was demolishing boundaries between high art and everyday life, and ARPANET, the computer-to-computer network which would become the internet. The internet has continued to erode established notions of what qualifies as art, and who can claim to be an artist. New categories flourish: net.art, new media art, the New Aesthetic, internet art, post-internet art. Online-only sales and exhibitions are increasingly common, as is art existing solely in digital form, bought and sold through websites such as Electric Objects (on a mission “to put digital art on a wall in every home”). Successful careers and expensive collections are built using social media, such as Instagram, the image- and video-sharing app that has users posting 80m photographs a day. “Electronic Superhighway (2016-1966)”, a new show at the Whitechapel Gallery in London, looks at how artists have responded to technology and change. The exhibition, which takes its name from a phrase coined in 1974 by Nam June Paik, a video artist, to describe the potential of telecommunication systems, is arranged in reverse chronological order. This calls particular attention to how quickly technologies become obsolete, and how art tied to those forms ages with it. The first room, which looks at the period from 2000 to 2016, is a cacophony of art made using the technologies and visual language of social media, gaming, 3D printing, computer-generated imaging, browser interfaces and smartphones. In subsequent rooms the technology becomes, like the bulky wall of analogue TV monitors that comprise Paik’s “Internet Dream” (1994), nostalgic for older visitors, and a mere historical curiosity for younger ones. Artists working with technology today are acutely aware that their work is ageing. To reflect—or deflect—the inevitable outdating of their material, some, such as Cory Arcangel or Petra Cortright, use low-tech graphics, outmoded software and retro hardware as an ironic aesthetic. Others take the internet’s visual vocabulary to extremes. They include Ryan Trecartin, who populates video and installation work with hyper-real, extravagantly costumed characters; or Camille Henrot, whose film “Grosse Fatigue” layers video clips, photographs and internet screen-grabs over one another as proliferating browser windows. Harun Farocki, a German film-maker who made “Parallel I-IV” just before he died in 2014, predicted of online culture that “Reality will soon cease to be the standard by which to judge the imperfect image. Instead, the virtual image will become the standard by which to measure the imperfections of reality.” Amalia Ulman recently provided a literal illustration of this in a social-media performance piece called “Excellences & Perfections”, using her Instagram and Facebook profiles to create a fake approval-seeking persona, and to stage her body having hoax plastic surgery. Douglas Coupland’s portraits (of which one is shown above) respond to the automatic face-recognition technology used by security services and Facebook. Geometric shapes in primary colours over their features highlight how, to a computer, a face is just a series of abstractable properties. “Every large online corporation (Facebook, Twitter, Amazon, eBay) is optimising you,” Jonas Lund, an artist, has said. “So why shouldn’t an artist also use the same techniques?” His work incorporates analysis of viewer behaviour itself. “VIP (Viewer Improved Painting) 2014” contains an algorithm that creates a fluctuating, abstract composition based on where the viewer looks. In effect handing over the creative prerogative, Mr Lund sardonically gives the same impression as Instagram seeks to give: everyone is an artist. Indeed, it is a problem that plagues the Whitechapel show: it is often difficult to find any sense of individual identities or even real human feeling. Breaking down barriers between technology and art can raise technology to the level of art, but it also risks working the other way round, reducing art to the banality of an algorithm.THE compass did not belong to him. But when he felt it in his trouser pocket—and with every stride of his skis over the Antarctic ice, he felt it—it powered him on. When the light was flat, crevasses lurking and nothing before him but “white darkness”, he remained aware of it, his silent companion. If team morale was low in the tent in the evenings, with socks drying at head-height and the winds hurling outside, he would pass it round. It was not much bigger than an old penny, but alive, spinning and jittering, as excited as he was to be so close to the South Pole. For it had been there before, a century earlier. Inside the lid the owner had scratched his initials: EHS, for Ernest Henry Shackleton. On his three expeditions to Antarctica, in 2008-09, 2011-12 and 2015-16, Henry Worsley went equipped with GPS, video cameras, satellite phones, solar panels, energy bars. No item was more important than the compass. It accompanied him physically only on his first trip, a centenary recreation of Shackleton’s march towards the Pole in 1908-09 which, at 88.23ºS, he had been forced to abandon for weakness and lack of food. On that journey Colonel Worsley took the compass into Shackleton’s hut, from which the trek had started, placing it back among the blankets, boots and golden-syrup tins all perfectly preserved by the dry polar air; and he later also placed it ceremonially at the South Pole, completing what Shackleton had always hoped to do. Yet there was a Shackleton compass in his head in any case. He collected anything to do with him: books, autographs, cigarette cards. At Grytviken whaling station, in South Georgia, he slept beside his grave. His family gamely encouraged him, accepting that the white continent held him fast. Other loves, such as cricket, paled beside it; even his unusual liking for sewing, which he taught to inmates of Wandsworth prison, seemed part-inspired by the “ditty bags” of needles, buttons and thread that were vital gear on polar expeditions. Stirrup of patience It was easy to pinpoint when the obsession had started: at prep school, in the library, as he read of the great explorers and stared, with amazement, at Frank Hurley’s photographs of Shackleton’s ship Endurance listing, like the ghost ship in “The Ancient Mariner”, among towering pack-ice in the Weddell Sea. That third attempt on the Pole had been abandoned, in 1916, almost before it had begun; a distant relative, Frank Worsley, had been the ship’s captain. There lay another reason for the haunting. For decades, though, he doubted that he was bold enough for the Antarctic. How could he be as decisive as Shackleton, as intrepid and optimistic? Could he, to quote his hero, “Put footstep of courage into stirrup of patience”? Throughout his long and distinguished army career, including commands in Bosnia, “special duties” in Northern Ireland and tours with the SAS in Afghanistan, he would keep comparing himself. Trapped in a café by a violent mob in Bosnia, he psyched himself up for a breakout by asking “What would Shacks do?” Meeting, unarmed, with tribal elders in Helmand to lay the trail for the British army in 2005, he would start by making them laugh at his lamentable Pushtu; Shacks had always believed in the power of laughter. In Afghanistan, camping out in wadis in desert camouflage, he was reading “The Heart of the Antarctic”. As an army officer, he was deeply impressed by Shackleton’s leading of his men. Nothing, even reaching the Pole, had meant more to him than their welfare; in return, they had trusted “the Boss” completely. It was in Shackleton’s footsteps that “General” Worsley, as his teams called him, insisted on regular hot meals on polar treks and berated himself, as well as them, for idle slips. And the same loyalty to comrades impelled him on his third journey, starting last November, to raise money for “my wounded mates”: the soldiers who had not, like him, returned whole from active duty. That journey he made alone, intending to be the first to pull a 148kg sledge for 1,100 miles right across the continent, unaccompanied and unassisted, in honour of Shackleton’s abortive bid a century before. He did not mind being solitary. On his two previous expeditions, both heading for the Pole, he had made a point of wandering off each evening to commune with the land and with ghosts. For he did see ghosts, in that extraordinary, mesmerising panorama of blue ice and white peaks: a pair of snow petrels, which he thought might be Shackleton and Scott, and a solar parhelion that might, perhaps, contain their safeguarding spirits. He imagined his hero murmuring advice beside him. The Antarctic, though, turned on him as fiercely as it had ever turned on them. Whiteouts blinded him. Storms kept him pinned in his tent. The sheer scale of the challenge began to daunt him. Day by day, his audio diary for his website stayed chirpy; but the selfies showed a face increasingly exhausted. Eventually, like Shackleton with his “astonishing decision” at 88.23ºS, he had to admit he had “shot his bolt” and, 30 miles from success, could not go on. Unlike his hero, he left it too late, and died in a Chilean hospital. In a whiteout, he radioed on Day 24, “one’s head is always bent downwards in reverence to the compass.” It might have been his epitaph. North Korea declared that it had launched a satellite into space, violating UN sanctions. The launch is likely to have been a cover for testing a long-range ballistic missile. Days later reports surfaced that the army chief of staff, Ri Yong Gil, had been executed. He was one of several bigwigs to have been purged recently by the dictator, Kim Jong Un. Meanwhile, South Korea, displeased at the launch and at an earlier underground nuclear test, shut the industrial park at Kaesong that it operates with North Korea. See article.  A “fishball riot” broke out in Hong Kong following reports that officials were trying to clear unlicensed food-hawkers from a working-class neighbourhood. More than 120 people were injured, including 90 police. Members of a political group called Hong Kong Indigenous, which wants the territory to be more separate from China, played a prominent role. See article.  Celebrations in Beijing of the lunar new year were somewhat quieter than usual. At the start of the holiday, workers swept away 400 tonnes of firework debris from the streets, down by more than a third compared with last year. Worries about pollution, as well as a slowing economy, may have dampened sales. The prime minister of Australia, Malcolm Turnbull, admitted that attempts to improve the lives of Aborigines were falling short. Infant mortality has fallen and the proportion of Aboriginal students who finish high school has nearly doubled. But Aborigines die younger and are more likely to be unemployed than non-indigenous Australians. Show of force Ahead of a two-day meeting of NATO defence ministers in Brussels, Germany and Turkey proposed that the alliance set up patrols in the Aegean Sea to police refugee flows. Meanwhile the European Commission drew up a list of steps it expects Greece to take to improve the situation of asylum-seekers. The lower chamber of the French parliament voted on a proposal to write into the constitution the power to strip French nationality from dual citizens who are convicted of terrorism. The amendment was adopted but divided both the majority and the opposition. This was not the final vote, but it was a test for François Hollande, the French president, who needs three-fifths of the votes in both chambers. Two trains crashed in Germany leaving ten people dead and more than 80 injured. Five years on… Fears grew of a new humanitarian catastrophe in Syria, as forces loyal to Bashar al-Assad, backed by heavy Russian bombing, came close to encircling Aleppo, where 300,000 people are in danger of being cut off and starved. UN investigators accused the Syrian government of a crime against humanity, after a report found that detainees are being killed on a massive scale, amounting to a state policy of civilian “extermination”. See article.  A grandson of Ayatollah Khomeini, who led Iran’s Islamic revolution, will not be allowed to stand in this month’s election in Iran, the body charged with vetting candidates reaffirmed. Hassan Khomeini is seen as a reformist. A plane leaving Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, survived what appears to have been a blast that killed only the suspected suicide-bomber. The bomb exploded after take-off, blowing a hole above the wing of the plane out of which the bomber was sucked. No one else died. Encouraging peace Barack Obama said he would ask Congress for $450m to help Colombia implement a peace agreement with the FARC, a guerrilla group with which Colombia’s government has been at war for more than 50 years. Among other things, the “Peace Colombia” aid package will help pay for clearing mines. Colombia’s government and the FARC have set March 23rd as a deadline to sign a peace deal. Haiti’s president, Michel Martelly, left office as scheduled, but without handing power to a successor. A run-off vote in the presidential election was postponed until April after several candidates complained of irregularities in October’s first round. Parliament is to select an interim president. Anabel Flores Salazar, a crime reporter for a newspaper in the Mexican state of Veracruz, was kidnapped from her home by at least eight uniformed men and murdered. Her body was found on a road in the neighbouring state of Puebla. Six journalists who lived or worked in Veracruz have been killed since 2011. The government of Argentina offered a partial repayment to bondholders whose refusal to accept a debt restructuring prompted the country to default in 2014. It is offering $6.5 billion to bondholders, who are claiming $9 billion. Fulfilling an election promise, Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said that the country will stop bombing Islamic State in Iraq and Syria by February 22nd. It is to withdraw six jets but will continue to refuel aircraft flown by its allies, keep two surveillance planes in the region and triple its number of troops training Kurdish fighters. Bern, baby, Bern In the New Hampshire primary Bernie Sanders won on the Democratic side, beating Hillary Clinton by a stonking 60% to 38%. Donald Trump came first in the Republican contest with 35%. The winning margins for both men were bigger than had been forecast. John Kasich came second in the Republican primary on 16%, followed by Ted Cruz, Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio. Support for the party’s mainstream challengers to Mr Trump was split. See article.  After their poor placing in the primary Chris Christie and Carly Fiorina pulled out of the Republican race. America’s Supreme Court temporarily halted the implementation of the Clean Power Plan, the backbone of Barack Obama’s policy to cut emissions from power plants. The plan gives states leeway over achieving this, but some contend it is too burdensome. The White House sent its budget to Congress. The document was deemed dead on arrival, as Republican leaders are this year forgoing the traditional charade of even pretending to listen to the administration’s budget director at public hearings. See article. It was another jittery week for stockmarkets. As well as general worries about the state of the world economy, investors fretted about the health of European banks, causing wild swings in their share prices. Some of the concerns were over Deutsche Bank’s restructuring programme and its capacity to make payments on a specific type of debt. The bank’s chief executive, John Cryan, gave assurances that its position was “absolutely rock solid”. Its share price rebounded on reports that it would buy back several billion euros worth of its debt. See here and here.  Tech stocks also fared badly, none more so than those of LinkedIn, a social network for businesspeople, and Tableau, which produces cloud-based software for data visualisation. Both companies released sales forecasts for the year that came in well below analysts’ expectations; LinkedIn’s share price plummeted by 43% in a day and Tableau’s by 49%. Going cheap Twitter’s share price dropped to a new low after it released its fourth-quarter earnings, which showed no growth for the first time in its user base (compared with the previous quarter). It posted another net loss, of $90m. The results were the first since Jack Dorsey returned on a permanent basis as chief executive. See article.  Japanese ten-year bonds joined a lengthening list of government securities with a negative yield, offering -0.04% a year. Nearly 30% of the global government bond market now trades on a negative yield. Sweden, meanwhile, pushed its main interest rate further into negative territory, to -0.5%, Janet Yellen, who chairs the Federal Reserve, hinted that the central bank was less inclined to raise interest rates again at its meeting in March. China’s foreign-exchange reserves fell again last month, as the central bank tapped its pile of dollars to prop up the yuan. The reserves dropped by $100 billion to $3.2 trillion, the lowest in nearly four years. Believe it or not The release of GDP figures in India for the last three months of 2015 raised more questions than it answered. The economy officially grew by 7.3% compared with the same quarter a year earlier, making it the world’s fastest-growing large economy. But since last year’s rejig of GDP statistics, doubts have been raised about the accuracy of the data. Economists point to other numbers, such as weak exports and a lack of investment, which suggest a less rosy outlook. India’s telecoms regulator introduced a ban on differential pricing for access to internet content, in effect blocking Facebook’s Free Basics service in the country. Free Basics is a collection of apps and resources made for people in developing countries and distributed without charge, which Facebook says offers the poor a portal to the internet through their phones. But critics of the scheme contend that it ties people to Facebook’s network, giving it an unfair market advantage. Asahi, a Japanese brewer, presented a €2.6 billion ($2.9 billion) offer to Anheuser-Busch InBev to buy the Peroni and Grolsch beer brands that are currently owned by SABMiller. AB InBev is in the process of taking over SABMiller and has to offload some assets to satisfy antitrust regulators in Europe. It would be Asahi’s biggest acquisition to date. Weaker demand for transporting goods on Asia-Europe sea routes was a factor behind A.P. Moller-Maersk reporting a fall in underlying profit for last year, to $3.1 billion. The Danish shipping company also took a big write-down on its oil-exploration business because of “low oil-price expectations”. Volkswagen delayed the publication of its annual report. It is struggling to determine the full cost of last year’s emissions scandal, when it admitted to cheating in tests of nitrogen-oxide levels emitted by its diesel cars. The German carmaker has yet to satisfy regulators in America that it has a viable plan for fixing the 600,000 diesel vehicles that have been recalled. The squabble raged on between London’s black-taxi drivers and app upstart Uber. This week Uber offered free access to its taxi-hailing app to the cabbies, but this was rejected as a publicity stunt. Rival apps, such as Hailo and Gett, count two-thirds of the capital’s black-cab drivers among their ranks. Boys and girls Merchandise tied to “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” helped boost profits at Hasbro. The American toymaker said that sales in the last quarter of 2015 were 13% higher than in the same three months of 2014. Revenue in its “boys” division, where it parks its Star Wars-related business, was up by 35%. Hasbro, like other toymakers, faced a storm of criticism when it initially omitted products that feature Rey, the film’s female lead character, from its range.More KAL's cartoonsIT IS like a hash-induced hallucination: row upon row of lush, budding plants, tended by white-coated technicians who are bothered by the authorities only when it is time to pay their taxes. Cannabis once grew in secret, traded by murderous cartels and smoked by consumers who risked jail. Now, countries all over the world have licensed the drug for medical purposes, and a few are going still further (see article). Four American states have so far legalised its recreational use; little Uruguay will soon be joined by big, G7-member Canada in the legal-weed club. Parliaments from Mexico to South Africa are debating reforms of their own. Those (including this newspaper) who have argued that legalisation is better than prohibition will welcome the beginning of the end of the futile war on weed. Cannabis accounts for nearly half the $300 billion illegal narcotics market, and is the drug of choice for most of the world’s 250m illicit-drug users. Legalising it deprives organised crime of its single biggest source of income, while protecting and making honest citizens of consumers. Yet the repeal of prohibition marks the start of complex arguments about how to regulate cannabis. What sound like details for bureaucrats—how to tax it, which varieties to allow, who should sell it and to whom—are questions that force policymakers to decide which of legalisation’s competing aims they value most. Trailblazers like Canada are writing rules that the rest of the world will copy; once laid down, they will be hard to uproot. Getting these decisions right will ultimately determine whether legalisation succeeds or fails. Have your hash cake and eat it Legalisation’s proponents are an odd mix of libertarians, who want to maximise personal and commercial freedom, and conservatives, who grasp that prohibition is less effective than pragmatic legalisation and regulation. The hippies and hardliners created a powerful alliance for legalisation. But when asked to say exactly how the cannabis trade should work—at what rate to set taxes or whether to place limits on consumption, for instance—they can find themselves at odds. Libertarians may ask why cannabis, which has no known lethal dose, should be regulated at all for adults who can make free, informed decisions. There are two reasons for care. First, cannabis appears to induce dependency in a minority of users, meaning the decision whether to light up is not a free one. Second, cannabis’s illegality means that the research on its long-term effects is hazy, so even the most informed decision is based on incomplete information. When decisions are neither always free nor fully informed, the state is justified in steering consumers away, as it does from alcohol and tobacco. Hence the libertarians must cede ground. States can tax users to deter consumption—though not so much as to make consumers turn first to the untaxed black market. The “right” level of tax will depend on a country’s circumstances. In Latin America, where abuse is rare and the black market is bloody and powerful, governments should keep prices low. In the rich world, where problem use is more common and drug-dealers are a nuisance rather than a threat to national security, prices could be higher. One model is the United States after Prohibition: alcohol taxes were set low at first, to drive out the bootleggers; later, with the Mafia gone, they were ramped up. A similar trade-off applies when determining what products to allow. Cannabis no longer means just joints. Legal entrepreneurs have cooked up pot-laced food and drink, reaching customers who might have avoided smoking the stuff. Ultra-strong “concentrates” are on offer to be inhaled or swallowed. Edibles and stronger strains help put the illegal dealers out of business, but they also risk encouraging more people to take the drug, and in stronger forms. The starting-point should be to legalise only what is already available on the black market. That would mean capping or taxing potency, much as spirits are taxed more steeply and are less available than beer. Again, the mix will vary. Europe may be able to ban concentrates. America already has a taste for them. If the product were outlawed there the mob would gladly step in.  In one respect, governments should be decidedly illiberal. Advertising is largely absent in the underworld, but in the legal world it could stimulate vast new demand. It should be banned. Likewise, alluring packaging and products, such as cannabis sweets that would appeal to children, should be outlawed, just as many countries outlaw flavoured cigarettes and alcohol-spiked sweets. The state should use the tax system and public education to promote the least harmful ways of getting high. The legal market has already created pot’s answer to the e-cigarette, which reduces the damage done by smoke to lungs. INTERACTIVE MAP: Marijuana and the disjointed states of America In America the federal ban on cannabis means the task of writing its first regulations has fallen to overstretched civil servants in a few small states. Testing potency, setting safe-driving limits and solving a hundred other puzzles is no easier when the federal agencies that would normally advise them (such as the Food and Drug Administration, the world’s most advanced pharmaceutical regulator) are sitting on their hands. And the absence of federal curbs on pot advertising means that the drug is more widely promoted than tobacco, by companies pleading the First Amendment. The federal government’s wait-and-see policy sounds prudent; in fact it is irresponsible. Be cautious, but be bold Campaigners for and against legalisation need to adjust to the new reality, too. Those who would rather ban the drug should stop flogging the dead horse of prohibition and start campaigning for versions of legalisation that do the least harm (just as the temperance movement these days lobbies for higher taxes on booze, rather than a ban). Legalisers, meanwhile, should open their eyes to the fact that the legal marijuana industry, which until now has only had to prove itself more worthy than organised criminals, now needs as much scrutiny as the other “sin” industries that defend their turf jealously. Rather than one day having to take on Big Cannabis, it would be better to get policy on pot right from the start.ON SOCIAL media the rioting that erupted in Hong Kong on February 8th has been dressed up as a righteous political protest: “#FishballRevolution” is the hashtag used to discuss the violence that racked a working-class district of the city for ten hours, resulting in injuries to 124 people, including 90 police officers (see article). The mayhem was triggered by reports that officials were trying to clear away illegal food stalls selling fishballs, a local delicacy. In no sense was the violence righteous. Most Hong Kong residents were appalled. Their city is renowned for the peacefulness of its many protests. In an unusually prolonged outbreak of unrest late in 2014, known as the Umbrella Movement, pro-democracy protesters mostly remained on good terms with police. Not since the 1960s, during the madness of Mao’s Cultural Revolution in mainland China, have the territory’s streets seen such bloodshed. Nonetheless, #FishballRevolution was undeniably political. Activists from a group called Hong Kong Indigenous, which stresses Hong Kong’s separateness from mainland China, were involved in the mêlée. Their pretext was the protection of a cherished tradition—eating from food stalls during the Chinese new-year holiday—from zealous officialdom. Hong Kong Indigenous is a fringe group. Officials will be tempted to dismiss its resort to violence as an aberration over a triviality. In fact the central government in Beijing, and that of Hong Kong, should see what happened as evidence of social and political discontent. They have a role in putting it right. When the Umbrella Movement eventually sputtered to an end in December 2014, both governments hoped that the public’s misgivings would abate. China had refrained from leaning on Hong Kong’s government to follow up its tear-gas assaults on the Umbrella protesters with even tougher measures and the tactic was quickly abandoned. But China also turned a deaf ear to the demonstrators’ demands for fully democratic elections for the territory’s leadership. Leung Chun-ying, the unpopular chief executive, showed no willingness to explain the protesters’ anxieties to his overlords in Beijing. As a result, resentment towards officials has grown. The emergence of radical groups such as Hong Kong Indigenous is an extreme manifestation of the simmering discontent. Fears of China’s influence are evident even in debates about building transport links with the mainland (see article). Anxieties have been fuelled by the apparent abduction in recent months of five Hong Kong booksellers by Chinese agents—three while visiting mainland China, one from a resort in Thailand and another from Hong Kong itself. Many suspect that the men were “disappeared” because of plans to publish a tell-tale book about China’s president, Xi Jinping. A fine kettle of fishballs The months ahead in Hong Kong will not be calm. Elections will be held this year for the Legislative Council; and there will be a (rigged) election in 2017 for the chief executive. Mr Leung could help reduce tensions by launching a thorough investigation of the recent violence, including its social causes. Young people are concerned not just about high politics, but also about everyday issues such as unemployment and house prices. But it is China’s government that most urgently needs to act: by releasing the booksellers, apologising for their treatment and heeding calls for political reform. Above all, it needs to recognise that its “one country, two systems” formula depends on preserving Hong Kong’s freewheeling way of life. It should seek to persuade the people of Hong Kong to see themselves as Chinese through attraction, not intimidation.FOR those who worry that a repeat of the crisis of 2007-08 is imminent, this week brought fresh omens. Shares of big banks tumbled; despite a mid-week rally, American lenders are down by 19% this year, European ones by 24% (see article). The cost of insuring banks’ debts against default rose sharply, especially in Europe. The boss of Deutsche Bank felt obliged to declare that the institution he runs is “absolutely rock solid”; Germany’s finance minister professed to have no concerns (thereby adding to the concerns). This is not 2008: big banks are not about to topple. But there are reasons to worry, and many of them converge on one country. Start with the better news. Banks are more strongly capitalised than they were. Even in Europe, where lenders have been slower than their American counterparts to raise capital, banks have plumped up their core equity cushions from an average of 9% in 2009 to 12.5% in 2015. Managers at European banks are making a renewed effort to adjust to the post-crisis landscape. New rules on everything from capital to liquidity are forcing them to change. John Cryan, Deutsche’s newish co-chief executive, was brought in to trim its investment bank. He is jettisoning whole divisions, and suspended the dividend this year and last. Credit Suisse is undergoing similar surgery. Just now, this is weighing on the banks’ share prices. Yet, however painful for investors, the sensible goal is ultimately to create slimmer, safer, more profitable outfits. Also salutary, if painful, is how investors in bank debt are coming to understand that they bear greater risk than they did. New European rules that came fully into force at the start of this year stipulate that troubled banks must deal with capital shortfalls by “bailing in” holders of bank bonds before any call is made on the taxpayer. The chance that bondholders might lose money suddenly seems more real. The turmoil at Deutsche this week stemmed partly from fear that the bank might struggle to pay interest next year on a type of bond that is designed to act as a buffer in a crisis (see article). There are some design flaws in the bail-in regime, but the possibility that European banks are at last repairing themselves at a cost to their investors is the silver lining to this week’s spasms. The clouds, alas, still loom. One source of anxiety is the health of the world economy. The factors that spook markets more broadly—the slowdown in China, plunging commodity prices and indebted energy firms, political upheaval from Greece to New Hampshire—all weigh heavily on banks in particular. Banks do well when the economies they serve are growing, and miserably when they are not. The receding prospect of higher interest rates leaves American banks with less hope of widening the margin between the rates they pay depositors and what they charge for loans. In Japan, where bank shares have fallen by 24% this month, and Europe central banks have imposed negative rates, in effect levying a fee on some reserves—one that banks have not yet been able to pass on to depositors. With the economic outlook growing gloomier, margins being squeezed and restructuring costs still hitting profits, investors have good reason to fret. Worse, some countries appear to have taken so long to deal with their banks that they will now struggle to clean them up at all. The IMF reckons that the total amount of non-performing debt in Europe was around €1 trillion ($1.13 trillion) at the end of 2014. Bail-in is an especially ugly prospect in countries where bank debt is owned not only by diversified financial institutions but also by local retail investors. Under such conditions, politicians may find that they cannot force the cost of cleaning up balance-sheets on voters without causing uproar. Rome is where the hurt is No country is more impaled on this dilemma than Italy. The gross value of non-performing loans makes up a whopping 18% of their total lending; retail investors own some €200 billion of bank bonds, equivalent to 12% of GDP. A government plan to buy bad debts from the banks at close to face value would fall foul of European rules against “state aid”. But selling the loans at a significant discount would force Italian banks to recognise losses, some of which could be borne by retail investors. The prime minister, Matteo Renzi, headed down this road late last year, when the efforts to save four small banks clobbered the savings of individual Italians and seemingly resulted in a high-profile suicide. He will not want to do so again. The European Union and the Italian government recently agreed on a half-baked alternative to bail-in, though few think it will cleanse banks’ balance-sheets. Instead Italy seems trapped between the rock of hurting small savers and the hard place of a banking system strangled by bad debts. If Mr Renzi cannot negotiate his way round the new rules on bail-in, Italy’s banks and economy risk years of more stagnation, poisoning relations with the EU. Behind this week’s banking headlines is the threat of something very bad coming out of Italy.
