FEW places still capture the romance (and frustration) of the early days of flight quite as Africa does. Although air travel in the continent is safer and more common than ever before (see page 53), it still has some charming anachronisms. In Nigeria everyone applauds when the plane touches down. On tiny propeller-driven planes in Botswana the cabin attendants hand you a little bag of biltong, the dried meat that once fed people on long overland treks. In Tanzania, where on some flights almost half the passengers are taking to the skies for the first time, many of the faces in the cabin betray a sense of wonder tinged with fear. Yet African airlines feel like a prop-blast from the past in regrettable ways, too. In most places, schedules are about as reliable as they were when planes could take off or land only in clear weather. Tickets are costly. Routes are convoluted: a passenger wanting to fly from Algiers to Lagos may have to go via Europe, turning a four-and-a-half-hour journey into one that takes at least nine hours. Most airlines are state-owned and protected from competition. Like a lot of national carriers elsewhere, they tend to be chronically unprofitable and to need frequent bail-outs from taxpayers. Across Africa, airlines wanting to fly new routes from one country to another need the agreement of both governments first. Getting this can take years of lobbying and, in some cases, bribes. If the airline is not owned by one of the two states, its chances of winning permission nosedive. Fastjet, a London-listed low-cost carrier with operations across Africa, had to wait three years for a green light to fly between Tanzania and neighbouring Kenya. Zimbabwe recently announced that it would not let any airline besides its national carrier fly from Harare to London—although Air Zimbabwe does not currently service this route, for fear that as soon as its planes land they will be impounded by creditors. Closed markets carry jumbo-sized costs. It is not just that badly run African state airlines lose money ($300m last year, or $3.84 for every airline ticket sold on the continent). Far bigger are the opportunity costs. Lousy air links inhibit trade, exports and investment. In many parts of the world air travel grows about twice as fast as GDP. In Africa it has been expanding by about 5% a year, which is slower than the 6% or so that economic growth has averaged over the past decade. The lesson from other parts of the world is that when markets are freed, fares fall. This stimulates a huge increase in air travel and gives a boost to all the businesses that depend on mobility. In African countries that have liberalised a bit, this has indeed happened: after a bilateral open-skies deal, fares between South Africa and Zambia fell by almost 40% and passenger numbers rose nearly as much. After Morocco opened its market to European airlines in 2005, the number of passengers jumped by 160% and the number of routes more than tripled, from 83 to 309 in eight years. A study commissioned by the International Air Transport Association (IATA), a club of big airlines, estimates that if just 12 of Africa’s bigger economies opened their skies to one another, fares would fall by more than a third and traffic between them would soar by 81%, to roughly 11m passengers. More than 155,000 new jobs would be created, and $1.3 billion would be added to GDP. This may well be an underestimate, given Africa’s vast size and sparse, shoddy road network, which is about a fifth as dense as the world average and mostly unpaved. Where air travel expands, so do unexpected new industries, such as growing roses in Kenya for export to Europe. Fly freedom In 1988 most African governments signed up to the Yamoussoukro Declaration, pledging to open their skies. To date not one has done so fully (although some, such as South Africa, have opened up a lot). Rather than encouraging competition, most African leaders seem more concerned with mollycoddling their bust national carriers. This provides jobs for pals and jets that can be commandeered for presidential shopping trips to Paris. But it is terrible for Africa. The continent will struggle to take off economically while its people are stuck on the runway. Time to let Africans fly.THE greatest of all South-East Asia’s waterways and the world’s 12th-longest river, the Mekong, is a natural wonder that ties together the destinies of half a dozen countries. Born from snowmelt at over 17,000 feet (5,200 metres), it bolts off the Tibetan plateau like a runaway horse; by the time it leaves China it is starting to slow and spread. When it reaches Cambodia, via Laos, it is tropical and ample and, with the monsoon rains, parts of it curiously change the direction of their flow. Farther down, it reaches the South China Sea through a filigree delta. The Mekong watershed nurtures extraordinary biodiversity, with new species of plants and animals discovered every year. It has also nurtured humans. Tens of millions of people—much of the population of Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam—depend on the Mekong. Its fish are their protein and its delta is the world’s rice basket. No wonder its name, in Thai or Lao, means “mother of rivers”.   Planners think the mother has one more gift to give: hydropower. China has 14 dams planned or under construction on its stretch of the Mekong in Yunnan province, joining six already built. Today the river is undammed below China, but that will soon change. Laos has nine dams planned or under way; Cambodia has two. Dozens more dams for tributaries are on the drawing board. To the planners, the case for building dams is obvious: they generate electricity and much-needed cash. Poor, landlocked Laos wants to become the dynamo of South-East Asia, selling its energy to Thailand and others; it dreams of hydropower becoming its biggest earner in just a decade. Long wretchedly poor, the Mekong region is now booming. Hydropower will help meet its energy demands, which are expected to double over the next ten years. Yet there are flaws in the planners’ case. For one, they overestimate the river’s potential. At most, says the Mekong River Commission (MRC), the intergovernmental body charged with co-ordinating the river’s management, dams will meet just 8% of the lower Mekong basin’s projected power needs. Worse, the planners underestimate the harm that dams will do to ecosystems as well as to food security. As our essay on the Mekong points out (see article), dams threaten the stocks of migratory fish on which many South-East Asians depend. Farmland will either become less productive because less sediment reaches it from upstream, or disappear under rising river levels or, in the delta, suffer incursions of salt water. The dams, in other words, come at a high environmental cost, imperil food security and, far from increasing overall prosperity, promise to aggravate the poverty of millions of people. They may also increase regional tensions. China and Laos will reap most of the hydropower benefits, while downstream Cambodia and Vietnam pay most of the price. The biggest problem with the dam-building schemes is their lack of co-ordination. An individual dam, high up the river system, would not be a big worry, especially if it was fitted with ladders for migrating fish and the like. But the question is not what one dam will do. It is what 25 of them will do, and how each will affect the next. The dams’ sponsors are not thinking about that. Just keep it rollin’ along Isn’t this the MRC’s task? Well, yes, and it tries to do its job. But it has no enforcement power, struggles to promote good river management and is woefully short of cash. Besides, China, the Mekong’s biggest threat, refuses to be a member. The MRC proposes a ten-year moratorium on dam-building, and has urged studies of hydropower projects, such as run-of-the-river schemes, that would not block the Mekong’s flow. That is prudent advice; but few governments are listening. The scale of the harm that damming the Mekong might cause is huge, and would be irreversible. Without giving enough thought to what they are about to undertake, governments are messing dangerously with the mother of all rivers.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Property deals in Bosnia I’d like to add some points to your article on Arab investment in Bosnia (“Ottoman comfort”, January 23rd). Land-development deals are being made in a completely non-transparent manner. Officials with the necessary party and foreign ties are making favourable deals with Arab investors without input from the broader community. Some of the land being sold is public, and municipal officials are playing fast and loose with zoning regulations to clinch deals. There are reports that private landowners (often non-Muslims who remained after the war in what are now majority-Muslim areas) are being pressured to sell as foreign buyers seek large land holdings. Beyond the value of developments catering to other Arab buyers, the aim of these investments is seemingly less about profit and more about longer-term presence and influence. The only Bosnians “delighted” about these deals are the elites who directly profit from them. The residents in this still-divided society are troubled by opaque terms that will result in gated communities, catering to thousands of foreign nationals. There is a marked difference between favourable globalisation and open markets, and the narrow economic fruits of poor governance, weak rule of law and corruption. VALERY PERRY African energy Regarding your article on stalled electrification plans in Africa (“Power hungry”, January 9th), electricity-distribution companies across the continent are generally state-owned and governments are usually the largest electricity consumers. They are the main culprits for either late or non-payment. What does a state-owned electricity company do when its owner and biggest customer doesn’t pay? The generators of that energy are then not paid or paid in arrears. The shortfall in generation is plugged using emergency diesel generators at four times the cost of grid power. This is symptomatic of a greater failure in sub-Saharan energy markets. Schemes such as Barack Obama’s Power Africa plan are welcome, but the focus should be on reforming markets and recapitalising and privatising distribution companies under qualified, accountable management. A functioning power market will attract foreign capital for expansion, which is vital for broader economic growth and poverty alleviation in Africa. DIARMUID TWOMEY The battle of backwater loos The debate over making restrooms inclusive to transgender people is too narrow (“Restroom rumpus”, January 30th). Rethinking restrooms for all genders would better serve families by, for example, letting a father with a daughter or a caregiver looking after someone from the opposite sex take them to the toilet. Public restrooms don’t meet modern society’s needs in many ways. JENNIFER GEREND Batteries not included * I was surprised that you cited lithium-ion batteries as the “technology of our time” (“A plug for the battery”, January 16th). A consensus is emerging within the industry that electricity storage will require a number of complementary technologies. Where there is no one dominant technology, the suitability of a storage system depends on how and where it is going to be used. You highlighted the limitations of lithium in storing grid-scale power which alternatives can address. Flow batteries, for example, store energy in tanks of liquid electrolyte and so neatly sidestep this problem, since more energy can be stored through a simple increase in tank size. Vanadium, the most commonly used metal in flow battery technology, is a significantly more plentiful element, and therefore does not suffer from the supply restrictions which you rightly noted are driving up prices. Based upon US Geological Survey resource data and current usage, we have 1000 years supply of vanadium. Whilst lithium has enjoyed success in short duration applications, it is longer duration services that will drive the de-carbonisation agenda and smooth imbalances between generation and consumption. I would suggest that the flow battery is the real “technology of our time” and that it should not be eclipsed by its younger, and often noisier, cousin. Natural-born thriller Although Ted Cruz is an American citizen by virtue of his mother, it is simply not the case that “his eligibility to be president is beyond serious doubt” (“Outsiders’ chance”, January 30th). Mr Cruz was born in Canada. The phrasing in Article II of the constitution requires that “No person except a natural-born citizen… shall be eligible for the office of president.” Neither the constitution nor statutory law defines “natural born”. As a former foreign-service officer, I point you to volume seven of the “Foreign Affairs Manual”, section 1131.6-2: “It has never been determined definitively by a court whether a person who acquired US citizenship by birth abroad to US citizens is a natural-born citizen within the meaning of Article II of the constitution and, therefore, eligible for the presidency.” Thus, “the fact that someone is a natural-born citizen pursuant to a statute does not necessarily imply that he or she is such a citizen for constitutional purposes.” HOWIE MUIR In the pipeline * Regarding the global market for natural gas (“Step on it”, January 30th) one area to watch is the development of a liquid wholesale natural gas market in China. Domestic consumption is growing and there is diversity and competition of supply sources. Important policy changes are forthcoming from the National Development and Reform Commission, including third-party access to gas pipelines and potential pipeline sales. The infrastructure is being restructured. China could finally be the answer to the “Asian Gas Index”, providing a long awaited reference for LNG contracts in the region, and playing the role of the Henry Hub index in the East. An Economist reader passes I am writing to tell you of the death of Martin Bud, possibly The Economist’s longest-ever subscriber. He received his subscription on his 18th birthday in January 1938, and his last copy was delivered after more than 78 years of uninterrupted readership. His life was in many ways a mirror of the 20th century. Born Jewish in Weimar Berlin to the family of a self-made economist and banker, his mother died of appendicitis when he was four, in the age before antibiotics. Returning from school one day he found himself between a great crowd and a motorcade, face to face with Hitler. His family escaped as refugees to England in 1935, where he qualified as an accountant with PriceWaterhouse. His father stopped him from joining the Republicans in the Spanish civil war and later the British army. At the family firm, ENM, he developed sophisticated research tools for sales forecasting, which would later form the basis for some celebrated work by the music industry on modelling the long tail of digital consumption. In the 1960s he pioneered the use of microelectronics by British industry. The years after ENM’s purchase were difficult, as this heir to the German industrial tradition chafed at what he felt was the plutocratic, lax and irrational management of the new owners. He later supplied equipment to many of the world’s state lotteries, and enjoyed working in an industry which thrived by applying rational reasoning to the irrational. His wife of 58 years, Hanna, was a research chemist with Margaret Thatcher at J. Lyons Research. In 2009 the producers of Harry Potter wanted to use his house as a location. He conducted negotiations for the complex contract entirely in verse. ANDREW BUD Pioneers of punk More than a few elderly New Yorkers would dispute whether the “place of punk rock’s birth in 1976” was the King’s Road in London (“Punk reaches middle age”, January 30th). The Ramones, were playing punk rock in New York in 1974. When I lived in London in 1978 my landlady complained that punk was an evil American influence. PETER WEVERKA Death to the collaborators! Schumpeter is one smart dude for capturing the destructive underbelly of technology’s tidal wave of collaboration and consequent disruption (January 23rd). He would do well to read “The Circle” by Dave Eggers, a chilling story that would leave him even more despondent. RICHARD HETKE Collaboration also allows ineffective employees to skirt responsibility. As the saying goes, meetings are the practical alternative to work. TIMOTHY KLAAS * Letters appear online onlyIN AN anonymous-looking building a few minutes’ drive from Denver International Airport, a bald chemotherapy patient and a pair of giggling tourists eye the stock on display. Reeking packets of mossy green buds—Girl Scout Cookies, KoolAid Kush, Power Cheese—sit alongside cabinets of chocolates and chilled drinks. In a warehouse behind the shop pointy-leaved plants bask in the artificial light of two-storey growing rooms. Sally Vander Veer, the president of Medicine Man, which runs this dispensary, reckons the inventory is worth about $4m. America, and the world, are going to see a lot more such establishments. Since California’s voters legalised the sale of marijuana for medical use in 1996, 22 more states, plus the District of Columbia, have followed suit; in a year’s time the number is likely to be nearer 30. Sales to cannabis “patients” whose conditions range from the serious to the notional are also legal elsewhere in the Americas (Colombia is among the latest to license the drug) and in much of Europe. On February 10th Australia announced similar plans. Now a growing number of jurisdictions are legalising the sale of cannabis for pure pleasure—or impure, if you prefer. In 2014 the American states of Colorado and Washington began sales of recreational weed; Oregon followed suit last October and Alaska will soon join them. They are all places where the drug is already popular (see chart 1). Jamaica has legalised ganja for broadly defined religious purposes. Spain allows users to grow and buy weed through small collectives. Uruguay expects to begin non-medicinal sales through pharmacies by August.   Canada’s government plans to legalise cannabis next year, making it the first G7 country to do so. But it may not be the largest pot economy for long; California is one of several states where ballot initiatives to legalise cannabis could well pass in America’s November elections. A majority of Americans are in favour of such changes (see chart 2). Legalisers argue that regulated markets protect consumers, save the police money, raise revenues and put criminals out of business as well as extending freedom. Though it will be years before some of these claims can be tested, the initial results are encouraging: a big bite has been taken out of the mafia’s market, thousands of young people have been spared criminal records and hundreds of millions of dollars have been legitimately earned and taxed. There has so far been no explosion in consumption, nor of drug-related crime. To get the most of these benefits, though, requires more than just legalisation. To live outside the law, Bob Dylan memorably if unconvincingly claimed, you must be honest; to live inside it you must be regulated. Ms Vander Veer points to a “two-inch thick” book of rules applicable to Medicine Man’s business. Such rules should depend on which of legalisation’s benefits a jurisdiction wants to prioritise and what harms it wants to minimise. The first consideration is how much protection users need. As far as anyone has been able to establish (and some have tried very hard indeed) it is as good as impossible to die of a marijuana overdose. But the drug has downsides. Being stoned can lead to other calamities: in the past two years Colorado has seen three deaths associated with cannabis use (one fall, one suicide and one alleged murder, in which the defendant claims the pot made him do it). There may have been more. Colorado has seen an increase in the proportion of drivers involved in accidents who test positive for the drug, though there has been no corresponding rise in traffic fatalities. The chronic harm done by the drug is still a matter for debate. Heavy cannabis use is associated with mental illness, but researchers struggle to establish the direction of causality; a tendency to mental illness may lead to drug use. It may also be the case that some are more susceptible to harm than others. Jonathan Caulkins of Carnegie Mellon University has found that cannabis users are more likely than alcohol drinkers to say the drug has caused them problems at work or at home. It is an imperfect comparison because most cannabis users are, by definition, lawbreakers, and therefore perhaps more prone to such problems. Nonetheless it is clear that pot is, in Mr Caulkins’ words, a “performance-degrading drug”. What’s more, some struggle to give it up: in America 14% of people who used pot in the past month meet the criteria by which doctors define dependence. As in the alcohol and tobacco markets, about 80% of consumption is accounted for by the heaviest-using 20% of users. Startlingly, Mr Caulkins calculates that in America more than half of all cannabis is consumed by people who are high for more than half their waking hours. INTERACTIVE MAP: Marijuana and the disjointed states of America To complicate matters, the public-health effects of cannabis should not be looked at in isolation. If taking up weed made people less likely to consume cigarettes or alcohol it might offer net benefits. But if people treat cannabis and other drugs as complements—that is, if doing more pot makes them smoke more tobacco or guzzle more alcohol—an increase in use could be a big public-health problem. No one yet knows which is more likely. A review of mostly American studies by the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, found mixed evidence on the relationship between cannabis and alcohol. Demand for tobacco seems to go up along with demand for cannabis, though the two are hard to separate because, in Europe at least, they are often smoked together. The data regarding other drugs are more limited. Proponents of the Dutch “coffee shop” system, which allows purchase and consumption in specific places, argue that legalisation keeps users away from dealers who may push them on to harder substances. And there is some evidence that cannabis functions as a substitute for prescription opioids, such as OxyContin, which kill 15,000 Americans each year. People used to worry that cigarettes were a “gateway” to cannabis, and that cannabis was in turn a gateway to hard drugs. It may be the reverse: cannabis could be a useful restraint on the abuse of opioids, but a dangerous pathway to tobacco. More bong for your buck Danger and harm are not in themselves a reason to make or keep things illegal. But the available evidence persuades many supporters of legalisation that cannabis consumption should still be discouraged. The simplest way to do so is to keep the drug expensive; children and heavy users, both good candidates for deterrence, are particularly likely to be cost sensitive. And keeping prices up through taxes has political appeal that goes beyond public health. Backers of California’s main legalisation measure make much of the annual $1 billion that could flow to state coffers. Setting the right level for the tax, though, is challenging. Go too low and you encourage use. Aim too high and you lose one of the other benefits of legalisation: closing down a criminal black market. Comparing Colorado and Washington illustrates the trade-off. Colorado has set its pot taxes fairly low, at 28% (including an existing sales tax). It has also taken a relaxed approach to licensing sellers; marijuana dispensaries outnumber Starbucks. Washington initially set its taxes higher, at an effective rate of 44%, and was much more conservative with licences for growers and vendors. That meant that when its legalisation effort got under way in 2014, the average retail price was about $25 per gram, compared with Colorado’s $15. The price of black-market weed (mostly an inferior product) in both states was around $10. The effect on crime seems to have been as one would predict. Colorado’s authorities reckon licensed sales—about 90 tonnes a year—now meet 70% of total estimated demand, with much of the rest covered by a “grey” market of legally home-grown pot illegally sold. In Washington licensed sales accounted for only about 30% of the market in 2014, according to Roger Roffman of the University of Washington. Washington’s large, untaxed and rather wild-west “medical” marijuana market accounts for a lot of the rest. Still, most agree that Colorado’s lower prices have done more to make life hard for organised crime. Uruguay also plans to set prices comparable to those that illegal dealers offer. “We intend to compete with the illicit market in price, quality and safety,” says Milton Romani, secretary-general of the National Drug Board. To avoid this competitively priced supply encouraging more use, the country will limit the amount that can be sold to any particular person over a month. In America, where such restrictions (along with the register of consumers needed to police them) would probably be rejected, it will be harder to stop prices for legal grass low enough to shut down the black market from also encouraging greater use. Indeed, since legalisation consumption in Colorado appears to have edged up a few percentage points among both adults and under-21s, who in theory shouldn’t be able to get hold of it at all; that said, a similar trend was apparent before legalisation, and the data are sparse. If, starved of sales, the black market shrinks beyond a point of no return, taxes could later go up, restoring the deterrent. There is precedent for this. When the prohibition of alcohol ended in 1933, Joseph Choate of America’s Federal Alcohol Control Administration recommended “keeping the tax burden on legal alcoholic beverages comparatively low in the earlier post-prohibition period in order to permit the legal industry to offer more severe competition to its illegal competitor.” After three years, he estimated, with the mob “driven from business, the tax burden could be gradually increased.” And so it was (see chart 3). Those taxes reflected the strength of what was for sale; taxing whiskey more than beer made sense as a deterrent to drunkenness. Here, so far, the regulation of cannabis lags behind. The levies on price or weight used by America’s legalising states are easy to administer, but could push consumers towards stronger strains. In the various lines sold by Medicine Man, for example, the concentration of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the chemical compound that gets you high, varies from 7% to over 20%. The prices, though, are mostly the same, and there is no difference in tax. Some like it weak, but on the whole, Ms Vander Veer says, the stronger varieties are what people ask for. If they cost no more, why not? The average potency on sale in Denver is now about 18%, roughly three times the strength of the smuggled Mexican weed that once dominated the market. Barbara Brohl, the head of Colorado’s Department of Revenue, says THC-based taxation is something the state may try in the future. But the speed with which the regulatory apparatus was set up—sales began just over a year after the ballot initiative passed in November 2012—meant that they had to move fast. “We’re building the airplane while we’re in the air,” she says. Uruguay, clear that it wants to be “a regulated market, not a free market”, as Mr Romani puts it, plans a more direct way of discouraging the stronger stuff. Dispensaries will sell just three government-approved strains of cannabis, their potencies ranging from 5% to 14%. Another issue for regulators is the increasing number of ways in which cannabis is consumed. The star performer of the legalised pot market is the “edibles” sector, which includes THC-laced chocolates, drinks, lollipops and gummy bears. There are also concentrated “tinctures” to be dropped onto the tongue and vaping products to be consumed through e-cigarettes. Foria, a California company, sells a THC-based personal lubricant (“For all my vagina knew, I was laying on one of San Diego’s fabulous beaches!” reads one testimonial). The popularity of these products looks set to grow; users appreciate the discretion with which they can be consumed, producers like the ease with which their production can be automated (no hand-picking of buds required). But edibles, in particular, make it easy to take more than intended. A hit on a joint kicks in quickly; cakes or drinks can take an hour or two. Inexperienced users sometimes have a square of chocolate, feel nothing and wolf down the rest of the bar—only to spend the next 12 hours believing they are under attack by spiders from Mars. The three cannabis-related deaths in Colorado all followed the consumption of edibles. Hospitals in the state also report seeing an increasing number of children who have eaten their parents’ grown-up gummy bears. In response the authorities have tightened their rules on packaging, demanding clearer labelling, childproof containers, and more obvious demarcation of portions. A second concern about new ways of taking the drug is that they could attract new customers. Ms Vander Veer says that edibles offer a “good way to get comfortable with how THC makes you feel”; women, older people and first-timers are particularly keen on them. If you see cannabis as a harmless high, this is not a problem. If you want to keep usage low, it is. The innovation seen to date is just a taste of what entrepreneurs might eventually dream up. On landing in Denver—which, uncoincidentally, is now the most popular spring-break destination for American students—you can call a limo from 420AirportPickup which will drive you to a dispensary and then let you smoke in the back while you cruise on to a cannabis-friendly hotel (some style themselves “bud ‘n’ breakfast”). You can take a marijuana cookery course, or sign up for joint-rolling lessons. Dispensaries offer coupons, loyalty points, happy hours and all the other tricks in the marketing book. Legalisation has also paved the way for better branding. Snoop Dogg, a rap artist, has launched a range of smartly packaged products called “Leafs by Snoop”. The estate of Bob Marley has lent its name to a range of “heirloom marijuana strains” supposedly smoked by the man himself. Roll up for the mystery tour Branding means advertising, which may itself promote use. Many in America would like to follow Uruguay’s example and ban all cannabis advertising, but the constitution stands in their way. When Colorado banned advertising in places where more than 30% of the audience is likely to be under-age cannabis companies objected on the grounds of their right to free speech, though the suit was later dropped. As well as moving into advertising, the industry is growing more professional in its lobbying. In legalisation initiatives the “Yes” side increasingly outspends the “No” side: in Alaska by four to one, in Oregon by more than 50 to one. Rich backers help—in California Sean Parker, an internet billionaire, has donated $1m to the cause. In some states, ballot initiatives have been heavily influenced by the very people who are hoping to sell the drugs once they are legalised. In November 2015 voters in Ohio soundly rejected a measure that would have granted a cannabis-cultivation oligopoly to the handful of firms that had backed it. Worries about regulatory capture will increase along with the size of the businesses standing to gain. Big alcohol and tobacco firms currently deny any interest in the industry. But they said the same in the 1960s and 1970s, a time when Philip Morris and British American Tobacco, it has since been revealed, were indeed looking at the market. Brendan Kennedy, the chief executive of Privateer Holdings, a private-equity firm focused on the marijuana industry, says that several alcohol distributors have invested in American cannabis firms. Even without such intervention big companies are likely to emerge. Sam Kamin, a law professor at Denver University who helped draft Colorado’s regulations, suspects that eventual federal legalisation, which would make interstate trade legal, could well see cannabis cultivation become something like the business of growing hops, virtually all of which come from Washington, Oregon and Idaho. Big farms supplying a national market would be much cheaper than the current local-warehouse model, driving local suppliers out of the market, or at least into a niche. The industry has so far been helped by the fact that many on the left who might normally campaign against selling harmful substances to young people are vocal supporters of legalisation. That could change with the growth of a business lobby that, although understanding that an explosion in demand would trigger a backlash, may have little long-term interest in restraint. The prospect of such a lobby could also serve as an incentive for states to take the initiative on legalisation, rather than waiting for their citizens to demand it. Fine-tuning Colorado’s regime, Mr Kamin says, has been made harder by the fact that the ballot of 2012 enshrined legalisation in the state constitution. Other states “might want [their rules] to be defined instead by legislation, not citizens’ initiative,” suggests Ms Brohl, the Colorado tax chief. Different places will legalise in different ways; some may never legalise at all; some will make mistakes they later think better of. But those that legalise early may prove to have a lasting influence well beyond their borders, establishing norms that last for a long while. It behoves them to think through what needs regulating, and what does not, with care. Over-regulation risks losing some of the main benefits of liberalisation. But as alcohol and tobacco show, tightening regimes at a later date can be very difficult indeed.THE nativist rage Donald Trump is whooping up across America translates into actual votes—lots of them. So does the left-wing populism with which Bernie Sanders is thrilling an expanding chunk of the Democratic Party. These were the messages of the New Hampshire primary held on February 9th; and their repercussions, blown from the icy New England state down south and out west, where America’s quarrelsome primary contest moves to next, could be tremendous. Mr Trump hoovered up 35% of the vote in New Hampshire. John Kasich, the governor of Ohio, came second with 16%. That means the Republican establishment still has no answer to Mr Trump’s assault on conservative ideology and their party’s good name; or to Ted Cruz, an ultra-conservative troublemaker who won in Iowa and came third in New Hampshire. Mr Kasich is too pragmatic and, in a fraught time, too genial for most Republican primary voters. Marco Rubio, a likelier establishment champion who was widely expected to surge from the mainstream pack, did abysmally. He won less than 11%, which put him fifth behind Jeb Bush, the ridiculed scion of a divisive dynasty. Democratic Party bosses were similarly confounded. They think Mr Sanders could not win a general election; they are probably right. The veteran senator vows to break up banks, make college education free, squeeze the pips out of rich people, then squeeze them again. He calls himself a democratic socialist; most Americans hear only the second word, and shudder. Yet he won 60% of the vote in New Hampshire, which represented one of the biggest victories in a contested Democratic primary—and trouble for Hillary Clinton. Mr Sanders trounced the Democratic front-runner in almost every voter group. Exit polls suggested he won over 80% of younger voters, which was startling, if predicted, given how college crowds love to “feel the Bern”. He also beat Mrs Clinton among men and women, college graduates and non-graduates, those with guns and those without. The only voters who mainly stayed loyal to Mrs Clinton were high-earners and those aged 65 and over. At an almost-hysterically upbeat defeat rally, Mrs Clinton acknowledged that she needed to do more to win the love of youngsters. But it is the votes of Hispanics and, especially, blacks that will now concern her most. African-Americans, who have hitherto favoured Mrs Clinton over Mr Sanders by 3:1, represent half of all Democrats in South Carolina, which will hold its primary on February 27th. So long as Mrs Clinton can keep them onside, she will probably win the nomination. Yet, given the immensity of Mr Sanders’s victory, that seems a bit less certain than it did. He had a couple of big advantages in New Hampshire. It is crammed with white lefties, his main target audience, and next-door to Vermont, which he has represented in Washington for a quarter of a century. Yet the result also showed how fundamental Mrs Clinton’s weaknesses are. She represents continuity, and voters want change; exit polls in New Hampshire suggest that 42% of Democrats want a more left-wing president than Barack Obama. They, naturally, are another group Mr Sanders swept. He promises a “political revolution”; Mrs Clinton pledges to secure Mr Obama’s legacy. With a little tinkering, that should not be a losing promise; the president is extremely popular among Democrats. The trouble for Mrs Clinton is that, despite her cool head, tough streak and ironclad grip on policy, she lacks the subtlety and easy charisma that lesser politicians would deploy to change gears. She has charm, but of a programmatic sort. Having failed, so far, to fire up many women with the promise of America’s first woman president, she is struggling even to get them to like her. A persistent controversy over her use of a private e-mail account as secretary of state has made that harder, by playing to her reputation for being rather shifty. Her supporters decry both, reputation and scandal, as malicious Republican slander, of which there has been plenty aimed at Mrs Clinton. But the impression endures, and there is little reason to think black and Hispanic voters, whom Mr Sanders is about to lovebomb with revolutionary promises, will be immune to it. “I worry that Hillary is dishonest,” said Reina Rodriguez, a retired teacher emerging from a polling station in the New Hampshire town of Nashua, after casting her vote for Mr Sanders. She thought the senator “a beautiful politician, a true democrat”. Ominously for Mrs Clinton, she was speaking in Spanish. If Mrs Clinton must rethink, her old New York buddy, Mr Trump, can rejoice. In Iowa, the property tycoon performed less well than opinion polls suggested he should. That implied his support was flaky, because the working-class whites who flock to his rallies, to hear him crack jokes, insult people and promise border walls, do not flock to vote. Mr Trump did little to salve that concern. He campaigned less in New Hampshire than almost any of his rivals, spending only 30 days in the state and little money. Much of what he spent went on aviation fuel and red baseball caps emblazoned with his Reaganite slogan, “Make America Great Again”. His campaign had the look of a Potemkin effort, cobbled together in a half-hearted bid to show journalists he was serious. Mr Bush, by comparison, spent 57 days in the state; he and the super-PAC supporting him, Right to Rise, spent $30m on television advertising there, chiefly to attack his mainstream rivals, Mr Rubio, Mr Kasich and Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar For Republican patricians and moneymen, Mr Rubio’s failure was an even bigger shock than Mr Trump’s win. Had the senator from Florida merely repeated his performance in Iowa, by beating his mainstream rivals convincingly, he would have been saluted as the man to foil Messrs Trump and Cruz—and his campaign deluged with money. That could still happen. Mr Rubio is suffering from a perception that he is too green to be president. An ill-timed gaffe in a televised debate on February 6th, in which Mr Rubio responded to Mr Christie’s accusation that he was rote-learned and untested by robotically repeating a rehearsed attack on Mr Obama, appears to have reinforced that. Yet he remains clever and attractive—and if he is not to be the mainstream Republican champion, it is not at all clear who is. Mr Bush has money, but seems as alien to the Republican mood as Mr Kasich. Mr Christie, who won a pathetic 7% of the New Hampshire vote, has dropped out. Worse for the patricians, the identity of the putative anti-Trump, anti-Cruz candidate, for whom about 40% of the primary vote is available, now cannot be settled until after the party’s South Carolina primary on February 20th. That is excellent for Mr Trump and Mr Cruz, who spent similar time and less money in New Hampshire than the Donald. They can concentrate on building their campaigns and racking up delegates. Mr Rubio and the rest are meanwhile locked in a mutually enfeebling brawl. Not that any of them is likely to do particularly well in South Carolina. Opinion polls put Mr Trump just as far ahead there as he was in New Hampshire, with 36% of the vote. They put Mr Cruz, with 20%, securely in second place. All the mainstreamers are lagging far behind.Power to the tax planners HOW radical is Bernie Sanders? The self-declared socialist likes to remind voters that many of his policies—say, on health care, or on paid family leave—simply copy most of the rest of the rich world. Compared with left-wingers there—Jeremy Corbyn in Britain, for instance—Mr Sanders is no socialist. It is freewheeling America which puts Mr Sanders on the far-left. The truly socialist thing about Mr Sanders’s admirably detailed economic plan is not its goals. It is that it is completely unworkable. Under President Sanders taxes, particularly on high earners, would soar. Mr Sanders wants to make public universities free, increase infrastructure spending and expand Social Security (pensions). His most ambitious policy calls for the government, rather than private insurers, to pay health-care bills. That would cost $14 trillion over a decade, requiring new taxes on most workers worth 8.4% of their income. Expanding Social Security means a further big tax rise for those making more than $250,000. Income-tax rates would become more steeply progressive, too. Totting up all the levies, the top marginal rate of federal tax—which would be levied on households earning more than $10m—would rise to about 67%. (Adding in state taxes would take it higher still.) That is not without precedent: in the 1970s, the top rate was around 70%. This would probably dent growth, and it is at the high end of estimates of the rate which maximises revenue. Taxes might have to go higher still. Mr Sanders plans to tax capital gains as ordinary income. High earners can decide whether or not to sell assets, making this tax easy to dodge. Partly because of this, the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, an advocacy group, reckons Mr Sanders has highballed his revenue estimates by $3 trillion over a decade. Mr Sanders knows that soaking the rich can get him only so far. He is also banking on health-care costs tumbling. Health spending per person is two-and-a-half times the average for the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries. The immense bargaining power of a government buyer could help to control waste. Medicare, government-funded health insurance for the over-65s, already provides care at a lower cost than private insurers. Mr Sanders predicts $6.3 trillion of savings over a decade. That looks like wishful thinking. A costing of Mr Sanders’s plans by Kenneth Thorpe of Emory University, using more conservative assumptions, found that the plan was underfunded by nearly $1.1 trillion (or 6% of GDP) per year. If Mr Thorpe is right, higher taxes will be required to make the sums add up. In 2014 Mr Sanders’ own state, Vermont, abandoned a plan for a single-payer system on the basis that the required tax rises would be too great. Getting health-care costs down is easier than it sounds. Mr Sanders hopes to save a bucketload on administration. But 20% of health spending flows to doctors, nurses and the like. A study published in Health Affairs, a journal, in June 2015 found that the average nurse earns about 40% more, and the average doctor about 50% more, than comparably educated and experienced people in other fields. To bring costs down to British or Canadian levels, these salaries would have to fall. Half a million Americans work in the private health-insurance industry, which would shrink or disappear if Mr Sanders had his way. His plan is “radical in a way that no legislation has ever been”, argues Henry Aaron of Brookings, a think-tank. Mr Sanders has bold plans for monetary policy and banking, too. He supports a movement headed by Rand Paul, an erstwhile Republican runner, to get politicians more involved in decisions on interest rates, because he thinks Fed policy is too tight. To loosen it, he would bar the Fed from raising rates when unemployment is above 4%. Mr Sanders’ plans tend to suffer from a fallacy of composition. Although the average American might not mind paying higher taxes instead of a health-insurance premium, some—such as firms that do not provide health insurance—would face big losses. With such concentrated costs, Mr Sanders’s plans would have no chance of making it past Congress, even an improbably friendly one.MANY ingredients went into making Donald Trump. An under-appreciated one is the distinctively German, or rather Kallstadtian, tinge to his family history. Mr Trump is descended from German immigrants who arrived in America penniless and succeeded quickly through hard work, a free relationship with the truth, opportunism, shrewd business tactics and a great sense of family loyalty. Fred Trump, Donald’s father, who was a strict taskmaster with all his five children, told his three sons to be “killers”. Fred Trump’s father, Friedrich Trump, came to America in 1885 as a 16-year-old from Kallstadt, a village in Rhineland-Palatinate, a region known for wine and stuffed pig’s stomach. After working for a few years as a barber in New York, he headed west and opened a restaurant in a mining town in Washington state where workmen were treated to hearty food, liquor and assignations with women in the back rooms of the establishment. Having amassed a nest-egg, Friedrich returned to Kallstadt to marry Elisabeth Christ, the girl next door, whom he took with him to America. Elisabeth was homesick, so they soon went back to Germany. Yet the authorities refused to let them repatriate because they said Friedrich, who was an American citizen by then, had dodged his military service. The young Trumps were thus forced to emigrate to America. In 1905 their first son, Fred, was born in New York. When Fred Trump was 11 America entered the first world war and a period of intense anti-German sentiment followed, abating in the interwar years and then flaring up again during the second world war. German books were burnt, sauerkraut was renamed “liberty cabbage” and frankfurters became “hot dogs”. Friedrich died of Spanish flu in 1918 at the age of only 49 and left Fred and his mother a tidy sum of money, which they used to set up a company, E. Trump & Son, and invested in property. After graduation from high school in 1923, Fred started to work full-time in construction. He realised quickly that his German origins could be a hindrance, so he pretended that his parents were Swedish, though his mother spoke English with a thick German accent and baked Apfeltorte for family reunions. Donald was Fred Trump’s favourite child, and followed him into the building business. “Fred taught Donald a lot and he was a very good student,” says Gwenda Blair, the author of a book on three generations of Trumps. Part of Donald Trump’s success in the casino and property business was down to his early understanding of the power of branding. “Trump” lends itself to big lettering on buildings because it suggests luck and success. Like his father, though, he thought his German origins might not endear him to possible backers. He stuck to Fred’s tale and wrote in his autobiography, “Trump: The Art of the Deal”, that his father was of Swedish descent. Challenged on this point in an interview with Vanity Fair in 1990, he replied: “My father was not German; my father’s parents were German…Swedish, and really sort of all over Europe.” The Trumps were typical of German-Americans, the country’s biggest single ethnic group, in trying so hard to assimilate and obscuring their origins. Yet Donald Trump has occasionally changed his story. Simone Wendel, a filmmaker from Kallstadt, visited him at Trump Tower a few years ago for her documentary “Kings of Kallstadt”, a portrait of this village of 1,200 inhabitants, which also produced the Heinz family, founders of the Ketchup empire. He was rather reserved at first during the meeting, says Ms Wedel, but he warmed to the topic when she showed him photographs of his grandparents and of his grandfather’s modest house. “I love Kallstadt,” says Mr Trump in her documentary. “Ich bin ein Kallstädter.” The braggadocious Mr Trump has probably more Kallstadt in him than he knows. The people of Kallstadt are affectionately known as Brulljesmacher, meaning braggart in the regional dialect. Were he to become president, Mr Trump would not be the first occupant of the White House of German descent. Dwight Eisenhower’s family was originally called Eisenhauer and hailed from Karlsbrunn, close to the German-French border. Herbert Hoover’s ancestors were called Huber and came from Baden in southern Germany. They both made little of their origins—but they did not go so far as to invent new ones.
