Valentine’s day“I still love New Hampshire.” Girls just wanna have fun“When you’re young, you’re thinking, ‘Where are the boys?’ The boys are with Bernie.” Fourth is the new first“This campaign is not dead.” Déjà vu all over again“There it is. There it is. The memorised 25-second speech. There it is, everybody.” 50 Shades of Christie“I’ll beat her rear end on that stage.” The Invisible Man“I could drop my pants. Moon the whole crowd. Everybody would be aghast, except the press…would never notice.” Cicero it ain’t“She said a terrible thing. You know what she said? Shout it out, because I don’t want to say…OK, you’re not allowed to say and I never expect to hear that from you again…She said: ‘He’s a pussy.’ That’s terrible.” Go ahead, make my day“Please run.”Rick Tyler, Ted Cruz’s spokesman, reckons Michael Bloomberg’s still-being-mulled-over candidacy would help his man. The Financial Times Animal House“And then somebody complains when, you know, a terrorist gets waterboarded, which quite frankly is no different than what happens on college campuses and frat houses every day.” A blessing“Sometimes when I am on a stage like this, I wish that we weren’t married, then I could say what I really think...I don’t mean that in a negative way. I’m happy.”                Porcupining for freedom AFTER successful careers in engineering, Dan and Carol McGuire could have pursued retirements of highbrow ease—the couple’s interests range from American history to collecting modern art. Instead they moved across the country from Washington state in response to an essay by a young libertarian, Jason Sorens, arguing that if enough believers in limited government moved to a single state (ideally one with a small population and a “live and let live” ethos), they could exert real influence. That essay spawned the “Free State Project” (FSP), whose early members voted to make New Hampshire their testbed. This was a nod to the state’s modest scale, its culture of Yankee self-reliance and low taxes, and its unusually accessible political system, starting with the state’s House of Representatives, whose 400 members answer to a few thousand constituents each, and are paid $100 a year. The FSP devised a pledge for activists to sign, by which they agreed to move to New Hampshire if 19,999 other libertarians made the same commitment. Once that critical mass was reached, FSP members pledged to make their own trek within five years. The FSP announced on February 3rd that the 20,000 target has been reached. In the past decade 2,000 pioneers could not wait and moved anyway. A total of about 40 Free Staters have been elected to New Hampshire’s statehouse at various points, among them the McGuires, husband-and-wife Republican legislators who represent overlapping districts. Free Staters have helped to legalise gay marriage and ease rules on everything from home schooling to selling unpasteurised milk.   Some wins were easy. A repeal of all state knife laws passed in 2010: Mr McGuire shows off a now-legal switch-blade that can be opened with one hand, noting that such knives are handy tools for paramedics. Mrs McGuire is proud of a law making it simpler for farmers to slaughter their own chickens and rabbits. The couple credit Free Staters with making New Hampshire juries more aware of their right to throw out cases that seem to offend natural justice, under the centuries-old principle of nullification. Future battles loom over school choice and over using public money to send children to private schools. Free Staters are yet to overcome national partisan divisions. In 2015 New Hampshire’s Democratic governor vetoed a law making it legal to carry a gun without a licence, backed by conservatives of all stripes, some of them libertarians. Interviewed at her suggestion in a smoke-filled Manchester cigar bar, the FSP’s president, Carla Gericke, stresses that some Free Staters have run for office as Democrats (though they are a small minority). One Democratic Free Stater is currently trying to legalise prostitution. Others are moved by internet privacy and alternative currencies such as bitcoin. Ms Gericke would like to see New Hampshire become a “mix between Alaska and Amsterdam on personal freedoms, and Hong Kong on economic freedoms”. That is a stretch. As a fine place to live New Hampshire attracts lots of newcomers, many of them more conventional than the FSP’s shock-troops. Still, Ms Gericke hopes that are allies on the way. Pledge-signers have e-mailed to say that their homes are on the market, she says. New Hampshire boasts a property firm founded by a Free Stater (and former member of the state House) to help project members move. It is called Porcupine Real Estate, after a favourite libertarian animal, honoured as a beast which is dangerous only when attacked.AMERICA’S bold effort to cut carbon-dioxide emissions from power plants is on hold. On February 9th the Supreme Court, divided five to four along partisan lines, putting the brakes on Barack Obama’s flagship environmental policy, pending a possible ruling this summer. The plan forms the core of America’s recent commitments to cut emissions, made at the UN climate talks in Paris. Power plants are America’s largest source of greenhouse gases, accounting for just under a third of all emissions. The Clean Power Plan, under the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), gives orders to each state which, considered together, should amount to removing 870m tonnes of carbon dioxide from power-station emissions by 2030 (as measured against 2005 levels). The regulations give states some flexibility over how and when to cut emissions. But each one is required to submit plans by 2018 and to show some progress on them by 2022. If the goals are met, the reduction by 2030 will be equivalent to taking 80m cars off the road. The legal basis for the regulation was thought to lie in a ruling by the Supreme Court in 2007, which declared CO2 a pollutant, thereby placing it under the EPA’s remit. The court upheld most of an agency rule requiring new or rebuilt factories and power plants to use the “best available technology” to limit their emissions of greenhouse gases in 2014. That year the justices also supported the EPA’s regulation of pollution that drifts over state lines. But the agency was rebuked for its overreach in 2015: the Supreme Court reprimanded it for regulating mercury, arsenic and other substances emitted by power plants without taking proper account of the costs. The Court’s new order suggests it may eventually conclude that the president has again exceeded his authority. States, utilities and mining companies have declared the plan to be too much, too soon. The attorney-general of West Virginia, one of the states opposing it, said he was “thrilled” after the court issued its stay. Richard Lazarus, from Harvard Law School, calls the intervention “extraordinary”. Although compliance with the regulation is not required until 2022, the deadline for submitting first plans to cut back on emissions was supposed to be September. (States also had the option then to ask for more time.) That date will now almost certainly need to be pushed back.ASH Carter may be one of the most formidably qualified defence secretaries to preside over the Pentagon, but the $582.7 billion 2017 budget request sent to Congress on February 9th is likely to be his only shot at creating a lasting legacy. After December’s two-year budget deal there will be less squabbling over funding levels than in recent years. But because this defence budget will not become law until after the election of a new president, it will need bipartisan support for Mr Carter’s vision to survive intact. Last week Mr Carter outlined the strategic thinking that had informed his decisions. Seen from the Pentagon, the world, he says, looks “dramatically different” from how it has for the past 25 years. He identifies five challenges: the return of great power competition with Russian aggression in Europe and China’s rise threatening the stability of the Asia-Pacific region; North Korea as a nuclear-armed rogue state; the continuing malign intentions of Iran despite the nuclear deal; and the “tumour” of jihadist terrorism, above all in the form of Islamic State (IS), “metastasising” around the world. There is nothing controversial about that list, but it means that the Pentagon must be able to deter sophisticated armed forces who are striving (quite successfully) to erode America’s traditional technological superiority; it must credibly reassure those allies who feel vulnerable to regional bullies; and at the same time it must relentlessly counter a variety of ever more potent threats posed by non-state groups. Even with rising spending that would be daunting. But this budget is already $22 billion below what had been projected last year, so money will be tight (in a half-trillion-dollar sort of way). Mr Carter’s biggest bet is on the Pentagon’s ability to deliver the future technologies that will maintain America’s military advantage. To that end, research and development is to be boosted by 4% over the previous year, to $71.8 billion. In the shorter term, the Strategic Capabilties Office, created by Mr Carter in 2012, is tasked with getting cutting-edge kit into the field as fast as possible. Mr Carter is particularly excited about all kinds of “swarming autonomous vehicles” to overwhelm opponents and inexpensive “hypervelocity smart projectiles” that can be fired from existing artillery to shoot down incoming missiles. In the meantime, current threats have to be addressed. The European Reassurance Initiative, a response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, is getting $3.4 billion, a fourfold increase over last year to rotate more combat brigades in and out of Europe and position a lot more tanks and armoured fighting vehicles. The campaign to destroy Islamic State is getting $7.5 billion, a 50% bump from last year. In addition, because of the rate at which smart bombs and laser-guided rockets are being used against the jihadists, $1.8 billion will buy 45,000 more of them. The fight against IS has also earned the venerable A-10 “tankbuster” a popular reprieve. So devastating is it against low-tech enemies that it will soldier on until 2022. Aside from politics, the threat to Mr Carter’s budget comes less from the things he wants to do—which include spending $7 billion on cybersecurity—but from the difficulty of finding cuts elsewhere needed to pay for them. He proposes small reductions in a raft of legacy programmes with the some further savings from big-ticket items, such as the navy’s controversial Littoral Combat Ship (one fewer next year, down from 52 to 40 in total) and the air force’s F-35A Joint Strike Fighter (down by five next year, but 45 over five years). One solution to the funding gap suggested by congressional Republicans is to raise the $58.8 billion Overseas Contingency Operations budget, a useful slush fund, by about $15 billion. A deal between the next president and Congress to lift the 2011 Budget Control Act caps before 2021 is also likely. If a successor with more money endorses this plans he has set out, Mr Carter will be happy.NOT all that long ago, “You could set your watch to when the first lobsters would start moulting,” says Carl Wilson, head of Maine’s bureau of marine science. When the forsythia bloomed, spring lobsters would soon move offshore. Lobster boats have radar, sonar and other electronic aids, but Steve Train, a lobsterman for more than 30 years, still likes to keep an eye on apple and cherry blossoms. “And if we start catching mackerel off the dock, then usually we get shedders,” he says. (Lobsters grow by shedding their shells.) “New-shell lobsters come between two weeks and 20 days later”. Those natural patterns are starting to break down. Early moulting in 2012 caused a glut in lobsters and a drop in prices. At the same time, there was a decline in cod and other natural predators of the lobster larva. This allowed the lobster population to flourish. Big hauls, or landings, are now the norm. To accommodate the larger volume, dealers began looking in earnest at overseas markets, especially Asia. Maine’s lobster exports to China have tripled since 2012. Chinese new year in February is an especially busy time for shippers. In Chinese lobster is called long xia, or dragon prawn, which has an auspicious ring to it. Tom Adams, owner of one of the larger live-shippers to China, says the critters must be carefully packed to survive the long journey. But Mr Adams, as bullish as he is on lobsters, is worried about the long term. The lobster industry collapsed in southern New England and the Long Island Sound because of warming waters. The state’s 6,000 lobstermen, most of whom work on family-owned boats, are already protective of their lobsters. In 1872 they stopped catching egg-bearing females. They notch tails to identify good breeders. The state has minimum and maximum size restrictions to protect the young and the robust. Diving and dragging was banned in the 1960s. Only traps are permitted, which must have escape hatches for tiddlers and be biodegradable. The industry is mostly self-regulated. “I throw ten to 20 back for every one I keep,” said Mr Train. This is as well-managed as fisheries get. But if ocean temperatures rise, that may not be enough.TO MAKE sense of the Republican race for the White House, here is a short cut: get in a car, turn on the radio and drive. On the face of it, the conservative activists tasked with choosing the Republican Party’s next presidential candidate are in a confounding mood. Until about five minutes ago, the received wisdom was that grassroots Republicans prize ideological purity above all—yet in the New Hampshire primary on February 9th they handed a thumping win to Donald Trump, a New York billionaire who invited Hillary Clinton to his most recent wedding and thinks government should play a much bigger role in providing health care. The same wisdom holds that in a time of anti-establishment rage, voters are desperate for plain-spoken authenticity. But on February 1st activists handed victory in the Iowa caucuses to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a Princeton and Harvard-educated lawyer whose wife works for Goldman Sachs, and whose highly polished campaign speeches lurch from sermonising—“Father God…awaken the Body of Christ, that we might pull back from the abyss”—to Ivy League pomposity, as when he tells crowds that this election represents an “inflection point” in history. Mr Cruz did well in New Hampshire too, coming in third even though the state’s Republicans are less pious and more live-and-let-live than most. At snow-buffeted campaign rallies, a surprising number of New Hampshire conservatives said they liked both Mr Trump and Mr Cruz, two very different candidates who between them eventually scooped nearly half the state’s Republican primary vote. A key to this puzzle can be found on conservative talk radio. It is a world of its own, built around codes of tribal identity, grievance and scorn for The Other. Each day such radio stars as Rush Limbaugh, Mark Levin or Glenn Beck describe a simple world, in which good guys would win and America’s foes tremble if only its rulers were braver (talk radio is keen on Mr Trump’s plan to bar Muslims from America, and likes Mr Cruz’s talk of carpet-bombing Islamic radicals). On talk radio Barack Obama is an America-hating, anti-white racist, and Republican Party bosses his collaborators. Even the advertisements seethe with paranoia, promoting gold coins as a hedge against economic collapse, or ammunition and survival provisions for those wishing to prepare themselves for civil unrest. In recent elections, notably in 2008 and 2012, talk-radio hosts could not prevent the nomination of candidates whom they considered traitors. For Republicans, that was a relief: hewing to talk radio’s sour, chauvinist world view is no way to win a general election (for all their clout, even the top-rated talk-radio hosts pull in just 13m listeners a week, most of them older white men). One way of summing up the crisis facing Republicans in 2016 is this. Mr Trump and Mr Cruz are each, in their own way, tribunes of talk-radio America. Mr Trump has the medium’s temperament down pat—one minute playing the snarling demagogue, and the next gleefully hurling schoolboy insults at rivals. Mr Cruz is a master of talk radio’s politics of insinuation, suggesting that Mr Obama has yet to defeat Islamic State not because that fight is complicated and hard, but because he is an “apologist for radical Islam”. No plausible candidate with a broader, sunnier message has yet emerged from the Republican pack. Talk radio despises the Republican who came second in New Hampshire, Governor John Kasich of Ohio. Mr Kasich may have balanced budgets and put forward conservative priorities. No matter. Along with such figures as Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, Mr Kasich is derided as a quasi-Democrat. His crime is to defend the pragmatic business of governing. Worse, Mr Kasich often expresses empathy for the poor and those who “live in the shadows”, and says that conservative hardliners lack Christian compassion. Mr Kasich is an interesting man, but he lacks a clear path through the mostly southern states up next. Beck and call Not every Trump or Cruz voter is a Rush Limbaugh fan. Mr Trump, in particular, offers (false) hope to many Americans buffeted by such large forces as globalisation, automation, female emancipation, civil rights and cultural change. But talk-radio’s power in this cycle is real. Just consider Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a young Cuban-American raised by working-class migrants, with the knack of advancing sternly conservative policies while expressing personal sympathy for underdogs. News reports focused on the gaffe that hurt Mr Rubio just before New Hampshire’s primary: a stilted performance in a TV debate when he used the same line on Mr Obama four times. The attack line causing Mr Rubio such trouble was a sop to talk radio. His stump speech used to be about the future, and how 21st-century America needs to equip its citizens to compete with workers anywhere in the world and with machines at home. More recently, though, to reassure the hard right (who think him soft on immigration) and to quash the idea that as an inexperienced first-term senator he is a second Obama, Mr Rubio has started painting the president as a malign super-villain. On the home-front, he accuses Mr Obama of deliberately transforming America’s “identity”. Turning to foreign policy, he says that Mr Obama sees America as “an arrogant country that needed to be cut down to size, so he guts our military and betrays our allies.” Mr Limbaugh duly praised Mr Rubio this week for saying what other Republicans “do not dare say”. The coming weeks of gruelling campaigning will show whether Mr Rubio can survive as a candidate. If you watch the senator work a rope-line, his sympathy for The Other—as when he praises the family values of some undocumented migrants—suggests he could be a champion for a more generous, open-minded conservatism. But in this race just now the loudest voices belong to the pinched demagogues.ZIKA, a mosquito-borne virus, is the kind of epidemic that Latin America hoped it had put behind it. Yet in the past nine months Zika has spread to 23 countries in the Americas, infecting some 3m-4m people. The disease, which probably causes babies of infected mothers to be born with small brains, will put primary health providers and hospitals in the region under strain. Yet thanks to a complex but hugely positive transition towards universal health care, they are increasingly capable of coping with it. Historically, health systems in Latin America have been marked by fragmentation and gross unfairness. The rich have private health insurance and patronise private hospitals, some world-class and others merely overpriced. Workers with formal jobs are enrolled in contributory social-security systems. Unusually, these do not just provide health insurance but also run hospitals. As for the poor, who tend to work in the uninsured informal sector, they have had to rely on the patchy services provided by health ministries, often having to pay for drugs and even for syringes and sheets. Serious illness often bankrupted poor families. Over the past 30 years this picture has begun to change. Under democracy, many countries have written a right to health care into their constitutions. Latin Americans are living longer and are more in need of treatment for ailments such as cancer and diabetes that were once more prevalent in rich countries. In response, governments are stumbling towards universal health systems. There is no single route to that destination. But most have expanded both the coverage and quality of health care for poorer citizens. On many measures they are succeeding. One model is that of a tax-financed system with government as sole payer (as in Britain’s National Health Service). That applies, of course, to the famed health service in communist Cuba, as well as in Costa Rica. It also applies in Brazil, where the 1988 constitution set up the Sistema Único de Saúde, merging the health schemes of the Social Security Institute and the health ministry. It has delivered improvements. The problem has been how to finance and staff it in a country where nearly everyone turns to public hospitals for treatment after retirement, even though 25% of the population has private insurance. Other countries, including Mexico and Peru, have bolted on a subsidised insurance system for the poor. Colombia has taken insurance-based reform further, though not without problems. A new constitution in 1991 proclaimed universal care; a law separated purchasers from providers. The expectation was that two-thirds of the population would be covered by an expanded contributory scheme, says Alejandro Gaviria, the health minister. In practice, half are in a government insurance system in which they pay little or nothing. That encourages workers to remain in the informal economy. The longevity gap: Does big health care spending pay off The Constitutional Court ruled in 2008 that the benefit plans offered by each system have to be the same, even though the government scheme has less money. Drug companies got the courts to mandate prescription of expensive pills. Mr Gaviria, an economist, arrived in 2012 to find that many health-management companies, which rely in part on reimbursement from local governments in their role as insurers, were bankrupt. He has adjusted judicial aspiration to financial reality. He has set up an equivalent of Britain’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence to decide which drugs offer value for money. He is defining benefit plans more tightly, requiring more payments by patients who can afford them. He accepts there are still “a lot of inequities”, but argues that a poorer Colombian who lives in a big city gets better health care than her peer anywhere else in Latin America. Many health experts think the single-payer system is fairer and more cost-effective. But such radical reform faces resistance from vested interests. So it may be easier to merge contributory and non-contributory schemes into a single system, as France and Colombia have done. According to Daniel Cotlear, a health specialist at the World Bank, Latin America offers lessons in its acknowledgment that the poor cannot pay for health care, in improvements such as benefits packages covering specified treatments, even if these entail “implicit rationing”, and in making public providers more efficient by giving managers more autonomy. With the economic slowdown putting pressure on budgets, he urges governments to continue to give priority to enrolling the poor in health schemes and to small-town clinics. To that list must be added caring for victims of those insidious mosquitoes.At least Cuban-Americans can vote NEITHER Ted Cruz nor Marco Rubio fared as well in the hills of New Hampshire on February 9th as they did in the plains of Iowa a week earlier. Even so, the two Republicans (pictured) are both closer to winning the White House than any Cuban-American has come before. You might expect the citizens of the country from which their parents emigrated to take an interest in their political fortunes, and they do. But it is not a friendly one. “I’d rather vote for Donald Trump,” harrumphs a professor in Vedado, part of Havana. To judge from informal conversations and press chatter (nobody is systematically canvassing opinion) Cubans are underwhelmed by the prospect of a Cuban-American president. A big part of the reason is that both Mr Cruz and Mr Rubio are hardliners on the subject of Cuba, the traditional stance of émigrés and their families. Mr Rubio, who is the better known because he is a senator from nearby Florida, would roll back the rapprochement between Cuba and the United States initiated by the countries’ presidents in 2014. He has threatened to put Cuba back on the State Department’s list of state sponsors of terrorism. Mr Cruz is no friendlier to the new policy. The Obama administration is “being played by brutal dictators”, among them Cuba’s president, Raúl Castro, he thunders. Mr Rubio “is the one who represents interests associated most with the politics of Bushiana,” wrote a commenter on the state-controlled Granma website, blackening him with George W. Bush’s reviled name. Some Cubans express pity for the Cuban-American duo, seeing them as dupes of the Miami-based diaspora, which is traditionally hostile to Cuba’s government (though it is warming to the idea of better relations). The candidates’ ideas are based on outdated stories that their exiled parents told them, says the professor. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar Several habaneros summed up their sense of betrayal with a well-worn expression: No hay peor astilla que la del mismo palo (“There is no splinter worse than one from the same stick”). Messrs Cruz and Rubio, in other words, spurn their own kind. “Unfortunately, it’s kind of a Cuban trait,” laments a rueful doctor. Of all the front-runners, the one whose philosophy is closest to that of Cuba’s leaders is Bernie Sanders, a Democratic senator from Vermont, who calls himself a “democratic socialist”. Cubans, who live with undemocratic socialism, seem to find this baffling rather than attractive. “Has anyone told him that socialism is a bad thing?” whispers a secretary in her office on the Malecón, Havana’s oceanfront esplanade. Donald Trump gets the most press coverage, as in the United States, but does not enrage Cubans as he does Mexicans. When Mr Trump fumes about immigrants, Cubans sense he does not mean them. The clear favourite to win the Havana primary is Hillary Clinton, who has promised to continue Barack Obama’s opening toward Cuba. When it comes to rooting for a candidate to be the next occupant of the White House, Cubans seem to want continuity, not change.
