February 8th began as a day of celebration in Hong Kong: it was the start of the Chinese new year (this one influenced by the “fire-monkey”, according to Chinese astrology). It ended in the worst outbreak of rioting since the 1960s. The violence flared amid rumours that officials were trying to clear away unlicensed hawkers selling local delicacies, including fishballs. Reports that some rioters shouted “establish Hong Kong as a country!” suggest that it was about more than fried food. Ninety police were among more than 120 people injured. More than 60 alleged participants were arrested, including a leader of an anti-China group called Hong Kong Indigenous. Members of it had used social media to rally support.BEIJING in the winter of 2016 is a bit like Moscow in the winter of 1936: every day brings news of more purged officials and you never know who will be next. On February 4th four more high-ranking party members were kicked out, bringing to 67 the number known to have been investigated, expelled or sentenced this year alone. Among prominent establishment figures who have been dealt with in such ways recently are the head of the National Bureau of Statistics; a former chairman of Wuhan Iron and Steel, a large state-owned firm; and a former deputy chief of the country’s police. Observers trying to understand the campaign’s complexities now have a bit more help, thanks to a database compiled by ChinaFile, part of the Asia Society, an American NGO. It includes everyone known to have been targeted: 1,496 of them, which is double the number of people who had been outed as suspects a year ago (thousands of others have been investigated but not identified publicly).    Only 151 people on the list are those who might be called “tigers”—a term used by President Xi Jinping to describe errant senior officials. The vast majority are those whom Mr Xi calls “flies”, or wayward low-level ones. Tigers and flies named as having been rounded up so far have been accused of stealing a total of 6.3 billion yuan (nearly $1 billion), 50% more than investigators were saying had been misappropriated by named suspects a year ago. By occupation, the biggest number of targets come from state-owned firms and the armed forces (see chart). Of the military officials, 44 are tigers—an exceptionally high proportion. The property sector, however, produces the most swag. There are just ten property magnates on the list, but they are said to be responsible for stealing 40% of all the money. Geographically, corruption tends to be patchy—or perhaps the investigation of it is. Shanxi, a northern province, has seen almost twice as many tigers arrested than any other region outside Beijing. They include five members of a so-called “Shanxi group” linked to another tiger, Ling Jihua, who was chief of staff to Hu Jintao, Mr Xi’s predecessor (the authorities would love to get their hands on his brother, Ling Wancheng, who is reported to be in America and spilling valuable secrets to officials there). Two provinces where Mr Xi served before becoming president—Fujian and Zhejiang—have got off relatively lightly. A big puzzle is whether the campaign is a genuine attempt to clean up or mainly a cover for political vendettas. The database lends some support to the idea that the purge began by concentrating on politically influential groups. But by tracking whether someone under investigation is connected to others on the list, it appears to show that the focus has changed. Of the first 100 people named as suspects when the campaign began, 25 had links with other targeted officials, including to Bo Xilai, a fallen rival to Mr Xi. Among the most recent 100 cases, however, only seven are members of identifiable networks. Those in the database who have ties with one another are often members of a group suspected of opposing Mr Xi. The shift from targeting such officials to tackling individuals without apparent connections may be a sign that eliminating corruption—rather than simply getting rid of rivals—is becoming a more important objective. Or it may be that Mr Xi has run out of rivals in need of crushing.SEASONED air travellers who criss-crossed Africa a decade or more ago usually have no shortage of hair-raising tales. One mining executive tells how on take-off in an old Russian jet one of the engines burst into flames. An imperturbable crewman stepped out with an extinguisher, sprayed down the engine and then announced the plane would leave as planned, trying to block the mass exodus of passengers. Another traveller recalls the amusement in the eyes of fellow passengers when he boarded an ancient plane in west Africa. Soon after take-off, as clouds billowed into the cabin, they had a good laugh at the panic on his face until one explained that this always happened when the air-conditioning was turned on. It is not just the tales that were hair-raising. Hard statistics alone might have grounded all but the most daredevil of travellers (except for the fact that shoddy roads continue to make driving in Africa even more dangerous than flying). In 2011, for instance, Africa accounted for almost a third of all deaths in air crashes around the world, even though it accounted for less than 3% of all air traffic. The European Union (EU) has banned no fewer than 108 airlines from 14 African countries from its airspace because of safety concerns. These include all airlines registered in, among other countries, Zambia, Sierra Leone, Mozambique and both of the Congos. A recent accident in South Sudan underscores the EU’s worries. In November a 44-year-old Antonov crashed on take-off in Juba, the capital. Its Ukrainian manufacturer said it should never have been allowed to fly, because it had not been maintained. Yet on the whole safety has improved vastly in recent years. Although headline accident rates are still sky-high—in 2014 aircraft in sub-Saharan Africa had a crash rate about 8-11 times higher than those in America and Europe—most of the accidents involved small propeller-driven planes. Look only at jets and the rate falls sharply. Flying on a passenger jet in Africa is now about as safe as it would have been to board a European or American one about two decades ago. And the best African airlines are almost as safe as their global counterparts, says the International Air Transport Association (IATA). Safety concerns force travellers to make some unusual compromises. Many international corporations forbid their staff from flying on one Nigerian airline because they think its rival—which is notoriously tardy—is maintained better. Passengers must choose between being late or being less safe. Another big change is in the number of flights and destinations knitting Africa together. The number of air travellers in Africa has almost doubled over the past decade. New routes have also opened, most visibly linking east and west Africa. But routes are often still convoluted, taking long detours via Europe. This is because most African states still regulate flights as if they were in the 1970s. Airlines hoping to open a new route between two countries have to ask their governments to negotiate a bilateral treaty. Approvals can take years, if they are granted at all, as governments try to protect their state-owned carriers. In instances where African governments have taken steps to liberalise their markets, as Europe and America did from the late 1970s, fares plunge. That, in turn, makes flying affordable to more people, so the number of passengers soars. Fastjet, a London-listed low-cost airline with operations across Africa, says fares charged by the existing carriers flying between Tanzania and Kenya dived 40% overnight when it got permission to fly the same route. Yet few governments seem willing to open up to competition for fear it would harm their national carriers. “The benefits would be huge,” says Andrew Charlton, head of Aviation Advocacy, a Swiss-based consultancy. “But you would almost certainly see some African airlines disappear.” Protectionism raises fares without making African airlines profitable. They probably lost a collective $300m in 2015, and are likely to lose another $100m this year, IATA reckons. When given a choice of airlines on international routes, passengers almost always opt for foreign carriers over African ones. The African Airlines Association laments that the continent’s own airlines only carry 20% of passengers to or from it. Simply opening up the skies to more competition will not, in itself, allow African aviation to reach its full potential. One barrier is that jet fuel costs about 20% more in Africa than it does elsewhere. This is partly because of antiquated infrastructure but also because governments tax it heavily. There is also little competition between airports, allowing some to charge outrageous landing fees. Countries such as the Central African Republic are unable to control traffic in their airspace, leaving pilots to chat directly with one another to avoid collisions. That works in uncrowded skies but gets riskier as they fill up. Still, some airlines are innovating in the face of adversity. Many of Fastjet’s customers don’t have credit cards, so it accepts mobile money sent from their phones instead. One Nigerian airline seems to have hit upon a subscription model of ticket sales: after your correspondent bought a single flight on a credit card, the airline proceeded to charge him again every month for the flight until an employee, aptly named Amicable, put a stop to it.THE stench of rotting flesh hangs heavy over the half-eaten carcass of a rhino, killed by poachers who hacked off its horns and left the rest to the lions. Barricade tape marks out the gruesome discovery in the South African bush: this is a crime scene. Two young women search for bullet fragments and casings with a metal detector, and use a chef’s knife to cut away tissue samples and a toenail. The evidence is bagged and carefully logged in a database. It is grim work but these women, wildlife crime investigators with the South African parks service, are used to it. Kruger National Park was home to 826 of the 1,175 rhinos killed last year in South Africa. This was a slight dip from 2014, but the number of rhinos killed by poachers increased in neighbouring Namibia and Zimbabwe. Overall, 2015 saw the most rhinos killed since the poaching crisis began nearly a decade ago, fuelled by demand from Vietnam and China, where many people wrongly believe it will cure everything from hangovers to cancer. Some firms have promoted drones as a sophisticated (and pricey) way to monitor the Kruger park and detect gangs of poachers. “They come with drones promising they will solve everything,” says one park official. But the drones have so far failed to impress the rangers. The Kruger park is huge (about the size of Israel or Wales) and drones have had technical problems with its harsh climate and rugged landscape. Heat-seeking drones, meant to spot poachers hiding in the bush, get confused, because large stones absorb heat during the day and then release it at night. Rangers were being dispatched to hunt rocks. A low-tech solution still works better. Tracker dogs, working alongside their human handlers, are responsible for more than 70% of arrests of suspected poachers in the Kruger. The powerful nose of a Belgian Malinois called Killer has led to 115 arrests over the past four years. Although the park is continuing to test drones in a project with Denel, South Africa’s state-owned arms manufacturer, the goals now are more modest. “They’re not the game-changer they have been portrayed to be,” says Julian Rademeyer, author of “Killing for Profit”, a book about the illegal rhino-horn trade. The real problem is that although South Africa tries fairly hard to catch poachers, no one is doing much to tackle the Asian crime syndicates that buy the horns. Unless Asian and African police work together better, the rhino’s future looks grim.LAST June, a few months after Chadian forces had crossed into Nigeria to fight the Islamist insurgents of Boko Haram, two suicide-bombers detonated their belts in N’Djamena, Chad’s capital, killing more than 30 people. Two days later Chad’s government banned the wearing of the burqa, the Muslim woman’s covering that hides even the eyes. Henceforth, said the prime minister, security forces could “go into the markets… seize all the burqas on sale and burn them”. Those spotted in such “camouflage” would be “arrested, tried and sentenced after summary proceedings.” Heavy-handed as that sounds, several other sub-Saharan governments have followed suit. A month after Chad’s ban, Cameroon did the same in its northernmost region following suicide-bombings by people clad in burqas. Now the ban has been extended to five of Cameroon’s ten provinces, including its two biggest cities. Niger’s government has banned the garment in Diffa, a southern region that has also been hit by Boko Haram. And late last year Nigeria’s President Muhammadu Buhari, a Muslim, said that a ban even on the hijab, which shrouds a woman’s head and chest but leaves her face on show, may be necessary if bombings persist. Even countries unharmed by Islamist terror are banning the burqa. Last year Congo-Brazzaville barred it in public places to “prevent any act of terrorism”. And Senegal, which the French security service says is vulnerable to an attack, is pondering a ban, too. Only one west African country seems to be moving in the other direction. The Gambia’s eccentric dictator, Yahya Jammeh, who recently declared his nation to be Islamic, told all female government workers to cover their hair. For decades Muslim countries outside the Gulf (where the garb is common) have discouraged the full-face veil—and the strict form of Islam it denotes. In recent years some governments in Europe, notably France and Belgium, have ruled against the full covering of the face, arguing that it allows terrorists to disguise themselves and violates European notions of secularism and sexual equality. Now many African governments have similar fears. Bar Congo-Brazzaville, all those that have banned various types of religious covering for women have been threatened by suicide-bombers with a record of hiding explosives under loose-fitting clothes. Many locals feel nervous if they cannot identify a figure in a mosque or market. “Banning burqas is not a fail-safe, but at least it allows security forces to identify suspects,” says Martin Ewi of South Africa’s Institute for Security Studies. Across the region around Lake Chad such rules have accompanied a stream of new security measures, including curfews, embargoes on motorbikes (the attackers’ vehicle of choice) and checks on cars with tinted windows. People in Congo-Brazzaville have been banned from sleeping in mosques. Last year Nigeria even outlawed horse-riding in the north-east, because Boko Haram, short of fuel, has occasionally made its lethal raids on horseback. Most people in Chad, Senegal and Niger are Muslim, as are nearly a quarter of Cameroonians. Islam expanded south of the Sahara in the tenth century and most of its adherents have opposed the most puritanical versions of Islam. Many Muslims in the region are Sufis, who wear colourful clothes, practise a mystical kind of Islam, and tend to see the full-face veil as drab and unAfrican. “Sometimes people don’t want the black [material] to touch them,” says a burqa-wearer at an Islamic school in a poor bit of Lagos, Nigeria’s commercial capital. “They think it signifies death.” An imam in Yola, a north-eastern Nigerian town hit by Boko Haram, says, “Even Muslims think [the burqa] is an extremist thing, or it’s linked to Boko Haram.” Ultra-austere forms of Islam, in particular the Wahhabist version, sprung up in sub-Saharan Africa only in the past few decades, as traders and students travelled to the Gulf and Saudi Arabia poured money into Islamist institutes and mosques.Though a small minority, fundamentalists are growing in number. A tenth of Muslims in Cameroon may now be Wahhabists. Sufis in Chad fear they will soon be outnumbered by them, says Thibaud Lesueur of the International Crisis Group. “We thought it would never be part of the culture in Senegal, but more and more people are following these rituals,” says Aliou Ly, a Senegal-born assistant professor at Middle Tennessee State University. Yet it is not clear that banning the burqa, let alone the hijab, will help the fight against extreme groups such as Boko Haram. Some fear it could play into their hands. A few weeks after Chad banned the burqa, a veiled man blew himself up in N’Djamena’s main market. In Cameroon police have pulled the hijab off women in the street. That enrages ordinary Muslims. In Chad, 62 women were arrested for wearing burqas and told that if they did so again they would be charged with complicity in terrorism. If Mr Buhari penalises women for wearing the burqa, there could be a backlash. “There would be a war bigger than Boko Haram,” says an imam in Lagos, as his wife and daughters sit silently in the corner, under veils.HOW the tables have turned. In February last year Bashar al-Assad’s forces launched an offensive to take back Aleppo, once Syria’s most populous city but divided between the regime and rebel fighters since 2012. Not only were Bashar’s battalions pushed back from the city; the rebels then turned west and routed them from Idlib too. A year on, Mr Assad is attacking Aleppo again. This time he is succeeding. Almost five years since the war started in Syria, the regime is making a comeback. Unlike previous ebbs and flows in the brutal conflict, this one looks as if it may prove decisive. In what has long since become a proxy war, Mr Assad’s allies are simply more dedicated to their cause than the backers of those fighting to oust him; and there is little sign that this will change. Aleppo is now almost encircled by the Syrian army and Shia fighters from Iraq and Afghanistan under Iranian command. They have taken back Zahraa and Nubl, two Shia towns north-west of Aleppo (see map), and have cut off the rebels’ last supply route into Aleppo from the Turkish border. Russian airstrikes cleared the way. They are bombing civilian areas at least as heavily as front lines. Ezz al-Din Attar, a refugee from Aleppo now in Kilis, says that includes hospitals, schools and markets. It is likely the regime intends to move onto villages around the city, and then towards Idlib to Aleppo’s west. The road to Idlib is the only one out of rebel-held Aleppo still open, through a 5km (three-mile) corridor separating two regime positions in the north-western corner of Syria. And it may not last long. The regime, which has a column only 3km from it, is shelling this road too. Hizbullah and Shia fighters are only 20km from two towns in Idlib province that, if captured, would help the regime to advance in the province. The UN reckons 300,000 people in the eastern part of Aleppo under rebel control are in danger of being cut off and starved, as Mr Assad has deliberately done to other towns and villages. Aleppo town councillors have sent a detailed list to donors of the food, fuel and medical supplies they will need to survive the siege, which could last many months since the city is too big to fall quickly. Thousands of others have fled towards Turkey’s border. “People are beginning to panic,” says Bahaa Jabali, a photographer in Aleppo. Iran has long been sending thousands of Iraqi and Afghan Shia militiamen to Syria. But it is Russia’s intervention in the autumn last year that has made the difference. Sold as being against Islamic State (IS), Russia has mainly set about bombing the more mainstream Sunni rebels. Despite yet another report this week accusing Mr Assad of crimes against humanity for “exterminating” prisoners, Russia knows that his regime is more palatable to the West than IS. America, focused on fighting IS, has continued to hope, without any real evidence, that Russia will help force Mr Assad to the negotiating table. Not surprisingly peace talks fell apart in Switzerland last week almost as soon as they had begun, over the assault on Aleppo. Mr Assad and his allies appear to see the only point of the talks as being a place to consolidate their gains, in hope of receiving a stamp of approval from a weary UN. The opposition’s backers are at odds, too. The Gulf states are angry with America for focusing on IS instead of Mr Assad. On February 10th Turkey lashed out at America for working with the Kurdish PYD, Syria’s offshoot of the Turkish PKK, which Turkey considers a terrorist group. The PYD is in tacit alliance with the regime. Its fighters are moving in to hold some of the areas taken by the regime around Aleppo, on the border with Turkey. The silent agreement may soon become formal. Word is that Russia has promised the Kurds what Western backers would not: a continuous Kurdish area in the north-east of Syria that is their stronghold. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts The rebels say their last hope is a promise from Gulf states to send ground troops to help them out, though the Gulf states say their main aim is to fight IS. About 30,000 fighters from various groups have joined an umbrella group, Jaish Haleb (the Army of Aleppo), to defend the city. Elsewhere the choice is harder: in the town of Tel Rifaat, near the border, the rebel fighters are local men tempted to flee to safety with their families. What any Gulf force would consist of is unclear, but even if it materialises, it is unlikely to do much in the face of the regime’s firepower. Even in the south of Syria, where the rebels are in better condition thanks to more consistent and organised support by the opposition’s backers, the regime, once again with Russia’s help, has made advances. In January it took Sheikh Miskeen, a rebel stronghold. “Russia, Iran and Assad know that this year America is weak because of the election and that Obama will not do any more so they are using this time to destroy the opposition,” reckons Fabrice Balanche, a scholar at the Washington Institute, a think-tank. Jordan is unlikely to do much to help, wary of Mr Assad and of more refugees. The Turks say they will not intervene directly in Syria unless the Americans do; but they are setting up an informal buffer zone. Rather than allow in the thousands camped out in the open between Aleppo and the border, Turkish relief organisations have been crossing over to the Syrian side and building new camps there. But it is unclear who will protect the area should the regime decide to attack. Any action at this point risks direct conflict with Russia. Aleppo may determine what happens in Syria, the region and beyond.It seemed a good idea at the time “FIRE or flood” goes an old saying about the turbulent history of Iraq; and just now flood is the one to fear. American officials are ringing alarm bells over a potentially catastrophic collapse of the country’s biggest dam, 50km (30 miles) upstream from Mosul, Iraq’s second city, currently held by Islamic State (IS) “What we do know is this—if this dam were in the United States, we would have drained the lake behind it,” said Lieutenant-General Sean MacFarland, who commands American forces in Iraq, to reporters last month in Baghdad. Sensors installed by American army engineers in December show widening fissures in the fragile gypsum base underneath the dam, though no one can predict when a breach might occur.  Iraqi authorities have downplayed the danger, in part because they have not had the money to fix it. But after repeated warnings from American experts and an infusion of $200m from the World Bank for urgent repairs, the Iraqi government has now contracted with the Trevi Group, an Italian firm, which it hopes will offer a more advanced and permanent method of plugging cavities in the stone base than the constant maintenance it has required for the past 30 years. That maintenance came to an abrupt halt after IS seized the dam in August 2014, and has continued only intermittently after it was seized back three weeks later. Essential equipment went missing then, and half its staff decided not to return to work. One study says that if the dam collapses, Mosul would be submerged within hours. Another warns that half a million Iraqis could be killed by floodwaters, and more than a million forced from their homes. Disease and looting as the floodwaters raced through Baiji, Tikrit, Samarra and even parts of Baghdad would complete that dreadful scenario. The dam was built by an Italian-German consortium and started operating in 1986. Because of the high proportion of gypsum in the area, the construction included a grouting tunnel to allow almost constant injection of cement and drilling mud into crevices in the base that are widened by the water flowing through them. America’s Army Corps of Engineers warned in 2005 that the “extraordinary engineering measures” needed to maintain its structural integrity made the structure potentially the most dangerous in the world. But taking the dam out of commission is not an attractive option. Emptying the reservoir would leave Iraqis seriously short of drinking and unpolluted irrigation water in the summer. What is clear, according to Iraqi military leaders and engineers, is that if the Mosul dam collapses, the city below it would be flooded so quickly that it would not stand much of a chance. “Downstream we can do many things” in co-operation with the UN and other Iraqi ministries, says Mehdi Rasheed of Iraq’s water ministry in Baghdad. “In the current situation that is not possible for the people in Mosul city.” The Italians had better get moving.IN TSARSKOE SELO (“Tsar’s Village”), a smart district in Kiev, Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, owns a swathe of desirable land. Across the street sits a sprawling compound belonging to Ihor Kononenko, the president’s friend and deputy head of his parliamentary faction. The two men met during their Soviet army service. After Ukraine gained independence they rose together in business and politics. Last week Ukraine’s economy minister, Aivaras Abromavicius, resigned, accusing Mr Kononenko of obstructing reform. Mr Abromavicius said he refused to cover for officials who, “very much like the old government, are trying to exercise control over the flow of public funds”. Ukraine’s Maidan revolution was supposed to roll back corruption and cronyism. Mr Abromavicius, a Lithuanian-born investment banker, was one of several foreigners invited into government to change the old ways. He ran up against vested interests in the circles of both the president and the prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk (pictured, being uncomfortably hoisted during a brawl in parliament). Mr Abromavicius is the second economy minister since the revolution to quit for similar reasons, and the fifth minister to resign from the current government. Western ambassadors lamented his departure. In unusually blunt language, Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), threatened an end to Ukraine’s $18 billion bail-out programme “without a substantial new effort to invigorate governance reforms and fight corruption”. Following Ms Lagarde’s comments, Mr Poroshenko pledged to do more. Yuri Lutsenko, the head of Mr Poroshenko’s parliamentary bloc, says the country now faces a “full-blown political crisis”. A cabinet shake-up is inevitable. A collapse of the ruling coalition and early parliamentary elections look increasingly likely. Ukraine’s Western allies argue that elections would be destabilising and open the door to radicals and populists. Yet an exasperated public may demand them. At stake is Ukraine’s chance of moving past its history of post-Soviet misrule. Mr Abromavicius’s problems mounted last year after his ministry was given control over Naftogaz, the state gas firm, and the power to appoint chief executives at the 60 top state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Ukraine’s SOEs exemplify the crooked relationship between business and government: interest groups in parliament install “loyal” managers who funnel cash to oligarchs and political parties. Mr Abromavicius says he was pressured to let these appointments go through. His security detail was abruptly cut off for several weeks. The “tipping point” came when Mr Kononenko demanded that he appoint a crony as his deputy minister. (Mr Kononenko declined to comment.) Figures like Mr Kononenko abound in Ukraine’s parliament; locals call them “grey cardinals” or lyubi druzi (“dear friends”). The lines between friends, business partners, relatives and political allies are blurred, says Mr Abromavicius, and reforms have stalled. “It’s not a technical problem, it’s a political problem,” says one foreign adviser to the government. Dissatisfaction with the country’s direction is rising and trust in the authorities is falling (see chart). Not a single government institution has a positive trust rating, according to the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology. Investors are worried, says Tomas Fiala, the head of Dragon Capital, Ukraine’s largest investment bank. Bond yields have spiked in the past week. On February 16th Mr Yatsenyuk is set to present his yearly progress report to parliament. A vote of no confidence may follow. Political stakeholders have been scrambling to prepare. Mr Poroshenko summoned the ambassadors of the G7 nations for a meeting, hoping to regain their trust. Mr Yatsenyuk gathered his cabinet to push for a last-ditch attempt at unity. Young reform-minded deputies are holding cross-party strategy sessions. The central bank chief summoned the heads of the top 40 banks for a dour meeting earlier this week. Western diplomats have been urging calm, concerned that instability could derail both Ukraine’s reforms and the Minsk peace process. Sensing weakness in Kiev, the Kremlin may be rocking the boat: last week saw an uptick in ceasefire violations and snap drills by the Russian army along the border with Ukraine. The crucial question is the fate of Mr Yatsenyuk, who is reviled but controls a large faction in parliament. Although he and Mr Poroshenko are partners in public, insiders say the president wants the prime minister out. About 70% of Ukrainians also want Mr Yatsenyuk gone, but there is no consensus on who should take his place. The American-born finance minister, Natalie Yaresko, is favoured by some reformers, including Mr Abromavicius, yet she has expressed no interest. Two old hands, Yulia Tymoshenko, a former prime minister, and Mikheil Saakashvili, the ex-president of Georgia who is now governor of the Odessa region, do have designs on Mr Yatsenyuk’s seat. There is a circular quality to Ukraine’s reforms. Mr Poroshenko was among the lyubi druzi of a previous president, Viktor Yushschenko, after the 2004 Orange Revolution. This time, many had hoped that real work on reforms would begin after local elections last autumn. The opposite has proved true. Mr Yatsenyuk has focused on saving his job, despite approval ratings in single digits. Mr Poroshenko, facing a backlash over his support for an incompetent prosecutor general, has seen his credibility steadily eroded. For some activists his failure to demand Mr Kononenko’s resignation is the last straw. “R.I.P. Poroshenko,” says Daria Kaleniuk, the head of Ukraine’s Anti-Corruption Action Centre. “He’s digging a political grave for himself and for the country.”
