A national sport WHEN France imposed a state of emergency in November, following the terror attacks in Paris, it implied some constraints on liberty. But the freedom to smoke was probably not one many observers had in mind. Fully 32% of French 17-year-olds admit that they smoke daily, and by law pupils can do so only outside school premises. Yet head teachers now fret that, by letting them out of the school gates during the day to light up, they face a greater threat: terrorism. Improbable as it seems, the country’s biggest head-teachers’ union, SNPDEN-Unsa, wrote last month to the prime minister, Manuel Valls, demanding clarification. Did the ban still apply under the state of emergency, as the health ministry insisted? Or, given the security risk of gathering on the pavement, could head teachers make an exception, as the education ministry seemed to suggest, and allow smoking on school grounds? This, argued some, was the lesser danger. “Between a cigarette and a Kalashnikov, the risk is not the same,” said Michel Richard, a head teacher at the union. Nobody seems to have thought of banning young people from smoking altogether. Smoking, like café culture, seems embedded in French life. Every year 350 tonnes of cigarette butts, the equivalent in weight to two blue whales, are cleared off the streets of Paris alone. Most European countries have curbed smoking over the past decade, thanks to sales taxes, public-health campaigns and stricter rules. The proportion of people who smoke has dropped by six percentage points to 20% in Britain; by 13 points to 13% in Norway, and an average of eight points across the OECD rich countries. In France, however, the figure has remained stable, at around 25%, and since 2008 rates for teenagers have gone up. Tobacco is the leading cause of preventable death in France, far ahead of alcohol or road accidents. Successive French governments have tried to discourage the habit. Although cigarette taxes were not raised last year, as the state auditor noted disapprovingly this week, smoking has been banned in cafés and offices. In May, after years of resistance by the tobacco lobby and tabac-sellers, Marisol Touraine, the health minister, will impose “neutral packaging”. A manufacturer’s brand name will still be visible. But all packets will be henceforth sold in “unattractive” shades of mud-brown and khaki, with lurid health warnings. The French do not exercise much. But they don’t snack, eat much junk food, or binge-drink like British teenagers. And they live longer, stay slimmer, and suffer lower rates of cardiovascular disease than most other rich countries. Yet they seem ready to ignore health warnings when it comes to smoking. Teenage girls say it keeps them from getting fat. “If you want to be with the cool kids, you hang out with the smokers outside the gate,” says one.WHEN Spaniards voted at a general election in December, they chose to change the way politics works. What they did not expect was that it would stop working altogether. Yet eight weeks later, they have no government and, with a fractured parliament, might not have one until the summer. The question that quickly arose was: does it matter? Surprisingly, many thought the answer was no. Luis De Guindos, the finance minister, estimated that Spain could hold out for six months with the current caretaker government led by Mariano Rajoy of the Popular Party (PP). A 2016 budget was passed last year. “In the short run political uncertainty is likely to have limited impact on fiscal policy,” noted Fitch, a ratings agency, after the elections. Much of the spending, on services like health and education, is done by regional governments. More important, the economy is recovering, unemployment is falling and growth looks set to continue at about 3% this year. Spanish newspapers, recalling Belgium’s 589 days without a government in 2010-11, predicted everything from an economic boom to less corruption. But with jittery financial markets now threatening to upset Spain’s fragile recovery, attitudes are changing. “The assumption in Spain was that it didn’t matter because in an environment with benign financial conditions and growth and employment being created, who cared?” says Fernando Fernández, an economist at the IE Business School in Madrid. Yet it would be foolish to forget that the Spanish economy is still vulnerable, he adds. Spain is heavily in debt, as are many Spanish families. The deficit remains high and unemployment, although falling, is still sky-high at 20%. If the current market turmoil provokes a large hike in bond yields, then the provisional government may have to make tricky spending decisions. And the problems are not just domestic. In Europe, too, Spain may have to take a stance on everything from Brexit to immigration. With a weak government, any major decisions risk being viewed as ephemeral, warns José Fernández-Albertos, a political scientist at Spain’s National Research Council. Unlike Belgium, Spain is not used to consensus-based coalition politics. It is more like the United Kingdom, where a change of government can bring a big shift in policy. Any decision Mr Rajoy takes could be reversed by a new government within weeks or months. All this could be avoided if Spain’s political parties could agree on a new government. That is unlikely to happen soon, if at all. Mr Rajoy has run out of options and the socialist leader, Pedro Sanchez, is now trying to see if he can piece together a coalition. His two main potential partners are either the centre-right insurgent party Ciudadanos or the new left-wing radicals of Podemos. Yet both coalitions would result in unstable minority governments. If Mr Sanchez fails, new elections must be called. Whether that will resolve things is unclear. Polls show that the distribution of seats would be fairly similar. This might lead to a coalition with Podemos, a thought that frightens many investors. If that happens, Spaniards may look back on this period of political uncertainty fondly, says Lorenzo Bernaldo de Quiros, an economist. “A caretaker government,” he says, “is better than a bad one.”Tying her hands OF ALL the people stoking the pressure on Germany’s chancellor these days, the most relentless is Horst Seehofer, Bavaria’s premier and leader of its governing party, the Christian Social Union (CSU). Angela Merkel’s refugee policy, he said this week, amounts to a “reign of injustice”—or “illegality”, depending on the translation. This month he will decide whether Bavaria will sue the federal government in the constitutional court in Karlsruhe. The argument that Mrs Merkel’s “welcome culture” is not only naive but downright illegal is popular among German conservatives. Proponents include eminent jurists such as Hans-Jürgen Papier, a former president of the constitutional court (and a member of the CSU). Claiming asylum in Germany is technically impossible for anybody arriving on a land route, he points out. Under the German constitution, since an amendment in 1993, protection is not available to people entering from “safe” states, a description that fits all nine of Germany’s neighbours. European Union law brings him to the same conclusion. The EU’s so-called Dublin agreement stipulates that refugees must claim asylum in the first member state they reach. Geographically, this cannot be Germany, unless refugees take an aeroplane or ship. Mr Papier concedes that Dublin has broken down. But while it allows Germany to process asylum claims voluntarily, it does not oblige it to. Given the magnitude of the crisis—with 1.1m refugees arriving in Germany last year—such a decision would have to be made by parliament rather than Mrs Merkel. Since the Bundestag has never yet voted on her overall policy, Mr Papier calls it “quasi-legal”. Another former judge on the constitutional court, Udo di Fabio, goes a step further. Approached by Bavaria for a legal opinion on the suit, he concluded that it could win. His argument—which will sound more familiar to Americans than to citizens of more centralised states—is based on German federalism. How do Angela Merkel's 10 years in office compare to other European heads of state? In the Federal Republic of Germany, the nation, its 16 states and its municipalities all have their own forms of “statehood”, as well as obligations to one another. In the refugee crisis, these divisions and responsibilities have become muddled. Federal agencies control the external borders and decide on asylum claims. But the states provide accommodation and social services, as well as deporting rejected applicants. If the federal government neglects its role by allowing chaos on the borders and an uncontrolled inflow of people, this could undermine the statehood of Bavaria, say, by compromising its ability to provide public safety and other functions. Germany’s constitutional court, unlike America’s, does not make a habit of resolving political disputes, and may not take such a hot-potato case even if Bavaria files it. But spelling out the legal logic exerts great political force. Mrs Merkel governs in a partnership between her Christian Democrats, the centre-left Social Democrats and the CSU. Mr Seehofer’s legal threat amounts to “a declaration of breaking the coalition”, says a top Social Democrat. At a pinch, Mrs Merkel could govern without the CSU. But given her waning popularity (see chart), she may not wish to. In fact, she has already been tightening asylum law piecemeal. Should she decide to close Germany’s borders to refugees for political reasons, her critics’ legal argument might serve as a handy excuse.LAST week Vladimir Ashurkov, a former executive at Russia’s Alfa Bank, stood at the front of a tour bus full of journalists and academics threading its way through London’s Whitehall district, lecturing into a microphone as he pointed out an £11m ($16m) apartment belonging to a senior Russian official. Mr Ashurkov is a close ally of Alexei Navalny, a Russian anti-corruption campaigner and opposition politician, and the event was one of a series of “kleptocracy tours” organised by émigré activists to publicise how corrupt regimes launder their fortunes in London’s property market. Mr Ashurkov fled Moscow in 2014 after prosecutors, in the midst of a crackdown on Mr Navalny, targeted him in an investigation that he says was politically motivated. He was granted asylum in Britain, where he joins a growing community of exiles who have left or been pushed out of Vladimir Putin’s Russia. The first Russian to inquire about political asylum in Britain may have been Tsar Ivan the Terrible, who wrote to Queen Elizabeth I in 1570 asking whether she would take him in if things got too hairy in Moscow. (Elizabeth replied that he could come if he paid his own way.) Ivan never came, but England has since offered refuge to generations of Russian political exiles. Alexander Herzen, Russia’s first socialist, came to London in the 1850s and published his newspaper Kolokol (Bell), which was smuggled back into Russia. Lenin lived briefly in Bloomsbury, and is said to have met Stalin at a pub in Clerkenwell. Today London is home both to Mr Putin’s cronies and to opponents of his regime trying to lay the groundwork for the day it vanishes. Putin or the Ritz The most prominent political exile is Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who was one of Russia’s most powerful oligarchs until the government seized his companies and jailed him in 2003. Freed in 2013, Mr Khodorkovsky now calls London “the second-best place to be after Moscow, if you follow Russia”. From his Mayfair office he runs Open Russia, a civil-society group that sponsors discussions between Russian experts, journalists and artists, streamed to Russia via the internet. He has also launched an online university project that looks at Russia’s modern history, in particular the 1990s, not as a period of chaotic weakness (as Mr Putin describes it) but one of cultural vitality and opportunity. Unlike many earlier dissidents, Mr Khodorkovsky is not directly working to hasten the regime’s end. Instead he aims to nurture a new Russian political elite, so that when the transition comes “we don’t end up in the same place as we did when the Soviet Union collapsed”, lacking leaders with democratic experience. As for what might bring about that change, Mr Khodorkovsky does not think it will be elections. Either Mr Putin will anoint a successor, or there will be “a revolution, with luck a bloodless one”. He has no illusions about how long that might take. “Putin may stay till 2024. This is why I am not working with anyone who is over 40.” Mr Ashurkov, too, is thinking about the future: “We want to have a seat at a virtual round table about what Russia would look like after Putin.” As a first step, he has launched a project to analyse all the repressive laws passed by the Russian parliament in recent years that would need to be revoked by a future democratic Duma. A timeline of Vladimir Putin’s unshakeable popularity One obstacle to building a post-Putin elite is that many of the young people who might form one are leaving the country. The Soviet Union of the 1970s and 1980s prevented its citizens from defecting, forcing young, independent-minded people to sit tight and hope for change. In contrast, Russia has kept its borders open, letting the steam escape. The result has been one of the largest brain drains in Russian history. Leonid Bershidsky, a former editor of Vedomosti, a business daily, has called the latest exodus an “emigration of disappointment”. Mr Bershidsky himself moved to Germany in 2014, after his hopes that Russia would become a normal European country were dashed by the annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine. Shortly before leaving, he wrote on his Facebook page that he did not wish to “pay a single kopeck for Crimea. Stolen goods are stolen goods.” Most young Russians in London are neither exiles nor oligarchs, but professionals in search of the careers and intellectual fulfilment they can no longer find at home. Eduard Uraskulov, 30, who works at the London office of Goldman Sachs, was born in the small North Caucasus republic of Karachavo-Cherkessia. He considers himself a globalised Russian, wearing his nationality as lightly as his German, French or Brazilian peers. His road to London’s City started with a degree at Moscow’s prestigious New Economic School, then headed by Sergei Guriev, one of the country’s top economists. In 2013 Mr Guriev, who had advised Mr Navalny and testified in favour of Mr Khodorkovsky, was forced to flee himself. (Now a professor in Paris, he has just been appointed chief economist at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.) Like many of his friends, Mr Uraskulov was at the protests in Moscow’s Bolotnaya Square in the winter of 2011 that sparked off Russia’s latest saga of oppression and exile. “There was a really good atmosphere then. It is very sad that nothing came of it,” he says. Mr Uraskulov does not consider himself an émigré. “As soon as I see that things are starting to change, I will go back,” he says.IF BRITAIN adhered to Groucho Marx’s dictum of never joining a club willing to have him as a member, it would be on its way out of the European Union. The “renegotiation” of Britain’s EU membership pursued by David Cameron, the prime minister, has been a fanciful exercise designed to keep his Conservative Party in check. But it has at least forced Britain’s EU partners to accept that, if pushed, they are better off with the infuriating islanders as part of the family. The EU, said Bild, an exuberant German tabloid, would be “spiritually” poorer after a Brexit (even if that may be read as a plea not to be left with the French and Italians). The paper was responding to a draft settlement for Britain sent to EU governments last week by Donald Tusk, president of the European Council. Mr Cameron aims to convert Mr Tusk’s paper into a deal during a summit of EU leaders on February 18th-19th, and then put Britain’s membership to a referendum, probably in June. There is plenty of time for hiccups before then. The Poles and others are grumbling about an “emergency brake” that allows Britain to restrict benefit payments to working EU immigrants. France is suspicious about safeguards for non-euro members. Last week Martin Schulz, president of the European Parliament, warned an audience in London that Britain had tested Europe’s patience. He and his fellow lawmakers could hold up the legislation needed to implement parts of the deal. Mr Tusk himself admits that the situation is “fragile”. But broadly, although Mr Cameron has taken a hammering at home over the draft, the signs in Europe look good. Few seem in the mood for a showdown; even the Poles are less obstreperous than expected. Mr Cameron’s peers decided that they needed to give him enough goodies for him to make his case to voters. And the prime minister secured some victories that many had argued were beyond his reach, even if they hardly amount to the fundamental change in Britain’s membership that he once promised. For that Mr Cameron can thank the litany of woes afflicting Europe. Next to security fears, euro-zone sclerosis and the worst migrant crisis the EU has ever known, Britain’s little problem looks eminently solvable—and the departure of an economic and foreign-policy heavyweight an accident best avoided. Mr Cameron helped by steadily restricting the scope of his demands (see article). And the dread prospect, should Britain vote to leave, of spending years in painful negotiations over an exit settlement probably did Mr Cameron no harm. When everything else is falling apart, says a European official, at least the Britain talks give us a chance to get something right. Where does this leave the rest of Europe? Mr Tusk’s great fear was that other countries would seek their own special treatment during the renegotiation: a carve-out from climate rules for the Poles, say, or a more lenient fiscal regime for the periphery. So worried were the deal’s brokers that they explicitly warned some governments not to try any funny business during the talks. And by and large, apart from Catalonia’s chancer of a president (who mused that he could exploit the flexibility the EU showed with Britain in his bid for independence from Spain), they did not. Indeed, the most contentious elements of the Tusk deal seem designed to avoid such antics. Much of the package consists of clarifications of existing law designed to soothe British anxieties without upsetting the workings of the EU (or tampering with its treaties). A “red card” granting groups of national parliaments the right to block legislation, for example, gives Mr Cameron something to boast about. But the threshold of 55% of parliaments means it will rarely, if ever, be used. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Most strikingly, the legislation that will satisfy Mr Cameron’s obsessive demand to deny in-work benefits to migrants for four years will be crafted to limit its application beyond British shores. The European Commission, which will draft the law once the governments have struck their deal, has even stated that Britain satisfies the criteria for pulling the emergency brake before specifying what they are. Downing Street could not resist crowing about this concession before it was announced. Then everyone will want one Thus does the circle look squared. Mr Cameron will probably win a deal that he feels able to sell to British voters. Assuming there are no nasty accidents at referendum time, the rest of the EU reduces its list of crises by one without fatally damaging itself in the process. Could this turn out to be that rarest of beasts: a European diplomatic triumph? Not quite. Mr Cameron says other countries can enjoy the fruits of his renegotiation, but few will. Apart from a rule allowing governments to pay lower child benefits to parents with children abroad (which migrant-worker magnets such as Germany may exploit), most EU countries do not care about the provisions Mr Cameron negotiated. This is a deal to satisfy British concerns. Alas, that may be the problem. A package designed as an improvement for the whole machine might be presented as a one-off. But special treatment for the British sets a precedent. The Italians might cite it to pursue their vendetta against the fiscal limitations of the Stability and Growth Pact. Easterners could call for exemptions from refugee-sharing schemes. Previous special deals (such as the Danish opt-outs of the Maastricht Treaty of 1992) did not have this effect, but they were struck in happier times. Today the EU is under siege from populists looking to bring the edifice down, and joint projects like the passport-free Schengen zone are in grave danger. Still, before all that British voters will have to be seduced by their prime minister’s diplomatic dance. So far, despite the EU showing Britain that it wants it inside the club, many Britons still seem distinctly unimpressed. Mr Cameron, hoisting his renegotiation prize triumphantly, does not want to follow Groucho’s example. But there is no guarantee that the electorate will agree.GEORGE OSBORNE sees himself as a reformer. The chancellor promised that, unlike his Labour predecessors, he would take tough decisions to improve the economy, whether this was liberalising planning to boost housebuilding, promoting competition between energy firms, or cutting red tape for businesses. When in opposition, Mr Osborne also set his sights on the tax code. In 2008 he proclaimed (with some hyperbole) that Britain’s code was “the longest [and] probably the most complex in the world”, promising “long-term thinking on simplification” if he got into power. He even mulled the idea of a flat income tax, where everyone pays the same rate regardless of their earnings. Yet eight years on, the tax system looks as fiddly as ever. In 2010 Mr Osborne set up an Office of Tax Simplification (OTS) to hold the government to account, rather as the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) acts as a watchdog over fiscal policy. The OTS identified 1,042 tax reliefs in Britain. Plenty were ripe for reform. People could even get relief for the first 15p of “luncheon vouchers”, an idea dating from a time of rationing in 1946. Relief on luncheon vouchers is no more, but other wheezes have proliferated. In 2012 oil firms charged with decommissioning old rigs were given relief on corporation tax. A year later Mr Osborne allowed workers to cede employment rights, such as the ability to claim unfair dismissal, in exchange for tax-free shares in their firms. From March children under 16 will not have to pay air-passenger duty (only in economy class, mind). By March 2015, the OTS found, the number of reliefs had risen to 1,156. From 2009 to 2015 the number of pages in the tax code grew by about a third. Not all tax reliefs are foolish or damaging. The largest, costing roughly £80 billion ($115 billion) a year, is the personal allowance for income tax, a simple and progressive policy whereby people pay no tax at all on the first £10,600 of their earnings. So Adam Corlett of the Resolution Foundation, a think-tank, tries to capture the underlying complexity by adopting a restrictive definition of tax reliefs, which covers measures designed to “promote economic and social objectives”. Such reliefs resemble public spending. The state could, for example, give selected small firms either a grant or a tax break; the effect on the recipient (and on taxpayers) is practically identical. By this measure, the cost of tax reliefs rose in 2010-15 from 5.5% to 6% of GDP. All this has made life no easier for business. A report on the coalition government’s tax policies from Oxford University’s Centre for Business Taxation found “little evidence of real simplification”. According to the World Bank, since 2010 the time taken by the average firm to pay corporate, value-added and labour taxes has remained unchanged, at 110 hours a year (though, happily, this remains relatively low by international standards). On top of this, a failure to eliminate or simplify tax reliefs also hits the public finances. They encourage tax avoidance, which official estimates put at around £3 billion a year. And in a world of tight budgets, with spending by departments under ruthless scrutiny, many seem to offer poor value for money. Tax reliefs for film-makers, for example, whereby a production company can claim a rebate of 25% of film-production spending, has boosted the number of British flicks (“Last year alone we saw eight British-made films nominated for an Oscar,” Mr Osborne enthused in 2015). But it is not clear that this is worth the £2 billion cost to the government over the period from 2007 to 2015. Meanwhile, relief on capital-gains tax for entrepreneurs costs £3 billion a year, three times more than official forecasts predicted. Yet a report commissioned by the tax office found “few cases where [it] appeared to have a major influence on the business behaviour and tax planning of claimants”. At £100 billion a year, according to Mr Corlett’s calculation, revenue forgone in tax reliefs is roughly equal to the NHS budget; but few have been assessed to see whether they are worth the cost. The first year of a new parliament is when big decisions on tax are best made. Mr Osborne will have to announce some in next month’s budget, not least because the fiscal outlook has deteriorated since his autumn statement in November. The Bank of England has cut its forecast of GDP growth in 2016 to 2.2%. The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), a think-tank, reckons that receipts from income tax and national insurance in 2020 may be £5 billion lower than expected in November. So Mr Osborne will be looking for ways to make up the shortfall. He could choose a 33% flat rate on pension tax relief, yielding about £5 billion a year, according to Capital Economics, a consultancy. A more modest possibility is cutting tax relief on claims for travel expenses, which would yield £300m. Such reforms could even make the tax system a mite simpler. But the direction of travel is, as ever, towards greater complexity. The Treasury has never published an overall strategy for the tax system, complains Paul Johnson of the IFS. Instead, chancellors pick tax policies for reasons of political expediency. In July Mr Osborne raised the threshold for inheritance tax from £650,000 for a couple to £1m. The increase applied only to housing wealth, not financial assets. The effect is perverse, encouraging people to funnel yet more cash into Britain’s bubbly housing market. The OTS might have acted as a check on such wheezes. But it has little power. Unlike the OBR, few people have heard of it. It has had a small budget and has not been sufficiently independent of government, argues Julian McCrae of the Institute for Government, a think-tank. The Treasury fiercely guards its tax prerogatives. So far the OTS has not even been involved in pre-budget discussions about new tax measures, says Tracey Bowler of the IFS. In an ideal world the Treasury would ditch its long-standing practice of keeping policies under wraps until the chancellor presents them in his annual budget, argues Mr McCrae. Consulting in advance would encourage officials to consider fully the impact of proposed changes, thus dissuading economically damaging political grandstanding. It is getting better at this, consulting on changes to corporate taxation, for instance. But that is tinkering around the edges. Unless Mr Osborne changes course and revives the idea of simplification, the unfortunate reality is that the tax system is likely only to become more byzantine.Hey small spender: Tusk and Cameron DAVID CAMERON is frantically working to secure agreement at next week’s European Union summit to proposals recently set out by Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, to satisfy British demands for reform of the EU. The prime minister hopes a deal will allow him to hold his planned referendum on Britain’s EU membership in late June. One striking contrast with past British rows over Europe is the lack of any fuss over money. In Harold Wilson’s renegotiation of 1975, and again when Margaret Thatcher asked for her money back in 1979, Britain’s budget contribution was the central issue. Its absence this time may seem surprising, since it is an article of faith among Eurosceptics that Britain pays too much for its membership: some £20 billion ($28 billion) a year gross, or about half that net of receipts (roughly 0.5% of GDP). There are three explanations. The first is that, contrary to myth, the EU budget is modest, less than 1% of GDP. And it has been shrinking, not growing. The budget is smaller as a share of GDP than in the 1990s, even though the club has taken in ten poor countries from eastern Europe. Thanks partly to British parsimony, the multiyear budget in 2014-20 will also cut spending. The second reason is that it is hard to assert that Britain now bears an unfair burden. In the 1980s, before the Thatcher rebate, Britain came next to West Germany as a net contributor; without some corrective action it would have become the biggest, despite being one of the poorest members of the club. Thanks to the rebate, which refunds some two-thirds of its net contribution, Britain ranks eighth out of the ten net payers per head (see chart). This is despite surrendering part of the rebate after 2005 to ensure that Britain paid a fair whack to new members from central and eastern Europe. As the chart suggests, indeed, several other countries have a stronger case than Britain for complaining about their EU budget contributions. It is partly because of this that no fewer than four—Germany, the Netherlands, Austria and Sweden—have secured special reductions in their share of the British rebate. That means the burden of repaying Britain falls most heavily on France and Italy. The third answer is that a post-Brexit Britain would almost certainly go on paying into the budget, even as it lost EU funds for farmers, universities and scientific research. This is because the EU exacts cash in exchange for access to its single market. Norway, which has access via the European Economic Area, pays roughly 90% of Britain’s net contribution per head. Switzerland, which is not in the EEA but has bilateral trade deals, pays around 50%. Both countries subsidise their farmers even more lavishly than the EU, so the idea that Brexit would save taxpayers from supporting British farmers is also questionable. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Eurosceptics insist that Britain could get a better deal than Norway and Switzerland. Or it might forgo full access to the single market and do a free-trade deal like Canada’s, ending budgetary payments. Yet the first seems unlikely in a bitter post-Brexit atmosphere: a country that walks out of the EU can hardly expect better terms than ones that might join one day. As for a Canadian deal, not only would it be hard to negotiate but it would exclude most services, including financial services, a key component of British exports. The EU budget has many faults: too much goes on agriculture, plenty of spending in Mediterranean and east European countries is wasted, Eurocrats’ pay is excessive, and fraud and misappropriation are distressingly common. But the dream that Brexit would yield a pot of gold by saving the Treasury a huge and unfair contribution to Brussels is mostly just that.“SUPINE” and “deferential” have been some of the adjectives applied to the Intelligence and Security Committee, the nine-member body of MPs and peers which oversees Britain’s spy agencies. Unlike its counterparts in America’s Congress, it has a small staff, and it has failed to make much impact on issues such as the alleged participation of British officials in torture or rendition of suspected terrorists. Not any more. The committee’s report this week on the government’s draft bill on investigatory powers—termed the “Snoopers’ Charter” by critics—adopted a tone of blistering disdain. It accused the government of hurrying the bill through, said its language was in places “incomprehensible” and that the powers it authorised were far too sweeping. It bemoaned the lack of explicit protection for journalists’ sources and lawmakers. In particular, it said that the protection of individual privacy, not the promotion of spookdom, should be the centrepiece of the bill. The report echoes strong criticism from another parliamentary committee, dealing with science and technology, which complained that the bill did not explicitly rule out forcing companies to create back doors in the encryption they provide for customers. That, and the new burdens placed on internet companies to collect and, if required, hand over records of their customers’ activity online, risked damaging Britain’s competitiveness, it argued. A third joint committee, created to scrutinise the central measure in the bill—a new system of judicial oversight, under which warrants will be issued not by the home secretary alone, but by new commissioners—reported on February 11th. It broadly welcomed the new measures but said the government had “further work to do” in allaying worries about the necessity and cost of collecting internet records, and in justifying so-called “bulk powers” (bugging and snooping en masse). The criticism is directed chiefly at the government, not at spooks. Britain’s spymasters insist that they are happy to work within any legislative framework, and note that nobody has shown any evidence that they abuse their snooping powers under the existing one. None of the committees disputes the idea that the intelligence and security agencies should have the right, in some circumstances, to get hold of people’s private data, bug their phones and trawl databases in search of patterns and connections. The question is under what authority this happens, on what grounds, with which exemptions in case of urgency, and with what retrospective scrutiny. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union The government is now in difficulty. It needs to pass the new bill: the existing laws are barnacled, vague and out of date, and are liable to fall foul of judges in Luxembourg (at the European Court of Justice) and in Strasbourg (at the Court of Human Rights). Both are due to rule this year on cases which could rattle Britain’s intelligence agencies, particularly GCHQ, which deals with electronic surveillance and code-cracking. The new system of judicial authorisation for warrants should help reassure outsiders that Britain’s spooks are under control. Moreover, a stopgap law, which gives them temporary authority to bug and snoop, expires this year. But it is hard to see how, given the withering criticism it has received, the draft bill can proceed in its current form. A hurried rewrite risks running into the same difficulties as the current version. The fundamental problem is that the government has not been able to define the meaning of vital terms such as “necessary”, “proportionate” or “urgent” in a way that even sympathetic lawmakers find convincing. Despite the government’s pickle, the bigger point is a positive one, about Britain’s system of intelligence oversight. The same privacy advocates who once derided the Intelligence and Security Committee as a poodle are now cheering its resolve.Small print, big bill IN JANUARY the “big six” energy companies, which dominate the retail markets in gas and electricity, began their winter ritual of lowering prices. E.ON kicked off, cutting its standard gas tariff by 5.1%; Npower, SSE and Scottish Power then made similar reductions. On February 11th British Gas, owned by Centrica, and EDF followed suit. Rejoicing all round, surely, especially for anxious consumers awaiting their winter heating bills. Not a bit of it. Instead the reductions were met by angry complaints. It was “too little, too late”, said many; after all, the wholesale price of gas plunged by one-third last year. And only gas prices have been cut; electricity is not coming down. So, as usual, the big six are in the doghouse. The high price of energy was an election issue last year. Now energy firms have to worry about the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA). Responding to the continuing public outcry over high prices, the CMA launched an inquiry into the energy market two years ago; its final report is due at the end of March. As the CMA has already stated that too many customers are paying too much, it is expected to recommend some intervention in the market, maybe even a price cap in the short term. Unsurprisingly, the big six are against this, and insist that the market is competitive.   Many customers are caught out by the high price of the standard variable tariff (SVT) relative to those of the fixed one-year or two-year deals that are available if they shop around. The SVT is the default option, rolled over unless a customer actively switches to another tariff. And whereas the fixed deals have fallen in line with the wholesale price of gas, the average SVT has not (see chart). Switching has got easier, but still about 70% of the big six’s customers cling on to their SVTs, thereby forking out about £160 ($230) a year more than if they switched to a cheaper deal, even within the same company, according to the CMA. Why so few customers switch when it is clearly in their interest to do so is the matter of greatest controversy, and the focus of the CMA investigation. Critics argue that switching remains too difficult, and that firms still do not do enough to alert their customers to the lower fixed-rate tariffs. Edmund Reid, an analyst at Lazarus, a consultancy, says that the big six have “generally focused on maximising the profitability of their disengaged customers”, as they make much less money on the other tariffs. This is a risky strategy politically, as these non-switching customers also tend to be those who are least able to afford the higher prices. The big six say that they are caught in a squeeze. There is now an unprecedented number of suppliers—about 30—and the market share of smaller companies has risen rapidly, from about 2% in 2012 to over 10% today. The big six are thus haemorrhaging customers, while their fixed costs, of transmission and regulation, will rise this year from April 1st when a new round of so-called Renewable Obligations comes into effect. Companies such as SSE argue that, according to the CMA’s own surveys, most customers know they can switch, but many prefer to avoid the hassle. Nigel Cornwall, an energy consultant, suggests that the CMA should scrap the limit on the number of tariffs that companies can offer, now four, to introduce more price differentiation. But whether that would induce the big six to reduce their SVTs is an open question.
