IN A speech on February 8th David Cameron set out what he claimed was “the biggest shake-up of prisons since the Victorian era”. The package included more freedom for governors, league tables for jails and measures to improve ex-cons’ job prospects. But Mr Cameron also announced a proposal which could reduce the number of people who end up behind bars in the first place: the introduction of “problem-solving courts”. Such courts were established in Miami in 1989 to deal with drug offenders. First- and second-timers were sent to treatment programmes, rather than prison, and their progress was overseen by a judge who could send them to jail if they relapsed. Other states soon began to copy the idea, which was cheap (or at least cheaper than prison) and added a hint of tough justice to rehabilitation. By 2012 there were 1,122 problem-solving courts in America, dealing with everything from school truancy and gambling addiction to gun crime and domestic abuse. Mr Cameron is not the first British politician to be inspired by the model. In 2005 the Labour government set up a pilot court, the North Liverpool Community Justice Centre (NLCJC), which was billed as a one-stop shop for tackling crime. It was run by a single judge, bringing together justice agencies and services such as housing and domestic-violence support. Problem-solving meetings were often held after a guilty plea (someone steered towards crime by their homelessness might get help finding housing, for example). And some offenders could be dragged back to court to have their progress reviewed. The early signs were good. Visitors enthused and staff spoke of the innovation made possible by different services sharing a home. But in 2012 a report by the Ministry of Justice found that criminals who had been through the NLCJC were no less likely to reoffend, and were more likely to break court orders, than a control group. Partly as a result, the Ministry of Justice closed the NLCJC in 2014. Many still defend the project. Some argue that the outcomes for the toughest cases were good, even if the average results were no better than regular courts; others say that it struggled because it was largely forgotten by central government, after strong support in the early stages. The family courts, which deal with disputes over divorce, custody of children and so on, have been more successful in introducing problem-solving. A study by Brunel University in 2014 found that 40% of mothers with drug or drink problems who went before the London Family Drug and Alcohol Court (which involves fortnightly meetings with the same judge, regular drug-testing and the threat of removing children) kicked their habit, compared with 25% of those going through the normal family courts. Specialist domestic-violence courts and Miami-esque drug courts have also proved effective, though to varying degrees. What lessons can be learnt from these mixed results? First, that regular meetings with a familiar judge who can review sentences in light of offenders’ behaviour are crucial (by contrast, the NLCJC only occasionally assessed progress). A wide range of services must be consulted on the best approach in each case: much of the success of the family drug courts is due to the work of social services, says Penelope Gibbs of Transform Justice, a charity. And costs must be kept low. The NLCJC was so expensive that it was unlikely ever to be copied. Michael Gove, the justice secretary, has worked hard to win over judges, some of whom are sceptical of an approach they see as infringing their independence. The potential of problem-solving courts makes such efforts wise. As well as reducing reoffending, says Andrew Neilson of the Howard League, another charity, they could bring about a valuable cultural shift. “The criminal-justice system currently makes sentencing decisions on very little evidence about what works,” he says. Regular contact between judges and the people they sentence might provide an incentive for that to change.THE drumbeat of war reverberates around the House of Commons. The enemy, deadlier than al-Qaeda or Islamic State, lurks in every home: sugar. In January the National Health Service announced plans for a “sugar tax” on sweet drinks and snacks in hospital canteens. The same month Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, introduced a levy of 10p ($0.15) on cans of drink sold in City Hall. Later this month the government will launch a strategy to combat childhood obesity, perhaps including a tax on soft drinks and sweets, as imposed in countries such as France and Mexico. Yet MPs decrying sugar’s impact on the nation’s health should first examine their own diets. A freedom of information request by The Economist to the House of Commons canteen shows that employees of Britain’s lower chamber have a sweet tooth of their own. In 2014-15 Commons caterers ordered confectionery and soft drinks containing 4.8 tonnes of sugar, equivalent to 1.2m sugar cubes, or 680 cubes per full-time equivalent staff member. (Sugar content was available for only three-quarters of the items ordered, so the real total will be higher.) During the last parliament, from 2010 to 2015, 625,464 cans and bottles of Coke were chugged, and 659,470 chocolate bars and packets of sweets guzzled. KitKats are Parliament’s choc of choice, accounting for one in six snacks. Each contains 26% of an adult’s recommended daily sugar intake. At least Commons staffers are tightening their belts. The number of chocolates and sweets ordered dropped from 150,572 in 2010 to 99,412 last year; staff have cut their soft-drink consumption by 10% and prefer Diet Coke to the full-fat variety. Their intake is much less than that of the average British child, who consumes 22kg of sugar per year. Still, the sugar gobbled by MPs and their aides during working hours is two-thirds their recommended daily intake (and they may not eat only salad at home). That, says Jennifer Rosborough of Action on Sugar, a lobby group, is too high. She suggests fruit, unsalted nuts and water. One item in the saccharine census stands out. Perhaps unsurprisingly given the amount of time MPs spend shouting at each other over the dispatch box, 480 packets of throat lozenges were ordered last year. Sugar tax or no, some sweets are likely to remain popular.ONCE, Britain’s asylum-seekers could live where they pleased, but since 1999 they have been sent to a few places, mostly on Britain’s margins. These districts tend to be poor: Middlesbrough, which has the country’s highest number of asylum-seekers per person, also has its largest proportion of deprived neighbourhoods. Since most of Britain takes almost no asylum-seekers, officials in “dispersal areas” often complain this is unfair. Simon Danzuck, MP for Rochdale, which has Britain’s second-highest concentration of asylum-seekers, recently grumbled that his constituency is being used "as a dumping ground". In some ways the policy is a good one. It sends asylum-seekers to places where housing is cheap and plentiful (houses in Middlesbrough sold for less than half Britain’s average in December 2015; many of the houses asylum-seekers now live in were previously boarded up). And the habit of concentrating refugees in the same places over many years may actually help integration. One theory goes that fellow ex-countrymen have a protective effect on new migrants; and, although tensions remain, locals tend to become more welcoming after years of new arrivals, says Heather Petch of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, a think-tank. This can be seen in Stockton, in north-east England, which has Britain’s fourth-highest number of asylum-seekers per person. Teatime drop-ins have grown into dedicated asylum-support groups; charity workers reminisce proudly about refugee children who are now at university. Growing groups of migrants have created demand for particular food and clothing: some refugees have set themselves up in the catering businesses. Bini Arai, who arrived in Middlesbrough from Eritrea 15 years ago and now runs a basement drop-in centre for asylum-seekers, says the community has become more supportive. The main problem is that these areas have higher-than-average unemployment rates, and that people tend to stay there once granted asylum, rather than finding work elsewhere. According to Kath Sainsbury, who works for a refugee charity in Stockton, it is almost impossible to move on unless you already have a job lined up. Local authorities are obliged to provide refugees with welfare only if they have already been living in the area. There is also often a gap between the end of asylum assistance and the start of state benefits, meaning that people cannot afford to travel and must fall back on local shelters to avoid homelessness. Few have jobs lined up. And although local businesses have learned to value industrious new refugees, says Ms Petch, it is hard to make connections with employers elsewhere if you don’t speak much English. English teaching is both patchy and in the wrong patches. One refugee charity in Bolton says it is the district’s only service offering formal English lessons, and the waiting list is around six months. Asylum claims also take a long time to be processed, which means that claimants get rooted in a place. Gulwali Passarlay, an Afghan refugee originally placed in Kent, says it took a friend 15 years to gain refugee status from a dispersal area near Birmingham, and by that time he had seven young children in a local school. Alexander Betts of Oxford University believes the Home Office could start placing asylum-seekers according to skills shortages in local areas. This might not be enough. Britain’s history of refugees includes stories of great success, such as the Ugandan Asians and the Vietnamese boat people. But these involve free movement and have city backdrops. The IMF found that Europe’s current crop of refugees could raise economic growth if integrated well into the job market. Britain’s restrictive policy may mean it loses out.ALMOST a decade ago a new, ruddy-faced Conservative Party leader urged his comrades to stop “banging on about Europe”. David Cameron was right: his party’s neurosis was making it look clammy and xenophobic. He tried to kill the subject by marginalising it and, whenever his MPs became restless, flashing some Eurosceptic ankle. Hence in 2009 he pulled his party out of the European People’s Party (the EPP, the continent’s main centre-right grouping); in 2011 he tried to block a pact to save the euro zone; and in 2013 he pledged to renegotiate Britain’s membership and put the result to a referendum within four years. Thanks to this last gambit, Mr Cameron must now switch positions: having long played footsie with Eurosceptics and confronted his continental partners, today he must take on the former and flirt with the latter, especially in the build-up to the summit on February 18th at which the 27 other members of the European Council will discuss the draft renegotiation published on February 2nd. This all amounts to a morality play about the risks of short-termism. Take the domestic picture. Though once mocked as a Tory replica of Tony Blair, Mr Cameron ditched his predecessor’s quest to put Britain at the “heart of Europe”, redefining the EU as a necessary evil. That was risky. As Ken Clarke, a pro-EU former chancellor, warned: “If you want to go feeding crocodiles then you’d better not run out of buns.” Today the prime minister’s bun store looks sparse, his talks having extracted some decent but, to many, paltry concessions. Perhaps 150 of 330 Conservative MPs remain undecided on EU membership, the merits of which were once party orthodoxy. “The mood is hardening,” reports one eminently pro-leadership Conservative MP surprised to find himself contemplating an Out vote, despite the angry civil war raging between different would-be Brexit campaigns. Meanwhile commentators are debating whether Margaret Thatcher would have backed an In vote, none of them having had the common decency to pay for a séance. Questions swirl about the cabinet. So far five members have come out for Brexit. A larger number, including George Osborne, the chancellor, seem committed to membership. But three especially big Tory names are awaiting Mr Cameron’s deal. Theresa May, the home secretary, has indicated but not confirmed that she will back In. Michael Gove, the justice secretary and a quietly snappy crocodile, is torn between his ideals and his loyalty to the prime minister. Meanwhile Boris Johnson, the pro-EU mayor of London, is torn between his ideals and his loyalty to his own ambitions. He will back membership only at the last possible moment, as this will mean doing his three least favourite things: hitching his lurching wagon to someone else’s steady train, admitting that Mr Cameron is right and revealing his cards in any future leadership contest. All of which has forced Mr Cameron and his allies at last to come out with a hearty case for the EU. In a speech hailing the draft deal the prime minister asserted: “Britain is better off, more secure, more prosperous…inside the European Union.” The following day, to some grumbling, he invited his MPs to make up their own minds rather than bow to their local associations. Meanwhile Ms May boasts of her close links with her French and German counterparts and Nick Herbert, the Eurosceptic now running the Conservative pro-EU campaign, phones MPs stressing the case for membership. In a similar fashion, Mr Cameron’s dealings with his European partners have evolved from tactical raids into relationship-building (see article). By quitting the EPP he cut himself off from the EU’s most powerful information-sharing network. His veto in 2011, for example, was not a bold heresy but a misreading of the European mood (the prime minister had expected to trade it away for a change in voting rules). Likewise, in 2014 he alienated partners by ignoring diplomatic advice and mooting a cap on the number of migrants from the EU to Britain. In bilateral meetings last year he even threatened to lead the Out campaign. But in the past months he has backed out of these positions, partly at Angela Merkel’s behest. Both he and Mr Osborne have toured Europe wooing their counterparts. One adviser claims the prime minister now gets on better with some—especially Mrs Merkel and Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister—than with many in his own party. “He got diplomacy pretty late in the day, but better late than never,” agrees Charles Grant of the Centre for European Reform. This has not gone unnoticed in Brussels. “He has rediscovered the art of building relationships with people,” says a European Commission insider, crediting the moderating influence of Tom Scholar and Ivan Rogers, Mr Cameron’s two top advisers on European matters. Vanitas vanitatum, omnia vanitas What does this say about Britain’s prime minister? It is clichéd (and worse, unfair) to claim Mr Cameron is just a breezy toff, an “essay crisis” incumbent. In fact he has strong views about how society should look, works at a rate that would exhaust most and is well aware of his political mortality. He is a versatile and astute chancer. His renegotiation is the product of these traits—and two fundamentals in particular. First, of the many things Mr Cameron has long known and cared a lot about, the EU is not one. Second, his faith in his ability to devise and execute canny manoeuvres exceeds the (albeit impressive) reality. So on matters continental, the PM is a powerful car with a wobbly steering wheel. The result is tactical short-termism from a prime minister otherwise capable of being long-termist—but endowed with the wit and charm to extricate himself from the ensuing scrapes and to keep the show, albeit chaotically, on the road. Expect the coming months to bring theatre, brinkmanship, clever-clever flourishes and ultimately, in all likelihood, an In vote. Whether this circus will have merited the drama and risk is another matter. Economist.com/blogs/bagehotMore fish to fry THE waters off the Hawaiian island of Oahu are visited each winter by migrating marine mammals such as humpback whales. All year round they are home to much smaller animals that form vast reefs: corals. Intricate pink structures stand out amid contortions of vegetable-green ones; dark-striped fish flit among them and turtles hover above. Corals lay down limestone skeletons of different shapes and sizes: branching types like small trees; ground-huggers spreading squat. The colours that lure snorkelling and scuba-driving tourists are produced bysingle-celled algae that grow symbiotically in corals’ tissue. These use carbon dioxide respired by their host to make oxygen and carbohydrates through photosynthesis, giving corals most of the energy they need to form their skeletons. But this delicate balance is threatened by humans, both in the short term and over the coming years. Overfishing, tourism and pollution are the most immediate perils, disrupting reefs’ ecosystems and the ability of corals’ algae to photosynthesise. In the longer term, rising levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will hit reefs in two ways. Oceans absorb about 30% of carbon dioxide emitted into the atmosphere, which makes them more acidic; as concentrations of carbon dioxide in the water rise, it will be harder for coral skeletons to calcify. And as oceans warm, corals will lose their colourful algae, which can only cope within a narrow range of temperatures. Reefs will be reduced to bleached-looking skeletons, vulnerable to disease. Only twice before has such bleaching occurred worldwide. The first time coincided with El Niño in 1997-98, the world’s largest climatic phenomenon, which causes surface temperatures to soar in the Pacific Ocean. The second was in 2010. A third is now under way. About 16% of corals died in the 1997-98 disaster. The current bleaching event, once more occurring alongside a Niño, may have affected 38% of the world’s corals. Conditions now may offer a foretaste of the damage climate change could wreak on these already vulnerable ecosystems. The harm before the storm Coral reefs are found from the Middle East to Australia and America. They cover less than 0.1% of the ocean floor. But their importance is far greater than that figure suggests. They protect 150,000km (93,000 miles) of shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories by acting as coastal buffers, enduring the brunt of high waves and rough weather. They also support perhaps a quarter of all marine species, and act as nurseries for many others. In South-East Asian waters, the richest reefs are in the “coral triangle” (see map). This area of 86,500 square km holds two-thirds of the world’s coral species and more than 3,000 species of reef fish—twice as many as are found anywhere else. More fish to fry In the past half-century, though, these beautiful, biodiverse structures have been put under pressure by human activity. About a quarter of all coral cover has died. The reefs that are in worst shape are those off the most crowded beaches. “People don’t leave enough time for their sun cream to soak in, so it gets in the water,” says one deckhand with Eo Wai’anae Tours, which organises boat trips off Oahu. More damage is caused by fertiliser-rich run-off from farms, leading to algal blooms which block light the corals need. Fishing near reefs cuts the number of herbivorous fish, allowing vegetation to grow out of control. Some fishing methods are particularly harmful: for example, blast fishermen in Colombia, Tanzania and elsewhere use dynamite to stun and kill fish without regard to the harm done to nearby reefs. Crown-of-thorns starfish, coral-chompers that have proliferated in some areas, including Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, add to the stress. In the South China Seaisland-building and fishing for giant clams are crushing some reefs beyond the possibility of recovery (see article). The World Resources Institute, a think-tank, estimates that about 60% of reefs face such immediate threats. The bounty that reefs provide accrues to those living near them, and in the short term. Without strong property rights, the result is an unfolding tragedy of the commons, in which fishermen and tour operators destroy the resources they rely on. Tourism generated by the Great Barrier Reef is worth about $4.6 billion annually to nearby Queensland alone. Australian bigwigs bent over backwards last year to keep the UN from listing the reef, a World Heritage Site, as “in danger”. Estimates suggest that the economic value of Martinique and Saint Lucia’s corals comes to $50,000 per square km each year, thanks largely to tourism. But overdevelopment threatens the reefs the visitors come to gawp at. Sediment from construction clouds waters, burying corals and blocking the light they need. Hotels close to the shore may be convenient for tourists, but the process of building them can kill the reefs that snorkellers like to swim over. The mix of problems varies from place to place, meaning policies must be locally tailored to tackle them. But even when governments and environmentalists focus on the long term, the need to limit fishing means they often struggle to craft policies that do not cause immediate harm to poor people. The three countries with the largest numbers of people who fish on reefs are all in the coral-triangle region: Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and the Philippines. In Indonesia and in the Philippines, up to 1m people’s livelihoods depend on reefs. Averting a tragedy of the commons means agreeing which activities should be restricted and enforcing the rules. For coral reefs—and other biodiverse marine environments—the usual approach is to give ecologically sensitive areas special status under local or regional laws. In such “marine protected areas” (MPAs), activities that are deemed harmful, such as fishing, drilling and mining, can then be restricted or banned, with penalties for rule-breakers. Command and conquer The Aichi targets, agreed in 2010 under the UN Convention on Biological Diversity, seek to reduce “anthropogenic pressures” on coral reefs to “maintain their integrity and function”. The aim is to have at least 17% of inland water and 10% of coastal and marine areas under conservation by 2020. Most countries have signed up. But the targets are far from being met. Less than 3% of the ocean’s surface is within an MPA. The most urgent action is needed close to shore. The nearer humans are to reefs, the worse their effect on the fragile ecosystems. A global register of fishing vessels, long under discussion, would also help identify wrongdoers. And beefing up the UN law of the sea could inspire further action. Decades old, it has little to say about biodiversity. But simply declaring an area protected does not make it so. In 2009 George Bush junior, then president of America, established three national marine monuments in the Pacific, including nearly 518,000 square km of coral islands and surrounding areas. Their remoteness makes it hard to stop vessels entering illegally; Hawaii’s coastguard is already stretched. Satellites are sometimes used to police MPAs, but they pass over infrequently. In the future, sailing robots could play a larger role. America’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has been working with a private firm, Saildrone, on hardy models equipped with carbon-fibre fins. They cost less than $500,000 each and can roam remote ocean regions for months, making them far cheaper than manned boats. Such drones could photograph rogue fishing vessels, obtaining hard-to-gather evidence for any criminal proceedings. And they could carry out other useful work at the same time, such as monitoring ocean temperature and acidity or tracking tagged members of endangered species. Saildrone plans to provide its robots as a service, so that universities and other cash-strapped organisations do not have to buy one outright. Richer countries are better able both to administer and to enforce MPAs. Three-quarters of coral reefs in Australian waters are in MPAs, but only 16% of those within the coral triangle. “It is difficult to ensure systematic monitoring,” says Rusty Brainard of NOAA, who has advised marine scientists in the region. Indonesia has more than 17,500 islands, he points out. In poor parts of the world, low-tech methods of surveillance are needed. Just 0.09% of Malaysia’s territorial waters, and those within its exclusive economic zone, are protected by an MPA. But a national programme requires fishermen to paint their vessels according to how far out they have permission to fish within the nearshore area. Other fishermen can then spot when a rogue vessel has strayed, even if they cannot read. And as boats require regular painting anyway, little extra cost falls on their owners. Public-private partnerships could also help. A pilot project in Barbados, supported in part by local hoteliers and tourism organisations, will charge visitors to enter a coastal MPA managed by Blue Finance, an alternative-investment outfit with support from the UN Environment Programme (UNEP). About $1m was needed to set up the area; its upkeep will require half that each year. “We find private investors who don’t mind if their returns are a little below market rates because they are benefiting Barbados,” says Nicolas Pascal, an environmental economist who directs the company. Other pilots are under way in Colombia and Martinique. But more backers are needed. According to research conducted under the Convention on Biological Diversity, investment will need to quintuple for the Aichi targets and other conservation goals to be met. The effectiveness of marine reserves is hard to measure. Reefs are complex, ancient systems, and the effects of better policies will become known only gradually. “You can’t manage ecosystems: you can only manage the impact of humans upon them,” says Jerker Tamelander, the head of the reef unit at UNEP. Even if the right policies are adopted to keep corals healthy in the immediate future, longer-term threats loom. Neither oceanic warming nor acidification can be kept out by an MPA. And both may be happening too fast for corals to adapt, especially as recent global climate deals will not slow them much. Back slaps and handshakes accompanied the inclusion of an aim to limit global warming to just 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels in the Paris Agreement last year. But only an incorrigible optimist would bet on that aim being achieved. And even if it is, that much warming could breach the environmental limits within which most reefs can thrive. Nurture, not nature So researchers are turning their attention to ways to help corals cope. Their global diversity, scientists hope, may hold the key. The same coral will grow differently under different conditions: corals of the western Pacific near Indonesia, for example, can withstand higher temperatures than the same species in the eastern Pacific near Hawaii. Such disparities can be found even quite locally. In Kane’ohe Bay, where the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology lies, 70% of some reef patches has been bleached in the current event. Others, less than 200 metres away, suffered bleaching to just 40% of their corals. The characteristics that help some reefs survive unusual conditions could allow others to endure climate change. But tough corals from one place cannot simply be transplanted to another. So a team at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology is in the early stages of engineering reef ecosystems, with $4m from the Paul G. Allen Foundation, a charity set up by Bill Gates’s former business partner. Organisms respond to environmental changes through both genetic processes (adaptation) and non-genetic ones (acclimatisation). With corals, the nature of their symbiotic relationships can also alter. So selectively breeding and conditioning them, and investigating whether certain types of algae confer resistance to heat or acidity, could create hardier varieties faster than they would develop naturally. These could then be used to repopulate ravaged reefs—once more is known about how and where to transplant them. “We’re assisting evolution,” explains Ruth Gates, who leads the research. Her team aims to help corals withstand changing ocean temperature and chemistry. Despite all her effort, she says: “if the tools we develop are never used, I would be the happiest person in the world.” CORRECTION: In an earlier version of the map accompanying this article, some of the marine protected areas displayed were incorrect. This has now been rectified.Illicit cargo: a clam-laden Chinese fishing vessel THE giant clams that lurk in the coral reefs of the South China Sea can live for more than a century and grow more than a metre wide. Their shells are coveted by China’s rich as swanky furnishings or cut into trinkets, such as jewellery. Large specimens can sell for thousands of dollars. The trade is damaging some of the world’s most important ecosystems. China’s giant-clam industry operates from the port of Tanmen on the southern Chinese island of Hainan. There skippers load rickety wooden fishing vessels with provisions for a month. Barrels of water are lashed down at the stern and pigs led to pens at the bow. On the sidedecks sit crude open boats with single-cylinder engines and long propeller shafts. Once the mother ship reaches distant reefs, these are lowered and the propellers used to chew up submerged coral. When the murk clears divers bring up any giant clams that are revealed. The plunder is illegal in China, and trade in giant-clam shells is banned under international treaties. But in Tanmen it operates in broad daylight. Recently the fleets have pushed deeper into the South China Sea and into waters claimed by neighbouring countries, including Vietnam and the Philippines. Satellite photos collated by Victor Robert Lee, an analyst, show that tell-tale scarring from clam-harvesting is now visible on more than two dozen reefs. Enforcement has become laxer since China stepped up its claim to all the islands, reefs and rocky outcrops contained within a “nine-dash line” that encompasses most of the South China Sea. In some places the build-up of Chinese naval and coastguard vessels has made it less likely that clam-harvesters will be chased off by foreigners. Many Chinese feel that fishermen help to project sovereignty, and should be allowed to secure for China a bounty which “poachers” from abroad might otherwise seize. Three years ago President Xi Jinping even visited fishing boats on Tanmen’s quay, though the offending shells were hidden from photographers.   If this were not enough, reefs are also suffering from efforts to build new islands in the sea, mainly but not only by China. Seeking a stable base for runways, weather stations and other installations which might help promote territorial claims, dredgers have been sucking debris from the sea bed and spraying it over reefs which sit just beneath the surface. Such muck-spreading not only kills many square kilometres of coral, but obliterates any chance that it will regrow. Ecologists fret that the tense security situation prevents them from measuring the extent of the vandalism. Chinese authorities are not entirely deaf to their complaints; since last year they seem to have tightened restrictions on clam-harvesting somewhat (and an anti-corruption drive led by Mr Xi may be lowering demand for the showiest shells). But China’s stance on island-building is uncompromising. In January one Chinese bigwig promised that any damage being done to reefs was “recoverable”. Almost no one outside China agrees.DURING the crisis of 2008-09, Warren Buffett made two big bets in the midst of the panic. He bought a slug of preferred stock in Goldman Sachs. And he took over BNSF, a huge railway. Goldman’s 32,500 bankers and BSNF’s 32,000 miles of tracks, stretching from the Pacific to Texas, had nothing in common, except that it was impossible to imagine American capitalism without them. “It’s an all-in wager on the economic future of the United States,” declared Mr Buffett when he bought the railway company, which, naturally, was advised by bankers working for a certain “vampire squid”. How right Mr Buffett was. The last decade has been a golden one for shipping goods around the world’s biggest economy (each citizen’s consumption of goods and power requires the movement of 36 tonnes of freight a year). American railways have been a rare example of capitalism working well, with a virtuous cycle of demand, giant profits and vast investment in rolling stock and tracks. Foreigners who snipe at America’s late-Brezhnev-era airports, smelly subways and rutted roads should, as the Proclaimers sang, take a look up the rail tracks from Miami to Canada. Fixed assets at North America’s six biggest freight-rail firms rose by 58% between 2004 and 2014, to $250 billion (see chart). Private firms have been spending almost as much each year on modernising American locomotives and tracks as the federal government has on roads. The infrastructure splurge has helped the environment, too, since trains are about four times as fuel-efficient as lorries. America’s freight railways are more efficient and far busier than their counterparts in Europe. But now this privately fuelled locomotive has been derailed. In the last quarter of 2015 the combined earnings of the big American and Canadian freight-rail firms fell by a fifth, compared with a year earlier, mainly because of the commodity-price crash. The industry has tried to shrug this off as a temporary blip. But if the downturn persists, the investment extravaganza will be over. Tougher times also raise the spectre of rail mergers, a phenomenon that has vexed America ever since the first transcontinental line was hammered together in the Utah desert in 1869. Dealmaking is already in the air, with Canadian Pacific (CP) pursuing a reluctant Norfolk Southern. This week CP said it would propose a shareholder resolution calling on Norfolk’s board to negotiate a merger. The deal is backed by Bill Ackman, an activist investor. It has thrilled Wall Street, peeved rival firms and put regulators on red alert. Before asking how the industry’s fortunes could go wrong, however, how did it all go right? Since being deregulated in 1980, American railways have gradually got their acts together. Plenty of tailwinds are behind them. Freight volumes typically grow with GDP. And rail, with a market share of about 40%, should take business from road haulage, now with over 50% of traffic, which faces tightening emissions rules and a struggle to recruit drivers. Greasing the tracks in the past decade was the commodity bubble. Newly drilled shale oil needed to be shipped from remote basins, and coal moved to power stations and ports—American coal exports doubled between 2005 and 2011, thanks to demand from East Asia and Europe. Intermodal transport (containers moved from ship to rail to lorry) rose rapidly, too, and now accounts for a fifth of sales. Rail managers discovered their inner rottweilers. Hunter Harrison, who runs CP (and before that was at CN, Canadian National), is eulogised by investors for his ruthless scheduling—he is said to monitor individual trains as they chug across the continent. Most important of all, after declining steadily since the 1980s, freight prices were jacked up stealthily, rising by 42% in real terms since 2004. Railroads could be accused of gouging their customers: pre-tax return on capital for the big six firms rose from 10% in 2004 to 19% in 2014. But that misses the bigger point. For every dollar of gross cashflow in 2014, 67 cents was reinvested. The industry’s appetite for capital spending is all but unique in America, where most firms spend bumper profits on share buy-backs to boost their stock price. Rail firms’ resistance to this corporate crack cocaine is hard to explain, but may reflect the lingering presence in their boardrooms of gnarled railmen with a love of horn blocks and glad-hand connectors, rather than earnings-per-share enhancement. What is clear is that the investment spree is now under threat from slumping profits. The shale industry is reeling. Coal volumes have fallen, as domestic power generators switch to dirt-cheap natural gas and the strong dollar hurts coal exports. The industry has solid enough balance-sheets to weather a storm, with net debt of 1.8 times gross operating profit. But an age of austerity beckons. Capital investment fell by 15% in the last quarter of 2015 compared with a year earlier. In 2016 it could drop by 20%. The industry’s unspoken plan is probably to keep raising prices while investing less and returning more cash to shareholders to keep them happy. This approach is likely to enrage everyone else. Customers such as carmakers, energy utilities and shipping firms will complain of being squeezed. Regulators will fret that the pace of modernisation has slowed. Despite a decade of huge investments there are still pressing congestion problems, particularly in Chicago, a bottleneck through which much of America’s freight is rammed. So how can the industry continue to satisfy both investors and society if demand and profits are lower and the need for capital spending is just as high? Perhaps by turning the big six railways into four, or even two. How big the rewards would be from mergers is fiercely contested. Mr Harrison says he could cut $1.8 billion a year from Norfolk’s costs (equivalent to a quarter of the total), although most of those gains would come from running it better, not from synergies through bolting it onto CP. Norfolk says he is exaggerating. Take your hands off my train set Train mergers have been an explosive subject for over a century, with a dread of isolation or exploitation at the hands of railway robber-barons lodged deep in America’s subconscious. The last round of deals was permitted in the 1990s, when the number of big train firms fell by half. The antitrust apparatus today is clunky. The federal Surface Transportation Board (STB) has had broad powers to block rail mergers on public-interest grounds since 2001. But it struggles to articulate a logic for assessing what it thinks makes a system better—does it want choice, modest returns on capital, lots of operators, lots of route combinations, or low prices? The industry already consists of three geographical duopolies—the West (where BNSF and Union Pacific dominate), the east (Norfolk and CSX) and Canada and its links to the United States’ industrial north (CP and CN). It is not obvious why linking two non-overlapping rail networks would make any area less competitive. But even saying that is taboo, and a giant head of steam is building up across the country against the CP-Norfolk deal. The Alabama State Port Authority is sceptical, Ohio’s soyabean farmers are livid, western Kentucky’s coal miners are perturbed, and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen foresees a “death spiral”. Most are worried about services and jobs being slashed. Both Union Pacific and CSX have said they oppose a deal. On February 4th nine members of Congress from Indiana asked the STB to be vigilant. The regulator itself is likely to be worried about the short-term disruption dealmaking could create. Consolidation in the 1990s caused chaotic delays. So Mr Harrison’s proposed deal looks likely to struggle. Yet the near-universal hostility to consolidation reflects a complacency born of the golden years. Now that cash is no longer raining down it will be harder to satisfy investors, customers and the long-term national interest all at once. Perhaps a rationalised rail system will ultimately be seen as the best solution for congestion. It may, however, take someone with Mr Buffett’s legendary patience to witness it.Kocher and Mestrallet: a double act from now on LETTING go is hard, especially for a French boss. Consider Gérard Mestrallet, who for 15 years has run Engie, a giant energy utility formerly known as GDF Suez. Under him the firm has prospered: it gathers annual revenues of around €75 billion ($84 billion) from 70 countries. At 66 the wily baron no doubt believes he has the vim to keep building his empire. In fact he will be replaced as CEO in May by his deputy, Isabelle Kocher, letting Engie celebrate something rarer than a badly dressed Frenchman: a female leader of a company in the CAC 40 index, which has only happened once before. (Continental Europe lags on corporate sexual equality: none of Germany’s DAX 30 firms has a female CEO or chairman.) However, a report in the French press on February 4th, citing a senior official, suggests that Ms Kocher will not have the run of the place. Her predecessor may hang on for two more years as chairman. Engie’s board meets this month and may confirm the news then. Since the government owns over one-third of the firm, it is said to be a done deal. But Ms Kocher will be able to put a positive spin on her situation. Assuming she remains just CEO, and does not in time become chairman too, Engie is joining a growing club of French firms that split their main leadership roles. That is something shareholders increasingly demand, arguing that having two leaders reduces risks in times of crisis, complexity and increasing regulation. The CEO runs the company while the chairman leads the board’s oversight of the management. In Britain it is the norm, and in Germany a legal obligation, to split the two roles. European Union rules force banks to do so, to reduce financial risk, so French banks are among the splitters. A big institutional investor reckons that shares in firms which have yet to split the roles suffer discounts of perhaps 5-10% as a result. Yet firms resist, mostly for cultural reasons. Since the Vichy government in the second world war, corporate France has concentrated clout in an over-mighty Président Directeur Général, “le PDG”, just as in politics power has been centralised in the president’s hands. “We have a cultural bias, we love having one person at the top, we love to personify power,” admits the chairman of a large French firm. “The PDG was God,” adds the chairman of another, who says conservative corporate culture makes quick change impossible. “People need to get used to the idea that becoming chairman and CEO is not the only goal in life, which will take a lot of maturing,” he says. Guy Sorman, a rare liberal commentator on French business, says shareholders have long lacked influence over such matters, but may be gaining ground now. Engineering a split One model is Safran, a big aerospace firm, which appointed a separate CEO and chairman after its last PDG, Jean-Paul Herteman, retired just over a year ago. Things have gone peacefully since, with shareholders, the board and managers content. The government, a big shareholder, favoured the split. Emmanuel Macron, the reformist economy minister, appears influential in pressing for change at firms in which the state has a stake. Other big firms to have done the splits include Valeo (car parts), Michelin (tyres), Unibail-Rodamco (property) and Danone (food). However, there have been examples of backsliding. AXA, a big insurer, split the two top jobs for a while until Henri de Castries, who had become chairman, also grabbed the CEO’s job in 2010. Total, an energy firm, divided the roles after its boss died in an accident in 2014; but in December his successor as chief executive, Patrick Pouyanné, also became chairman. Firms with a globalised share register—foreigners hold roughly half of the stock traded in CAC 40 companies—may change sooner than others. “When I talk with my colleagues, this is the kind of discussion we have,” says the boss of a big French firm, noting that Medef, the main business chamber, has been weighing up whether to recommend that companies divide up the top jobs. One chief executive, who has experienced having both a unified and a split role, says it is “much, much better if there is a dual structure”, as long as the chairman and CEO co-operate, especially in public, and exchange advice without meddling. Most importantly, he says, boards are getting used to the idea, so more firms are destined to become splitters. If so, whatever happens at Engie, the days of “le PDG” look numbered.
