THE Ben Abeba restaurant is a spiral-shaped concrete confection perched on a mountain ridge near Lalibela, an Ethiopian town known for its labyrinth of 12th-century churches hewn out of solid rock. The view is breathtaking: as the sun goes down, a spur of the Great Rift Valley stretches out seemingly miles below in subtly changing hues of green and brown, rolling away, fold after fold, as far as the eye can see. An immense lammergeyer, or bearded vulture, floats past, showing off its russet trousers. The staff, chivvied jovially along by an intrepid retired Scottish schoolmarm who created the restaurant a few years ago with an Ethiopian business partner, wrap yellow and white shawls around the guests against the sudden evening chill. The most popular dish is a spicy Ethiopian version of that old British staple, shepherd’s pie, with minced goat’s meat sometimes replacing lamb. Ben Abeba, whose name is a fusion of Scots and Amharic, Ethiopia’s main language, is widely considered the best eatery in the highlands surrounding Lalibela, nearly 700km (435 miles) north of Addis Ababa, the capital, by bumpy road.  Yet the obstacles faced by its owners illustrate what go-ahead locals and foreign investors must overcome if Ethiopia is to take off. Electricity is sporadic. Refrigeration is ropey, so fish is off the menu. So are butter and cheese; Susan Aitchison, the restaurant’s resilient co-owner, won’t use the local milk, as it is unpasteurised. Honey, mangoes, guava, papaya and avocados, grown on farmland leased to the enterprising pair, who have planted 30,000 trees, are delicious. All land belongs to the state, so it cannot be used as collateral for borrowing, which is one reason why commercial farming has yet to reach Lalibela. Consequently supplies of culinary basics are spotty. Local chickens are too scrawny. The government will not yet allow retailers such as South Africa’s Shoprite or Kenya’s Nakumatt to set up in Ethiopia, let alone in Lalibela, a UNESCO World Heritage site. Bookings at Ben Abeba are tricky to take, since the internet and mobile-phone service are patchy. Credit cards work “about half the time”, says Ms Aitchison. Imports for such essentials as kitchen spares are often held up at the airport, where tariffs are sky-high: a recent batch of T-shirts with logos for the staff ended up costing three times its original price. Wine, even the excellent local stuff, is sometimes unavailable, because transport from Addis, two days’ drive away, is irregular and private haulage minimal. The postal service barely works. Fuel at Lalibela’s sole (state-owned) petrol station runs out. Visitors can fly up from Addis on Ethiopian Airways every morning, but private airlines are pretty well kept out. Many of these annoyances could be removed—if only the government were brave enough to set the economy free. “The service sector here is one of the most restrictive in the world,” says a frustrated foreign banker. The government’s refusal to liberalise mobile-telephone services and banks is patently self-harming. Ethiopians have one of the lowest rates of mobile-phone ownership in Africa (see chart); the World Bank reckons that fewer than 4% of households have a fixed-line telephone and barely 3% have access to broadband. The official reason for keeping Ethio Telecom a monopoly is that the government can pour its claimed annual $820m profit straight into the country’s grand road-building programme. In fact, if the government opened the airwaves to competition, as Kenya’s has, it could probably sell franchises for at least $10 billion, and reap taxes and royalties as well; Safaricom in Kenya is the country’s biggest taxpayer. Moreover, Kenya’s mobile-banking service has vastly improved the livelihood of its rural poor, whereas at least 80% of Ethiopians are reckoned to be unbanked. For entrepreneurs like Ms Aitchison and her partner, Habtamu Baye, local banks may suffice. But bigger outfits desperately need the chunkier loans that only foreign banks, still generally prevented from operating in the country, can provide. A recent survey of African banks listed 15 Kenyan ones in the top 200, measured by size of assets, whereas Ethiopia had only three. Land reform is another big blockage, though farmers can now have their plots “certified” as a step towards greater security of tenure. Given Ethiopia’s not-so-distant feudal past and the dreadful abuses that immiserated millions of peasants in days of yore, especially in time of drought, the land issue is sensitive; the late Meles Zenawi, who for 21 years until his death in 2012 ran the country with an iron fist and a fervent desire to reduce poverty, was determined to prevent a rush of landless or destitute peasants into slums edging the big towns, as has happened in Kenya. But the increasing fragmentation of land amid the rocketing increase in population is plainly unsustainable, even though productivity has risen fast through government-provided inputs such as fertiliser and better seed. (Ethiopia is Africa’s second-most-populous country after Nigeria; by some estimates it has nearly 100m people.) Most women still have four or five children. The standard family plot has shrunk to less than a hectare. Yet, despite these self-imposed brakes, Ethiopia’s economic progress has been spectacular. Its growth rate, if the latest official figure of 11% is true, is the fastest in Africa; and even the lower figure of around 8%, which the IMF and many Western analysts prefer, is still very perky. Social and economic indices are reckoned to have improved faster than anywhere else in Africa, albeit from a low base. Extreme poverty, defined as a daily income of under $1.25, afflicted 56% of the population in 2000, according to the World Bank, but had fallen to 31% by 2011 and is thought to be dipping still. The average Ethiopian lifespan has risen in the same period by a year each year, and now stands at 64. Child and infant mortality have dived. Protection for the rural poor in time of drought, which presently afflicts swathes of the north and east, is more effective than before. The government has “the most impressive record in the world” in reducing poverty, says a British aid official. (Britain gives its fattest dollop of largesse to Ethiopia.) Nonetheless, at least 25m Ethiopians are still deemed to be “extremely poor”. A waitress at Ben Abeba, a university graduate in biology, seems happy to get a monthly wage of $26. A labourer earns a lot less. How they made a miracle The core of the government’s economic policy is to improve agriculture, nurture industry and build lots of infrastructure. This includes a series of huge dams on the Blue Nile (which provides most of the water that flows into Egypt via Sudan) and on the Omo river, which flows south into Kenya’s Lake Turkana. The mass electrification that is expected to ensue should eventually help Ms Aitchison’s kitchen and communications in Lalibela. Roads and railways are also being built apace. Driving east from the town on a dirt track to join a paved road 80km or so away, your correspondent saw not a single other vehicle in two hours. The government puts its hope in industrialisation and light manufacturing, spurred on by investment and also by mass education (more than 32 universities have been created since 2000). It promotes industrial parks, which are supposed to boost their share of GDP from 5% today to 20% within a decade—and create millions of jobs for a population whose median age is only 19. Though the government invokes no precise model, it has various Asian ones in mind, most obviously China’s system of state capitalism under the strict control of a dominant political party. Meles rose to power at the head of the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front, a revolutionary regional party that originally drew its inspiration from Enver Hoxha’s Albanian brand of communism and which, after years of guerrilla warfare in the mountains, overthrew a vicious Soviet-backed Marxist regime, known as the Derg, in 1991. Meles gradually began to open the country’s economy, but he also felt obliged to close down an experiment in multiparty democracy after an assorted opposition made big advances in a general election (which it claimed to have won) in 2005. The two main opposition parties, which both want to liberalise the economy and privatise the land, were eventually allowed to keep 161 seats in the 547-strong parliament. In the post-election fracas, about 200 people were killed and at least 20,000 are reckoned subsequently to have done stints in prison. In the next two rounds of elections, in 2010 and again in May 2015, the tally of opposition MPs, after a government campaign of outright repression, slumped to one and now none. The opposition is crushed, fragmented and feeble. Prominent dissenters have fled or are behind bars. Human Rights Watch, a monitoring group based in New York, reckons there are “thousands” of political prisoners. Torture is routine. “Ethiopians are cowed,” says a longtime analyst. It was notable, at a recent Economist conference in Addis, that virtually no businessman, Ethiopian or foreign, had the nerve to disparage any of the government’s policies. In public Ethiopians tend dutifully to echo the government line; in private, though, they can be franker. After Meles’s death, Hailemariam Desalegn emerged as prime minister. In September of 2015 he was confirmed as head of the ruling Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front, itself a coalition whose key component is still Meles’s Tigrayan front. But Mr Hailemariam, a southern Pentecostalist from a small ethnic group outside Meles’s circle of revolutionaries from the north, has yet to achieve his predecessor’s authority. Just take the plunge He says he favours a loosening of economics and politics. But so far he has been tentative. “He’s a compromise guy encircled by old-guard Leninist ideologues, the Tigray boys,” says Beyene Petros, a veteran leader of the opposition. One of Mr Hailemariam’s close advisers, Arkebe Oqubay, a reformist who promotes industrial policy (especially the creation of industrial parks) and craves foreign investment, cagily suggests that banking will open up “in five years”. Yet the ruling front still reflects a deep wariness of foreigners who, in the words of a long-standing expatriate, remain widely suspected of plotting to “get rich at the expense of Ethiopians”. Most independent observers feel that, overall, Ethiopia is on the rise, and may even emerge as an African powerhouse alongside South Africa and Nigeria—and ahead of Kenya, its regional rival. It is proud of having the African Union’s headquarters and of providing more UN peacekeepers than any other African country. It is a leading mediator in the region, especially in war-torn South Sudan, and has won plaudits from the West for its fierce stand against jihadism. It also caters for more refugees than any other African country—some 820,000 at last count. On the home front, Ethiopia’s infrastructure plans have attracted the interest of potential investors from across the globe. Yet unless the government gets a move on frustration will grow, at home and abroad. If the ruling party had the courage to open up the economic and political system, the pace of Ethiopia’s progress towards prosperity and stability would quicken. Even lovely, remote Lalibela would gain.DOWN a bumpy two-lane road through the hills north-west of Vladivostok, the Pogranichny border crossing is where Russia meets China. Bilateral relations are blossoming, and trade should be booming. Yet lorries loaded with timber idle on the roadside, as obstructive bureaucrats keep them waiting for days. On a recent visit, the electricity was out; candles flickered in the truck stop’s lavatories. “Nothing new here,” said a shopkeeper. Over the past two years, as its relations with the West have soured, Russia has proclaimed a “pivot to the East”. Officials envisioned China replacing Western capital markets and hoovering up Russian exports of oil, minerals and food. Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping, the countries’ presidents, visited each other’s capitals for ceremonies commemorating the end of the second world war; Western leaders stayed away. Big deals in energy, transport and arms seemed to augur a new friendship. In September Mr Putin declared that Sino-Russian relations had “probably reached a peak in their entire history”. That was the official story, at least. “The turn to the east is happening, but in a characteristically Russian way: slowly, foolishly and with unrealistically high expectations,” says Alexander Gabuev, the chairman of the Russia in the Asia-Pacific programme at the Moscow Carnegie Centre, a think-tank. The Russian recession and China’s slowdown have put a damper on grand plans. With oil prices low and the rouble weak, bilateral trade shrank by around 30% in the first half of 2015. Corruption, bureaucracy and the rickety infrastructure of Russia’s Far East cloud the business climate. Mr Putin is not the first Russian leader to turn towards Asia. Chinese and Soviet communists feuded during the cold war, but by the time of perestroika Mikhail Gorbachev was calling Vladivostok a “window to the East” and declaring the Soviet Union “an Asian and Pacific country”. Nor is Mr Putin’s interest in the Pacific Rim new: when Vladivostok hosted the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) conference in 2012, he poured resources into the city, building two bridges and a sprawling campus for the talks. “In the 21st century, the vector of Russia’s development will be the development of the East,” Mr Putin said, in a rare echo of Mr Gorbachev. But after the conference, Moscow’s attention shifted and funds dried up. Development projects fell by the wayside. Two five-star Hyatt hotels went unfinished. The government says funds allocated to rebuild the Pogranichny border area were stolen (by contrast, a shopping mall and a Holiday Inn await on the Chinese side). The clash with the West over Ukraine turned Russia’s focus eastward again. In May 2014, two months after the annexation of Crimea, Mr Putin met Mr Xi and announced a 30-year, $400 billion gas deal, ending a decade of talks. Russia’s rail monopoly awarded a tender to the state-controlled China Railway Group to design a high-speed train between Moscow and Kazan. Moscow agreed to sell Beijing sophisticated S-400 anti-aircraft missiles and Su-35 fighter jets. China extended a yuan currency-swap agreement. In the autumn of 2015 Russia declared several Far Eastern regions priority development zones. Investors will enjoy a five-year break on most taxes and streamlined bureaucracy. Foreigners arriving through Vladivostok will be allowed in without visas. Some firms have moved in: En+ Group, an energy holding company controlled by Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch, has signed a deal with China’s Huawei to build data centres in Siberia. But it has not exactly been a gold rush. Western sanctions have made Chinese lenders cautious about Russian firms. Chinese foreign direct investment in Russia more than doubled in 2014, but collapsed during the first half of 2015. Gas export volumes are up, making Russia China’s largest supplier, but falling oil prices have slashed revenues. And although China is now Russia’s largest trading partner, Russia does not crack China’s top five—a fact not lost on Chinese businessmen. “They believe, and not without good reason, that they can dictate the conditions,” says the boss of a Vladivostok-based shipping firm. Russia, meanwhile, frets about being exploited. The desire to get closer to China is offset by a fear of becoming dependent, says Victor Larin of the Russian Academy of Sciences in Vladivostok. Russia imposes tough restrictions on businesses because of unfounded fears that the Chinese will take over its sparsely-populated Far East. Chinese businessmen complain about restrictions on hiring foreign labourers. Deals to lease farmland draw the ire of Russian nationalists. Even innocuous projects can incur the wrath of Russian apparatchiks. In November Cai Shangjun, an internationally acclaimed Chinese film director, brought more than 50 cast and crew to Khabarovsk to shoot a new movie, but customs officials held his camera equipment at the border. The frustrated cinéaste was left cooling his heels in his hotel for over a week. “It’s a tragedy,” said Mr Cai, as his crew lingered aimlessly in the lobby. His film “Under the Ice”, about two Chinese lovers who meet in Russia, has since resumed production. But like most things under ice, and Russia’s eastern pivot itself, it is moving slower than hoped.A billion on Siberia, please THE shiny new Tigre de Cristal casino looks like a black glass and steel spacecraft that has landed in the Siberian forest. A neon sign advertises “Seafood delicacies from the Sea of Japan”. Inside, Russian ladies deal out baccarat cards to Chinese gamblers. The casino itself represents a bit of a bet: that Russia can tap some of the cash from rising Asian economies to help develop its own Far East, a territory larger than the European Union that is home to just 6m people. Though the Far East is staunchly Russian, it has grown dependent on its Asian neighbours. Some regions do 85% of their foreign trade with China. Europe feels a world away. When Russia’s economy was booming, locals took their holidays at Chinese resorts and popped over the border for cheap massages and shopping. Since the collapse of the rouble the flow has reversed. Chinese shoppers come to buy Russian food, which they think safer than their own chemical-ridden produce. Others come for a bit of Europe. Li Tsang, a hairdresser from Fuyuan, raves about Khabarovsk, just across the Amur river: “It’s so clean!” At Tigre de Cristal, the brainchild of Lawrence Ho, son of the Macao mogul Stanley Ho, investors are banking on an influx of gamblers from north-east China, South Korea and Japan. “Within a two- or three-hour radius, you have 200m-300m people under-served from a gambling perspective,” says Craig Ballantyne, the casino’s upbeat Scottish manager. The fate of such foreign-backed projects depends on Russia providing the conditions for success. For Tigre de Cristal, little went smoothly. A bizarre legislative oversight means that it is illegal to advertise the casino: with the exception of a handful of special gaming zones, gambling is banned in Russia. The launch was postponed because of bureaucratic hassles. Even with the delay, the local government failed to revamp the main road from the airport in time for the grand opening, much to the chagrin of casino staff. “When Disneyland opened,” Mr Ballantyne notes pointedly, “the Santa Ana highway was finished.” Correction: In “The gauge of history” in our Christmas issue, a portrait was wrongly described as showing Fyodor Shekhtel, a Russian architect. The subject was in fact Savva Mamontov, a Russian industrialist and patron of the arts.IN MOST places, when 3,030 people take an up-or-down vote, some sort of decision will probably emerge. But one should never underestimate the contentiousness of the Catalans. On December 27th an assembly of the far-left Popular Unity Candidacies (CUP) party deciding whether to back Catalonia’s acting president, Artur Mas, split the vote evenly—1,515 on each side. The deadlock means that, three months after elections, Mr Mas still cannot form a government to carry out his programme of moving steadily towards secession from Spain. The Catalan impasse is part of a wider Spanish gridlock. Elections on December 20th splintered the political landscape. The duopoly of the conservative People’s Party (PP) of the prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, and the opposition Socialists (PSOE), who have traded turns in power for the past 33 years, has been upended. The insurgent left-wing Podemos and liberal Ciudadanos parties grabbed a third of the parliamentary seats between them, making a coalition or minority government a necessity. But Spain has little culture of coalition-building, and forming a government is a tall order. Fresh elections are also possible. After losing over a third of the PP’s seats, Mr Rajoy’s attempts to form a new government seem destined to fail. Meanwhile Pedro Sánchez, the Socialist leader, led his party to a historic low with barely one in five votes. A “grand coalition” between them, possibly backed by Ciudadanos, would be the most stable option. But decades of enmity make that unlikely. Instead Mr Sánchez fancies himself as the next prime minister. He would need to include the far-leftists of Podemos, which would be a triumph for southern Europe’s anti-austerity rebellion. But Podemos demands that Catalonia be granted a referendum on independence, which the Socialists refuse to accept. Mr Sánchez himself may soon face a leadership challenge, especially if party heavyweights, led by Susana Diez, the president of Andalusia, think he is selling them out. And even if Mr Sánchez and Podemos reach agreement, they do not have enough deputies; they would need the backing of either Ciudadanos or Catalan separatist parties. Podemos and Ciudadanos would make strange bedfellows. One party rails against neoliberalism; the other backs liberal reforms. The leaders of Podemos, Pablo Iglesias, and of Ciudadanos, Albert Rivera, have good personal chemistry, and both see themselves as crusaders ridding Spanish politics of corruption. They agree on the need to depoliticise the judiciary and some regulatory agencies. Yet a government of the Socialists, Podemos and Ciudadanos would lack the votes to change the constitution, making it hard to resolve Spain’s biggest looming problem: Catalonia’s threat to secede. Spanish election results Mr Mas and his Catalan Democratic Convergence party have been plodding towards secession for years. To secure the CUP’s backing, the once business-friendly leader is now dabbling in anti-austerity populism, promising to scrap a privatisation programme and commit his indebted region to an extra €270m ($296m) of social spending. His next steps towards independence are likely to clash with Spain’s constitution and may prod the new government to employ legal force against him. After four years without dialogue between Madrid and Barcelona, however, the two new governments may both be too weak to sort the problem out. Spain’s economy grew by an estimated 3% in 2015, but the recovery remains fragile and inadequate. Unemployment is 21% and GDP is still lower than in 2007. The most recent report by Fitch, a ratings agency, stated the obvious: a long period of political uncertainty and reversals of reforms will damage business confidence. Spain could use a strong government. It looks likely to get a weak one.That’s an ä not an å AFTER Aida Hadzialic’s parents fled war-torn Bosnia for Sweden in the early 1990s, they put their five-year-old daughter in a school full of native Swedes and made sure she studied hard to get ahead. It worked. Today Ms Hadzialic, 27, is Sweden’s minister for upper secondary education. Like her counterparts across Europe, she faces a new challenge: ensuring that a fresh wave of refugee children can integrate as successfully as she did. Even before this year’s surge, western Europe had lots of immigrant students. According to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the proportion of 15-year-old schoolchildren in Spain who are foreign-born rose from 3% to 8% from 2003 to 2012 (though in Germany it fell by about the same amount). The new wave of migrants from Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and elsewhere has redoubled the strains on school systems. In the countries accepting the most refugees—Sweden and Germany—lack of space is not a problem. Before the migrant surge, both countries faced declining numbers of pupils because of low birth rates. In Sweden the number of children in ninth grade fell from 120,000 in 2005 to 96,000 in 2015. “We have places for a hundred more pupils,” says Henrik Ljungqvist, the headmaster of Ronna School in Sodertalje, a city near Stockholm. (His school admits two to four new refugee pupils a week.) In Germany, without the new migrants, the number of students was projected to decline by 10% over the next decade, says Ludger Woessmann of the University of Munich. The biggest problem for education systems is that refugee children tend to be concentrated together. Many attend schools near refugee centres or in immigrant neighbourhoods. In Norway, Denmark and Sweden about 70% go to schools where at least half of the pupils are immigrants. This means they are partially segregated and less likely to learn the local language. Moreover, immigrants tend to find housing in poor areas with lower education standards. Schools where more than a quarter of students are immigrants usually perform worse than those with no immigrants (see chart), although the gap shrinks when economic status is accounted for. At Mr Ljungqvist’s school, where about 350 of the 750 students were born abroad, many of the brightest pupils have left. Swedish schools faced problems well before the latest migrants began arriving. From 2002 to 2012 Sweden’s rank in the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) fell more than any other country’s, to 28th out of 34 countries in mathematics and 27th in reading and science. Pupils in Sweden are more likely to arrive late to school than in any other rich-world country. The government has responded to declining scores by increasing teachers’ pay, but it still does little or no inspecting of schools. The OECD’s Andreas Schleicher says the system lacks a culture of accountability. Germany’s PISA rankings remain high, but its school system is “almost the worst you could pick” for migrants, says Maurice Crul, an expert on immigrant youth at Erasmus University in Rotterdam. Unlike France or Sweden, where most children start preschool before age three, German children tend to start school at four or five. Many schools have only half-day classes. Moreover, the German system streams pupils at 10 into either vocational or academic systems—and immigrant children are 44 percentage points more likely than natives to be sent to vocational courses. Unlike other vocational systems such as that in the Netherlands, Germany’s makes it hard to move from a vocational track to an academic one. Lack of native language skills can steer bright immigrant children away from a university education. The system’s inflexibility also makes it harder to integrate older immigrant children. Germany has one of the world’s biggest gaps in reading proficiency between those who arrive aged between six and 11 and those who arrive aged 12 or over. The German system has its strengths. In less than a decade, Germany has improved the mathematics grades of second-generation migrant children by the equivalent of over a year of schooling. In some German states school days are being extended, and the government has made a big investment in preschool education. In Sweden, meanwhile, older refugees are being trained as teaching assistants to speed integration. Ronna School and others scrapped separate “introductory lessons” for refugees after realising they led to immigrants being segregated and bullied. But far more could be done. Pupils could be distributed throughout the school system more effectively. In Aarhus, a city in Denmark, the proportion of pupils from migrant backgrounds cannot exceed 20% in each school; a similar distribution in Germany and Sweden could help fight ghettoisation. And refugee children should be getting more preschool. According to the OECD, 15-year-old immigrant children are 20% less likely to have attended pre-primary education than the native-born, but those who have score 49 points higher in reading than those who have not. Most important, European governments need to treat refugee children as an opportunity rather than a problem. Driven by a desperate desire for a better life, they and their parents tend to be hard-working and ambitious. Europeans worried about migrants studying beside their children should take comfort: the most important predictor of pupils’ school results is their parents’ level of education, and about half of the refugees reaching Europe from Syria have university degrees, according to UNHCR, the UN refugee agency (though other surveys put this number far lower). “Sometimes I joke that Syrian children may help reverse [our decline in] PISA results in maths,” quips Ms Hadzialic. If they are integrated properly, she may be right. Editor's note: This piece was updated on January 6th to include additional information on the proportion of refugees with university degrees.  ON A recent Sunday night in Bedfordshire, north of London, a damp-looking officer enters police headquarters. He has been fishing a possible murder victim out of the river, he says, but “had nothing to fish him out with”. Under the gaze of throngs of Christmas shoppers, he found he also had no tent with which to cover the body, and “embarrassingly” had to borrow one from an ambulance. Following big increases in spending on the police in 2000-10, the past five years have been austere. Police spending per person has been remorselessly trimmed back to roughly where it was in 2003, accounting for inflation. Further cuts were expected to be imposed in 2015, but after intensive lobbying by officers, and the jolt of the Paris terrorist attacks, on November 25th the government announced that the police would be protected from cuts for the next five years. Amid rises and falls in police funding there has been one constant trend. The police in England and Wales long received almost all their money in the form of a grant from the central government. But over the past two decades they have been raising more and more of their money locally. Whereas in 1995 only 12% of police funding was local, by 2014 30% of it was earned in this way (see chart). Tweaks announced in November mean that in five years’ time the proportion will be higher still. Britain’s police forces are slowly gaining real control of their finances—and they are using this power in very different ways. The shift began in 1995, when forces gained the ability to raise money by adding a supplementary “precept” to council tax, a local property levy. Police precepts were small at first: about £70 ($100) per household in today’s terms. They crept up in the 1990s, before soaring in the 2000s: in the decade to 2010, forces increased local charges by an average of 98%. There was wide variation. Whereas some forces increased their precepts by just a few percent each year, others went for broke: in North Yorkshire the police more than trebled the amount raised from local taxation in 2000-10. In the main, according to an analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, a think-tank, those forces that increased their local funding most were those that had done least well under the old system of direct grants, which favoured populous places with high crime rates. Forces covering England’s largest cities—Greater Manchester, Merseyside, West Midlands and London’s Metropolitan Police—all raised their local taxes less than average. The most enthusiastic taxers were small or rural forces: after North Yorkshire, the biggest increases were in Durham, Cambridgeshire and Cleveland. After entering office in 2010, the Conservative-led coalition put a brake on local fundraising, forbidding police bosses from raising taxes by more than 2% without holding a referendum, a feat none has yet managed. (Only one force, Bedfordshire, has tried it; Surrey considered it, but backed down in 2015 after a Conservative minister branded it a “lazy option”.) Yet the government has increased reliance on local funding in another way, by reducing the central grant. Central funding for the police was cut by one-fifth across the board in 2010-14. The forces that suffered least were those that had plenty of local income. The differences are stark: overall, North Yorkshire’s total budget is now 30% higher in real terms than in 2000, whereas in Northumberland, which increased its local precept the least, it is 8% lower. The devolution of funding allows locals to decide for themselves how much to spend on security. But it may lead to more being spent in wealthy areas—an odd way to approach crime, which is strongly correlated with poverty, points out Tom Kirchmaier, a policing expert at the London School of Economics. The reliance on raising money from households also punishes districts that combine sparsely populated rural areas with troublesome urban patches. Bedfordshire falls into this category: of the 43 forces in England and Wales, it ranks 32nd in the number of police officers per person, yet the presence of Luton, a rundown town with an international airport, gives it the fourth-highest rate of gun crime per head, as well as what local officials believe to be a high terror threat. There are sometimes so few officers on duty, says Kate Rowley, a local copper, that she knows that if she pressed her emergency panic-button no one would come. Police forces are finding new ways to supplement their incomes. In April the Home Office raised the modest fee charged by police for licensing firearms for the first time in 14 years. More controversially, the police make money by sending dangerous drivers on remedial “speed awareness” courses costing £85. Between 2010 and 2014, as forces’ central funding was squeezed, twice as many motorists were sent on such courses. Some police bosses have threatened to raise money by fining motorists who stray only fractionally above speed limits. Like doctors, police officers report that they are increasingly “dumped on” by social services, whose budgets have been drastically cut. In November the government announced that social services, too, would be supplemented in future by an optional local levy, to be determined by councils. Increasingly, it will be for local people to decide what sort of services they are willing to pay for. With a round of elections of police commissioners due in May, voters will get a chance to say just how thin a blue line they want.EARLY on December 27th, residents of Huntington Road in York were woken by cries warning them of torrents of water gushing down the street; the River Foss had burst its banks. The flooding was the worst in the neighbourhood since the last great inundation in 1982, says one local, John. With his house situated on a slight rise, the waters lapped at his front steps but rose no further. Most of his neighbours were less fortunate: by the afternoon most of the houses had to be evacuated. Here and there a few car tops were still just visible poking above the muddy waters. York was one of several northern cities to be swamped by the latest round of floods in Britain’s wet winter. By December 29th at least 6,700 properties had been inundated in northern England. At the time of writing (with more storms forecast), no one had died; the floods pale in comparison with recent disasters in other parts of the world (see article). But the rampaging waters, and the limp official response to them, are a problem for David Cameron, who has put the project of creating an economic “Northern Powerhouse” at the centre of his second term. “A Northern Powerhouse is nothing when it is under several feet of mucky water,” thundered the Yorkshire Evening Post. Splashing around York on December 28th, the welly-shod prime minister was heckled.  He deserved it. After entering office in 2010, he reduced flood-protection spending by one-fifth, and in spite of a splurge in 2014, after severe floods in Somerset, it has dropped back to below its level when he entered Downing Street. The cuts have resulted in hundreds of relatively cheap flood-defence schemes being cancelled, including one that could have prevented Leeds city centre flooding this week. The Environment Agency, which administers most flood-defence spending in England, funds only defences against sea and river flooding, not surface or groundwater, which cause more than 60% of the damage done by water to houses. A “complete rethink” is needed, the agency’s acting head said this week (his unfortunate boss was found on holiday in Barbados). Climate change has increased the frequency of the intense rains that cause severe flooding; some parts of Cumbria with a one-in-100-years chance of it have been inundated three times in the past decade. Yet if central government was found wanting, the local response was little better. “It was a poor show,” complains Ken Heald, a York hairdresser, with obvious understatement. He phoned a council helpline to request sandbags for his salon, Mamselle, as soon as he saw water seeping under the front door. Nobody got back to him, nor replied to two more pleas. Overall, the council was “no help at all”, he says. And for all the talk of e-government, the online response was glitchy, too: requests for sandbags on Leeds council’s website were met with error messages. Hard-up local authorities have struggled to do much beyond leading search-and-rescue efforts. In Leeds and York, the council response mainly consisted of organising evacuations. The stripped-down service is part of a wider trend of councils “becoming more like emergency services”, says Simon Parker of the New Local Government Network, a think-tank. Forced to make deep cuts to their budgets in the past five years, they have sacrificed long-term investment: in 2010-15 councils’ capital spending fell by 25% in real terms, and their outlay on planning and development by 50%. Saving so much money without seriously denting voter satisfaction has been a marvel, but the apparently thin preparation on display this week suggests how the trick has been pulled off. In the absence of much help from government, people have helped each other. “The spirit round here has been very good,” says Mr Heald, whose neighbours have rallied to help him out; one spent hours scooping water out of his salon. Groups such as Bingley Flood Support, near Bradford, have been organising clean-up operations, using Facebook to co-ordinate efforts: in Bingley members of a local mosque have brought food, a local newspaper has donated old newsprint to soak up water, and a bouncy-castle firm has lent its van to run errands. Social media have also eclipsed the conventional sort. Twitter and Instagram have provided updates and advice quicker than the local press, whose skeleton staff were caught on the hop over Christmas. Mr Cameron has long wanted to encourage a “Big Society” of volunteers. The floods have provided it—though perhaps not in quite the way he wanted.BRITONS have much to look forward to in 2016. Street parties will take place on the queen’s 90th birthday. The English, Welsh and Northern Irish football teams will all contest the European Championship. The Royal Shakespeare Company is promising the biggest-ever celebration of the Bard’s work to mark the 400th anniversary of his death, and the Globe theatre will stage a new production of “The Tempest”. Yet in politics, as in the skies, storms loom. Jeremy Corbyn, the far-left leader of the Labour Party, is consolidating his grip on the opposition. In an imminent shadow-cabinet reshuffle he will show moderates the business end of his proverbial ice-axe. North of the border, the pro-independence Scottish National Party will consolidate its political hegemony at elections in May. Another vote on separation is now only a matter of time. London’s mayoral election, also in May, will accentuate the growing divide between the rich, worldly capital and the rest of Britain. And with its EU referendum expected to take place as early as June, the country’s status as a leading European power hangs by a thread. Small wonder, then, that its allies are perturbed. Barack Obama privately talks of Britain’s “mid-life crisis”. As a commentary in the New York Times in 2014 put it: “Britain is having a kind of nervous breakdown, and its friends aren’t sure whether to say something or just look away.” Such observers are right to imply that the traumas were long in the making; more than freak intrusions on a country that has been calm and stable for decades. Why? Each polity has its pathology and Britain’s, as Walter Bagehot noted, is muddling through. Just as its people pride themselves on their—only partly imagined—“mustn’t grumble” stoicism, its leaders possess the institutional equivalent of the stiff upper lip: a preference for patching and fudging over abolishing and remaking. It has no written constitution; its union is the messy product of years of tweaks; its political bodies, from local councils to the Lords, are great mounds of sticking plasters. This predilection has its pros and cons. On the one hand, Britons’ mistrust of wide-eyed ideas (“Don’t you know it’s gonna be all right”, the Beatles sang in their sceptical hit, “Revolution”) explains their historical aversion to political extremism. It steers the country away from risky ventures like, some would argue, the euro. Thomas Kielinger, a veteran German correspondent in London, claims Britain’s seafaring history has made it flexible but cautious; more comfortable tacking with the winds than its uncompromising continental neighbours. On the other hand, a penchant for the zigzag and the gentle curve over the straight line comes at a cost. Consider the Palace of Westminster. Bombed during the war, it was quickly repaired and is now crumbling. A rolling programme of restoration struggles to keep up with its decay. Muddling through, in other words, can leave big problems unresolved. It stores up contradictions that occasionally unleash thoroughly un-British political earthquakes: the Labour landslide of 1945 would have been unthinkable without the hemming and hawing of pre-war governments, just as Margaret Thatcher’s economic revolution would have been without her predecessors’ procrastinations. The same pattern is in evidence now. Thatcherism created doubts about Britain’s place in Europe, divided England from other parts of the union, propelled London towards vast wealth and presented socialists with an existential challenge. Labour inherited these tensions when it came to power in 1997, but a combination of political skill and benign economic circumstances allowed it to fudge them. It sought European integration without convincing voters of the need for it; devolved powers to Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast without reforming the architecture of the union; encouraged the capital to boom without building up a counterweight and made its peace with markets without finally defeating anti-capitalists on the left. Today’s crises are, in other words, Tony Blair’s unfinished business. O brave new world Thus Britain’s current period of upheaval is not just overdue. It is necessary. The EU referendum forces pro-Europeans to make the gutsy case for continental co-operation. If they succeed, the vote should give British leaders a fresh mandate to build and wield influence in Brussels. Scotland’s swerve towards independence, and the accompanying grievances in England, should push politicians to transform Britain into a federation, at last putting the union on a stable footing. This should also precipitate the long-overdue decentralisation of England (a process that has already begun; Manchester will run its own health service from April). Lastly, Mr Corbyn’s leadership should force his moderate MPs to take on a reality that even Mr Blair ducked: Labour has always been two parties, one social democratic and the other anti-capitalist. Over the years it has muddled through, as concessions, feints and tactical battles have postponed a decisive confrontation. No longer: as Mr Corbyn bears down on the moderates, they will have to decide whether to push back, concede the party to him or quit—en masse, not in a dribble, as did their predecessors in 1981 when Labour last swung left—and form a new party. Britain’s crises may yet go to waste. But today’s flux gives the country a rare chance: to forge happier relations with continental Europe, to federalise the union and to update creaky institutions (asked to vote on a painfully expensive renovation of the Palace of Westminster in the spring, MPs should demand that Parliament move to a new, modern building). It is a test not just of Britain’s ability to evolve, but also of the very practice of muddling through. A political entity can only be sceptical and incremental most of the time if, when events demand it, it can bring about a sea-change. So let Britain’s leaders take in “The Tempest” and heed its wisdom: storms may be destructive, but they can also bring redemption.TWENTY years ago this newspaper published an essay that hailed a coming “golden age of discovery”. Great expanses of the Earth were beckoning the intrepid to put their footprints on untrodden ground, scale unclimbed mountains, peer into unscrutinised forest canopies, plumb unvisited caves and dive into unfathomed seas. Many such challenges remain. But exploration for the sake of being the first, and testing willpower, nerve and endurance, has been giving way to a higher-minded thirst to preserve the planet for future generations. As technology advances, especially in photography and telecoms, it is getting easier for ordinary citizens to play a part. Exploration is becoming both more scientific and more democratic.  All the same, vast unknown chunks of the world still tempt the purely adventurous. The most obvious are mountains: thousands remain unconquered. Then there are caves: speleologists, as cavers are more grandly known, reckon that a good half of them have never even been poked into. Antarctica, larger than the United States and Mexico combined, and Greenland still offer vast, untouched icebound stretches for the ultra-hardy. (The picture above shows a crevasse on Ross Island, Antarctica.) Millions of hectares of forest canopy in the Amazon Basin and in Africa and East Asia, especially Borneo and New Guinea, are yet to be inspected. Least charted of all is the seabed. Oliver Steeds, a leading British ocean explorer and film-maker, reckons that barely 1% of it has been explored. Lastly, there are still isolated peoples who have never been in contact with the outside world, and whose languages remain untranslated and unclassified. Start with mountains. All 14 higher than 8,000 metres have been scaled; the tallest of all, Mount Everest, has been climbed more than 7,000 times. But many thousands of peaks across the world are still unconquered, including hundreds in the Himalayas rising to 6,000-7,000 metres. Only 200-odd of the 2,800 Nepalese mountains that are higher than 6,000 metres may have been climbed, guesses Glyn Hughes, the archivist of the London-based Alpine Club. The highest unscaled mountain is Gangkhar Puensum, in Bhutan, near the border with China: the authorities have closed it to climbers to respect local beliefs. Muchu Chhish, in Pakistani Kashmir, is thought to be the highest unscaled mountain that it is still possible to get a permit to climb. It defeated a British team in 2014. Shifting geopolitics have opened some new ranges to Westerners wanting to display their derring-do, especially in the former Soviet republics but also in Chinese-run Tibet. Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan offer many challenging virgin peaks. And of course mountaineers are for ever seeking new “lines”, as they call routes, up mountains whose tops have already been reached. The sheer faces of the range of table-top mountains known as tepuis, near where Venezuela, Brazil and Guyana meet, offer a host of staggeringly hard tests. Even in Europe’s Alps new lines still beckon. Mountains apart, Antarctica is the continent we know least about, says Julian Dowdeswell, director of the Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge, England. It is the coldest, driest and windiest, and probably offers the greatest opportunity for old-style glory-seekers wanting to secure a “first”—if they can find a sponsor rich enough. In the past 20 years numerous new feats (crossings and climbs by new routes, “unsupported” by mechanical devices, for instance) have been achieved, but many more are still to be tackled. The most impressive endurance champion is probably Rune Gjeldnes, a Norwegian. Already the first person to cross the Arctic Ocean bringing all his provisions with him, in 2006 he became the first person to cross the Antarctic continent on skis alone without being resupplied. He is reckoned to be the only person to have traversed the North Pole, the South Pole and Greenland without resupplies. Caving offers explorers opportunities to test themselves that until recently were not even known to exist. Speleology “has changed massively” in the past two decades, says Andy Eavis, widely considered the world’s foremost caver. The Krubera cave in Georgia, near the Black Sea, down which a Ukrainian team descended in 2004, is twice as deep, at more than 2,000 metres, as the Pierre St Martin cave in the French Pyrenees, which had been reckoned the deepest when Mr Eavis plumbed it in 1971. A new technique of laser scanning can measure such “chambers” far more accurately than before. Mr Eavis still marvels at the great chambers still being found in the Malaysian state of Sarawak, on the island of Borneo. In 1981 he was the first to explore a cave there that is still the largest by area in the world—it could enclose the Hollywood Bowl. Now South China, among other places, is offering new opportunities for cavers. Its Miao Room, penetrated in 1989, is 852 metres long, and the largest by volume. Access to forest canopies is also being transformed by technology. Towers, balloons, inflatable rafts, light aerial walkways, drones and even giant cranes that have been helicoptered into place allow scientists to see what is going on under once-inaccessible foliage. A new remote-sensing technology known as lidar can illuminate objects high up under the canopy and analyse them through reflected light. The world’s most extensive unexplored place is undoubtedly the seabed. At first the aim was to get to the ocean’s very bottom. In 1960 Jacques Piccard, a Swiss oceanographer, and Don Walsh, an American, touched the floor of the Mariana Trench, the ocean’s deepest point, off the Pacific island of Guam. It is nearly 11,000 metres down; for comparison, Mount Everest rises 8,848 metres. Since then only one other person, a film-maker, James Cameron, has achieved the feat, in 2012. Lastly, there is one of the old-school Western explorers’ oldest quests: to find people who have never made contact with other human beings. The richest area in this respect is the Amazon Basin, mainly in Brazil but also extending into Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela. (Paraguay, though not Amazonian, may also host an uncontacted people.) Estimates of the number of uncontacted groups are rising, says Fiona Watson of Survival International, an organisation that seeks to protect tribal peoples and their lands, and to help them determine their own future. Ten years ago the Brazilian government department that deals with the country’s indigenous people reckoned there were between 20 and 30 such groups. Ms Wilson now thinks there are between 70 and 80. The other last bastion of uncontacted people (or isolated people, as some anthropologists prefer to call them) is New Guinea, an immense island whose western chunk, West Papua, is part of Indonesia and whose eastern side comprises a country of its own, Papua New Guinea (PNG). Half a century ago, many of its people lived in complete isolation from the rest of the world: even, often, from nearby groups. In the 1990s, says Sophie Grig of Survival International, missionaries made contact for the first time with at least 40 distinct groups in West Papua. But recent experiences in Amazonia lead the group to believe that there are still isolated people in various areas of West Papua. It would generally be best for them if they stayed that way, Ms Grig thinks. “All of the tribes in PNG have had contact with the modern world to one degree or another,” says Jonathan Claussen, an American linguist-cum-explorer who roams PNG. But many have seen only one or two visitors in the past 40 years, he adds; many outlying regions have yet to be visited. “The last uncontacted people are usually clans and families of a tribe that live on the fringes in isolated valleys, sub-ranges and forests,” he says. A tribe may be labelled as contacted, but “perhaps only 20% of the villages have actually been visited…Whole sections of mountain ranges and valleys have had no recorded visits by researchers or travellers.” Finding and saving endangered languages is yet another challenge. Early this century Tom Headland, an expert on tribal languages in the Philippines at SIL International, a non-profit organisation formerly known as the Summer Institute of Linguistics, reckoned there were 6,809 known languages, but half had fewer than 6,000 speakers each; a quarter, fewer than 1,000. Five hundred, he wrote, had no more than 100 speakers, 200 had fewer than ten. Two languages every month were reckoned to be dying out. Yet previously unknown and not properly deciphered languages are still, he reckons, occasionally found. The Ethnologue, a scholarly compendium published by SIL, has recently put the tally of “living languages” at 7,102, but says that 2,447 are “in trouble” or “dying”. Don’t just show off While the prospect of reaching new places and even people still tantalises the adventurous, explorers have become far more conscious of a duty to preserve the environment and less keen to be seen as no more than frostbitten action heroes. Even mountaineers, still often obsessive individualists seeking to pit themselves against the forces of nature, now tend to stress their role in advancing science and protecting the environment and local people. Mr Gjeldnes took regular samples of his blood as he crossed the Antarctic to help research into the functioning of the immune system under extreme conditions. Community Action Nepal, a charity founded by a British mountaineer, Doug Scott, who in 1975 was the first Briton to scale Mount Everest, is supported by thousands of climbers across the globe. It works to improve education, health care and living conditions in the Middle Hill Regions of Nepal, the home of most of the porters who assist Himalayan climbing expeditions. Krubera, the world’s deepest known cave Today’s ocean explorers, too, think at least as much about scientific progress as about being the first to reach the bottom of another seabed. Considering its vast expanse, remarkably little is known about it. “Only 0.05% of the ocean floor has been mapped in detail,” says Mr Steeds, who has switched from desert and jungle to the ocean. The “blue economy”, he reckons, could provide a wealth of minerals such as cobalt and manganese, and new plant and fish life. He talks poetically about the five watery zones: “sunlit” means down to 200 metres; “twilit”, descending to 1,000; “midnight” to 4,000; “abyssal” to 6,000; and finally “hadal”, meaning the deepest trenches. Virtually all today’s leading explorers stress climate change. “We’ve learnt a totally new way of presenting rainforests to the world,” says Andrew Mitchell, a British zoologist who runs the Global Canopy Programme. “It’s like understanding the lining of your lungs.” Forest coverage, he reckons, hosts 40% of the world’s terrestrial biodiversity. Mr Eavis says that caving offers climatologists “an incredibly detailed history of the planet” in terms of the composition of water and the atmosphere. Bertrand Piccard, son of the late Jacques, is trying, with André Borschberg, a Swiss businessman and pilot, to achieve the first around-the-world trip in a solar-powered aircraft—“to promote clean technologies”. “The key word nowadays is discovery rather than exploration,” says John Hemming, a former director of Britain’s Royal Geographical Society and an expert on the Amazon. “The term ‘explorer’ has been diminished and debased by headline-grabbing stuntmen and adventurers.” The RGS now gives grants almost solely for research. Mr Hemming quotes Robert Ballard, an American oceanographer famous for discovering the wrecks of the Titanic and the German battleship Bismarck—but who is far prouder of his work on hydrothermal vents. “Science gives legitimacy and worth to exploration,” wrote Mr Ballard. “You see lots of stunts today, but if you’re not doing worthwhile science, you’re not an explorer.” Most good research, Mr Hemming continues, involves patient observation, often in the same spot, under concealment and for a long time. “It is near-impossible to do that if you’re doing it solo or travelling by some awkward method.” He notes hopefully that many countries that once took less interest in the environment, including China and Brazil, along with smaller countries, such as Oman and various African ones, are becoming keener on conservation. Brazil has improved its once-dismal treatment of indigenous peoples. Mr Mitchell says the world should be grateful to them for helping to preserve the rainforest, which in turn provides the Earth with so much of its potable water. Exploring an underwater cave off Fiji Nigel Winser, another British explorer-scientist and long-time RGS luminary who more recently worked for the Earthwatch Institute, a charity founded in the United States to study and protect the environment, praises what he calls “citizen’s science”. Advances in technology, particularly in photography and the internet, make it possible for far more people to carry out valuable research. What he calls “the revolution of the camera trap” means images of animals can be captured seemingly with no interference by humans. Drastic improvements in nocturnal and underwater photography have opened whole new vistas of knowledge. Apps nowadays make it possible to identify the species of a bird by its chirp, often on the spot. Shane Winser, another RGS stalwart (and wife of Nigel), points also to the benefits of television, since it brings the best aspects of exploration into the public domain, not least thanks to sponsorship; witness David Attenborough and Alastair Fothergill, creators of “Planet Earth” and more recently “The Hunt”, two BBC television series. Not that the new zest for scientific discovery has quenched the desire to see what is over the horizon, behind the tree, up the mountain or under the sea. What Robin Hanbury-Tenison, another British explorer, who is president of Survival International, calls “the gosh factor”—that rush of amazement and catharsis when a pinnacle is reached or a mad exploit in some jungle or desert achieved—still motivates many an explorer. There is still no limit to the feats of endurance that people seek to achieve without a tangible scientific purpose—though often for a charitable one. Just after Christmas a 53-year-old Briton, John Beeden, became the first man to row solo non-stop across the Pacific Ocean (from San Francisco to Cairns in Australia). As Ranulf Fiennes, a British explorer, once said, people are still trying to cross the oceans “in ever tinier gin-bottles”, claiming firsts that have no bearing on science. Mountaineering still offers the same thrills it always has done. Even Everest has an almost endless list of feats yet to have been achieved. In 2006 Mark Inglis, a New Zealander, became the first double amputee to scale it. But, however admirable, this is not exploration or discovery. The gosh factor has been overtaken by the “do-good factor”. Corrections: In the original version of this article, we said that Oliver Steeds had filmed a fish at a deeper level than anyone else. In fact, this was achieved in 2014 by Alan Jamieson of Oceanlab, University of Aberdeen. We also said that Rune Gjeldnes  was the first person to cross the Antarctic continent on skis without being resupplied: in fact, he was the first to do so alone, but Sir Ranulph Fiennes and Mike Stroud had previously done so together. And we said that Bertrand Piccard is currently trying to achieve the first around-the-world trip in a solar-powered aircraft with Brian Jones. In fact, he is doing so with André Borschberg.
