The trials of St Jack FAITHFUL followers of Twitter believe that Jack Dorsey, one of the social network’s founders, is the only person capable of turning around the struggling firm. Mr Dorsey (pictured, during a recent Old Testament beard experiment) returned as its boss last year, taking over from Dick Costolo, who had led the company during a chaotic round of executive departures and strategic changes. True believers hope Mr Dorsey will be a reincarnation of the late Steve Jobs, who returned from exile to restore Apple to greatness. So far, however, Mr Dorsey has yet to perform miracles. On February 10th Twitter reported lacklustre earnings for the first full quarter that he has been back in charge. It now has 320m monthly users, no more than it had in the previous quarter, and it is unlikely to turn a profit until 2019. When Twitter went public in 2013, some believed it could become larger than Facebook, an older rival. Mr Costolo promised to build the “largest daily audience in the world”. Its prospects looked bright. Unlike Facebook, which began as a service on desktop computers, Twitter has always been popular on mobile devices, so it did not have to cope with a difficult transition. However, it has become clear that Twitter will never become the giant it was supposed to be. The pace at which it is adding users has slowed far sooner than it did at Facebook (see chart). Mark Zuckerberg’s outfit, which now has 1.6 billion monthly users, has grown swiftly by buying potential competitors such as Instagram, a photo-sharing site. One sign of Twitter’s ill health is that its number of users in America has stayed flat, at around 70m, for a full year, suggesting that it is approaching a ceiling in the world’s most important advertising market. Three problems have been hampering Twitter’s growth. First, there has been too much turnover of executives. At least 20 have left in the past two years. This has made it impossible to decide and act on a consistent strategy. Second, the reports about management turmoil have heightened an impression among some potential advertisers that the platform is not as mature as Facebook or Google, and thus is not worth taking as seriously. Third, new users find Twitter too fiddly compared with the alternatives (including Instagram and messaging services such as WhatsApp), which discourages them from continuing to use it. That said, many users and advertisers do still value Twitter. It is one of the best ways to reach people who influence the public’s conversations about brands, says Laura Desmond of Publicis Groupe, a giant advertising firm. However, to expand its audience, Twitter is in the difficult position of needing to keep long-time users happy while it makes changes that will increase its appeal to new ones. Mr Dorsey’s changes so far include “moments”, a new function which offers users a selection of the day’s top stories; and giving more prominence to tweets that Twitter’s algorithm judges more relevant. But more radical steps will be needed. Twitter is not the only tech firm with which investors, concerned by rich valuations and a gloomy economic outlook, are losing patience. In this volatile market, being a listed company with slowing growth is as bruising an experience as being attacked by trolls on social media. Yahoo and Yelp, two other struggling internet firms, have also been battered by the market. On February 4th LinkedIn, a professional networking site, beat analysts’ expectations for its quarterly earnings but forecast that its growth rate would slow significantly. This sent its shares down 44% the next day, wiping nearly $11 billion off LinkedIn’s stockmarket valuation. The sagging share prices of Twitter and other fallen internet stars have inevitably prompted takeover speculation. Twitter’s market capitalisation is now around $10 billion, less than a third of what it was a year ago. That makes it affordable for quite a number of firms. News Corporation, whose boss, Rupert Murdoch, is an active tweeter, recently denied rumours it might bid. Mr Dorsey is unlikely to want to sell up yet: he wants his flock to keep the faith, and still hopes to pull off a miracle.IT IS surely a promising sign for Terry Gou, the boss of Foxconn, that Japan’s largest business newspaper, the Nikkei, is reporting unflatteringly on his efforts to buy Sharp, a near-bankrupt electronics firm. At first the Innovation Network Corporation of Japan (INCJ), a government-backed fund, had seemed certain to snap up the company, and the Nikkei said little. But now the paper is calling Mr Gou a domineering, wilful “warlord of business” with close ties to China who it says has antagonised Sharp’s management with its tactics. So he must be getting somewhere. Mr Gou scored a coup on February 5th when he appeared to secure Sharp’s agreement to favour Foxconn’s bid of ¥660 billion ($5.6 billion) for the firm, rather than that of the INCJ, which is offering about half as much. Mr Gou says the two firms are set to strike a deal this month. If so, it would be one of the biggest foreign takeovers of a Japanese firm (see article). Sharp says it is still talking to the INCJ. Many foreign buyers have failed before. Japan Inc effectively slammed the door shut to overseas takeovers in 2007 when, backed by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Bull-Dog Sauce, a venerated condiment brand, cooked up a poison-pill defence to rebuff the advances of Steel Partners, an American hedge fund. Four years ago the INCJ, which has ¥2 trillion to invest, prevailed over KKR, an American private-equity fund, in buying Renesas Electronics, a chipmaker. An all-Japanese deal for Sharp would be awkward for Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, given his flagship policy of seeking to revive the economy via reforms. One element of his programme is to attract more foreign investment. Mr Abe’s advisers may even have had a say in Sharp’s abrupt change in attitude to Foxconn. Last year Mr Abe brought in a corporate-governance code that emphasises shareholder rights and the duty of outside board directors to promote them. Sharp’s external directors are said to have feared being sued by shareholders if they opted for the INCJ’s much lower bid. It was also difficult for Sharp’s two main banks, Mizuho Financial Group and Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, to shun Foxconn’s offer to assume some of Sharp’s debts. Losing Sharp to Foxconn would be a singular humiliation for the INCJ and METI. The INCJ had aimed to merge Sharp’s LCD-panel business with that of Japan Display, a firm whose creation it oversaw in 2012 and which is now Japan’s main maker of smartphone screens. Another scheme was to meld Sharp’s domestic-appliances business with those of other Japanese firms, including Toshiba, another troubled industrial group. The INCJ’s leaders are incensed at, and baffled by, the way the Taiwanese firm inched ahead. They argue that their plan is far tougher on Sharp and its banks. (As well as relieving the banks of much of Sharp’s debts, Mr Gou has hinted that he will keep the firm’s management and says he will not fire employees under 40.) “The biggest difference between the two bids is that we are asking Sharp’s Japanese main banks to cancel some of the firm’s debts and take a loss on them, since they are responsible for the company’s difficulty,” says Tetsuya Hamabe, chief strategy officer of the INCJ. That argument should go down well with reformers, who criticise the banks for propping up failing firms, if not with the banks’ own shareholders. The INCJ may fight to the last, but a deal with Foxconn would show that Japan is changing its attitude to outsiders. One reason it may come off is that as a failing firm, Sharp matters less for national pride. A foreign takeover of a more successful firm would be different. If, say, Tata Steel of India were allowed to buy Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corporation, imagines a government adviser, that would really signal that Japan is open to foreign buyers.AT FACE value, there is little sense in the $5.6 billion proposal by Foxconn, the world’s largest contract electronics manufacturer, owned by Hon Hai of Taiwan, to buy Sharp of Japan. It seems an extravagant price for a debt-laden firm that is bleeding red ink and squandered two previous bail-outs. Terry Gou, Hon Hai’s frugal boss, had the sense to walk away from a previous deal for his firm to invest $800m in Sharp in 2012, after the target’s finances deteriorated sharply. Why is he now so keen to spend lavishly on something that may prove a millstone around his neck? Mr Gou is not saying, but there are several possible explanations. Hon Hai surely wants to gain bargaining power over Apple, which provides around half its revenues. Foxconn, which has more than 1m workers on the Chinese mainland, has long been the biggest assembler of iPhones and other devices for the Californian firm. Since Sharp, which makes display panels, is also a big supplier to Apple, the combination would have more clout in negotiations over margins—which, at barely 3%, are now meagre at Hon Hai. Another factor might be Mr Gou’s desire to diversify Foxconn away from the grinding business of making devices for other firms, which profit nicely from owning the brands. About two-fifths of Foxconn’s revenues come from making networking equipment and servers for just a handful of Western firms, such as Cisco and HP. Foxconn assembles handsets for many firms, including Xiaomi, an ambitious Chinese company (although the mainland’s market for smartphones is reaching saturation). The rise of handheld devices has severely dented sales of desktop and laptop computers, which Foxconn also assembles. If Foxconn could design and sell its own devices under Sharp’s globally recognised name, it could at least keep the brand owner’s margin for itself. The desire for a low-margin assembler to move up the value chain is understandable. Foxconn has been making great efforts to become more inventive. A study in 2014 by the United Nations’ World Intellectual Property Organisation rated it as one of the most prominent filers of high-quality patents among firms officially resident on the Chinese mainland (as the company is, despite its Taiwanese parent). Foxconn also files its patents in America, whose standards are more demanding than China’s, and files lots of full “invention” patents as opposed to less important “utility” patents. Sharp has a proud history of technological advances, so perhaps that is why Mr Gou is ready to pay top dollar—especially if, having made a personal investment in one of Sharp’s display divisions a few years ago, he believes it has an important breakthrough in the works. If so, buying Sharp may help Mr Gou with his grand “eleven screens” strategy, by which he hopes his firm will become the dominant maker of displays for all sorts of devices, from computers to cars to smart watches. All this may explain his willingness to pay dearly for Sharp. But it will not make it any easier to turn around a broke and battered firm, should he end up owning it.Subrata Roy smiles on through adversity FOR businessmen scrambling to raise money in a bid to stave off bankruptcy, conference rooms can feel like little more than gilded prison cells. Few will feel this more acutely than Subrata Roy, the boss of Sahara, an Indian conglomerate: over the past 23 months he has worked out of a conference suite in a suburban Delhi jail. Held on charges of contempt of court relating to the sale of dodgy small-deposit plans to the masses—which the Supreme Court has ordered to be repaid, and whose proceeds he invested in property and other trophy assets—he has struggled to raise 100 billion rupees ($1.5 billion) in bail despite claiming his business is worth several times that. The ignominy of having to sell assets—Sahara is reportedly trying to flog the Grosvenor House hotel in London, four aircraft and a stake in a Formula One team, among other things—was once unthinkable for a “promoter”, the Indian term for founders and majority owners of businesses. A class unto themselves, the most flamboyant feature on the same glossy pages as Bollywood stars and cricketers in the national team (which Sahara once sponsored). Not all promoters are rogues, but the term is often used somewhat as “oligarch” is in Russia. Though life can hardly be described as tough for these plutocrats, they no longer enjoy impunity. Many thrived in industries where political connections mattered. They have found the new climate parching. At the top levels of Narendra Modi’s government, in power since May 2014, there are no longer the chummy relations that helped promoters secure precious permits, concessions and tax breaks. “Planes from Mumbai to Delhi used to be full of these guys heading to see ministers, you don’t see that any more,” says an investment banker. Political connections also meant access to credit. India’s public-sector banks, which make up 70% of the banking system, have made enough dud loans in recent years to prompt some to worry about financial stability. Most of the soured loans were made by state-bank officials to crony-infested industries such as infrastructure, metals and mining. In most countries, the banks would clear up the mess by seizing a defaulting company’s assets. India’s overburdened legal system and antiquated business legislation make that impractical. Promoters can credibly threaten to scupper a company before the creditors can get their hands on it, perhaps a decade down the line. With no fear of loans being foreclosed, the bigwigs have been able to flaunt their wealth even as their creditors fume. Worse, bureaucrat-bankers keen to avoid embarrassment have kept throwing good money after bad to avoid fessing up to earlier mistakes. However, all this looks likely to end. Raghuram Rajan, India’s central-bank chief since 2013, is on a mission to clear the banks of their non-performing loans: at the very least, the flow of money to some promoters will be stemmed. A bankruptcy law is snaking its way through the legislature, which would make it easier to remove over-indebted promoters from their businesses. Mr Rajan has spoken out against “connected wrongdoers” abusing the system. Throwing subtlety to the wind, he recently railed against promoters who “flaunt [their] birthday bashes even while owing the system a lot of money,” as guests were still recovering from the lavish 60th birthday bash thrown by Vijay Mallya, a drinks baron behind the Kingfisher brand (and a partner of Sahara’s in the Formula One team). Lenders to his group have been warning since 2012 that they are facing multi-billion dollar losses. In part thanks to the new regime, cracks are starting to appear in the promoters’ finances. Ever more are having to put up their personal assets (not just their shares in the companies they control, but also houses and the like) as collateral to raise fresh financing. Such pledges reached a seven-year high in 2015: 46% of promoters’ equity is tied up in this way, estimates Prime Database, a data provider, up from 27% in 2009. Whether Mr Roy gets to leave his prison conference room soon is in doubt. The reported value of the assets Sahara is flogging is well below the amount he needs to post bail, and they seem to be heavily borrowed-against anyway. The Indian securities regulator has rejected Sahara’s claim that it has made whole the vast majority of its small-scale creditors; it is after 400 billion rupees. On February 1st Mr Roy brought out a book detailing his life philosophy as seen from prison. A further two tomes are planned, suggesting he may have doubts over his judicial prospects.Grapes of governmental wrath THE region around Diyarbakir, in Turkey’s conservative south-east, has a long but faded tradition of wine production. “Suleiman”, an amateur oenologist from the city, dreams of reviving it. His biggest obstacle is not the renewed clashes between security forces and Kurdish insurgents, which are battering the region’s economy; nor even the conservatism of its Muslim majority. It is red tape. “The bureaucracy and the laws are the hardest to live with,” he says, preferring not to give his real name for fear of being denied his alcohol licence. Turkey, a secular but mainly Muslim country of 75m people, is not a nation of big drinkers. At an average of 1.6 litres a year, consumption per head (excluding bootleg booze) is the second-lowest among the 40 member and partner countries of the OECD. Among these, the only drier place is Indonesia, another secular but Muslim-majority country. In keeping with its Islamist roots, Turkey’s ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has been doing its best to keep it that way. The party’s leader, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, urges Turks to stop drinking or at least do so only at home. Yesilay (Green Crescent), a temperance movement founded in 1920, cheers him on. Big tax rises since 2004 have more than trebled in real terms the price of raki, an anise-flavoured spirit that was the preferred tipple of Kemal Ataturk, the nation’s founding father. Sales of bootleg alcohol, some of it deadly, are rising. According to the OECD, perhaps 29% of the booze consumed in Turkey is sold illegally. The tax rises on wine have not been so drastic, but winemakers are suffering from the same strong curbs on marketing as other producers of alcohol. A law pushed through by the AKP in 2013 prohibits any sort of promotion of alcohol, including ads, sponsorship deals, product placement or even wine tastings. “If someone comes to your vineyard, you can’t offer him a glass, because it’s against the law,” says Selim Zafer Ellialti, the boss of Suvla, a winery in the Gallipoli peninsula. “For new wines, it’s almost impossible to create an awareness around your brand.” As a result, a wine industry that had seemed on the verge of a breakthrough is now plateauing. Production, having more than doubled between 2006 and 2010 to 58m litres, has since stalled, as has domestic consumption. Some firms have given up on winemaking, turning instead to grape juice. Turkey is the world’s sixth-biggest producer of grapes, ahead of Chile and Argentina. Only about 3% of them are used to make wine. The good news for Turkish wines is that quality has improved markedly in the past decade. Producers, having invested in new technology and outside consultants, have begun to win awards in international competitions. Upstarts have prised a share of the market from the country’s five leading winemakers. “The new boutique companies have pushed the big ones to make better wine,” says Sabiha Apaydin, a sommelier at one of Istanbul’s leading restaurants. Reined in at home, wine companies are seeking a bigger share of foreign markets. About 30 of them have locked arms as Wines of Turkey, a group that promotes exports. Having slipped from about 3m litres in 2004 to 2.2m litres in 2010, the country’s wine exports revived to 2.6m litres in 2014. Although the government has banned all marketing to domestic customers, it subsidises the promotion of wine to foreigners. The top destinations for Turkish wine include Belgium, Germany and Britain, each of which has sizeable Turkish minorities and numerous Turkish restaurants. Gozdem Gurbuzatik of Kayra, another wine producer, sees big opportunities in America and China too. Yet for the likes of Suleiman, who has spent years accumulating the paperwork needed to get an alcohol licence, the prospect of running a legitimate, profitable wine business in Turkey remains bleak. “What’s the point of investing if you can’t advertise?” he asks. “It’s a big risk. No wonder people are reluctant to get into this.”SOME sports, such as wrestling and sprinting, claim long histories. They were portrayed in cave paintings thousands of years ago. Others are just lifting off. The racing of drones is, thus far, a niche activity, but several firms are betting on it. “Every person under the age of 13 either has a drone or wants one,” says Nick Horbaczewski of the Drone Racing League (DRL), a startup. “We are going to raise a generation of pilots.” The DRL has gathered in $8m from investors, including Stephen Ross, the owner of the Miami Dolphins, an American-football team, and CAA, a big agency that represents film and sports stars. Drone-racing began as an amateur sport in Australia only a couple of years ago, and spread with the aid of social media as pilots shared videos of their contests. Racers navigate at speeds of up to 100mph (160kph) through a course of illuminated checkpoints, getting a drone’s-eye view of their aircraft’s position through video goggles. The sport has had to work out some technological kinks, such as eliminating the “latency” that delays the live video feed to the pilot, which could cause a drone to miss a turn and crash. Races require special drones that are swifter than those mass-produced for consumer use by firms like DJI of China. DRL makes its own.   As drones have become more affordable, the sport has gained enthusiasts. This year perhaps 3m drones will be sold in America, generating around $950m in revenue, according to the Consumer Technology Association, an industry group. Once people buy one they want something more exciting to do than just hovering it over their houses, says Scot Refsland of RotorSports, which organises drone races and is in talks with a broadcast network to air a championship race later this year. Drone races, sometimes called “rodeos”, are becoming more frequent: in January events were staged in Las Vegas and Ontario. The big money will come in once people get into the habit of watching rodeos on television or over the internet. Optimists believe that drone-racing could follow the trajectory of e-sports, in which increasing numbers of people watch other people play video games. However unlikely it may sound, e-sports have turned into a large business, earning $194m in revenues worldwide in 2014, according to Newzoo, a research firm. Amazon validated the sport’s financial prospects in 2014 when it bought Twitch, a startup that streams people playing video games, for $1.1 billion. If it succeeds, the DRL will be a prime example of how the money to be made in drones may largely come not from manufacturing them but from services associated with them. It is also possible that drone-racing fails to capture the imagination of enough punters—and ends up like robot combat, which was briefly popular in the 1990s and 2000s on television. Drones may be in the ascendant, but not every sport flies.RONALD REAGAN once said that “The nine most terrifying words in the English language are, ‘I’m from the government and I’m here to help’.” Today they are run a close second by 12 words: “I’m from human resources and I’m here to organise a diversity workshop.” Most people pay lip service to diversity in public. But what they think in private can be very different. Some HR consultants have even started to worry about “diversity fatigue”. The arguments in favour of diversity are powerful. The most obvious is that diversity is simply a fact about the modern world. Women have entered the workforce in huge numbers. Mass immigration has transformed Western societies: even in once-homogeneous countries such as Sweden, foreign-born people make up 14% of the population. Gay men and women increasingly feel no need to stay closeted, in or out of the workplace. Companies that ignore this may starve themselves of talent, as well as be out of touch with their customers. Adding to the evidence for diversity’s benefits, a study published this week by the Peterson Institute for International Economics found that the more female executives firms have, the more profitable they seem to be. There is also evidence to support the commonsense idea that encountering people with different ideas and different perspectives can boost creativity. Ronald Burt, a sociologist at the University of Chicago, has produced several studies which suggest that people with more diverse sources of information consistently generate better ideas. Sara Ellison of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has shown that mixed-sex teams can produce more creative solutions than those dominated by either men or women. And internal surveys at Google have found that diverse teams are often the most innovative. Given all these benefits, why the talk of diversity fatigue? David Livermore provides some interesting thoughts on this question in his new book, “Driven by Difference: How Great Companies Fuel Innovation through Diversity”. As president of the Cultural Intelligence Centre, a consulting firm, Mr Livermore is a card-carrying member of the diversity industry. But over the years he has been struck by how many companies complain that they are not getting much return for their investment in diversity. “Tomorrow I have to go to a diversity-training workshop,” he heard one man say to another in the gym. “Oh God!” came the reply. “That’s right up there with getting a root canal.” Mr Livermore says that one reason for this is that talk of diversity often comes accompanied with a faint air of menace. Managers are dragooned into sitting through lengthy seminars on equal opportunities. They are fearful of saying anything that departs from the “correct” line on any diversity-related matter. And they feel under pressure to hit their recruitment quotas. The more important reason, however, is that proponents of diversity often fail to acknowledge that there can be a trade-off: to get the benefits, employers must be prepared for, and deal with, some problems. Diversity does not produce better results automatically, through a sort of multicultural magic. It does so only if it is managed well. The biggest challenge is to do with trust. Employees need to trust each other if they are to produce their best work. This is particularly true if that work involves tackling creative projects that have a high risk of failure and a circuitous path to success. But it is easier to establish trust with those you have a lot in common with. Mr Livermore notes that diverse teams have a higher degree of variance in their performance than homogeneous teams. They are more likely to produce truly innovative ideas, but they are also more likely to fail completely. He suggests that managers of diverse teams need to work hard at establishing bonds of trust. They need to set lots of short-term goals so that teams can see the benefits of working together. They also need to recognise that different groups forge trust in different ways. Westerners tend to think that getting straight down to the task at hand is the best way to do this, whereas South Asians believe in establishing rapport over cups of tea first. A second challenge is to do with culture. Too many companies fail to rethink their management styles as they open their doors to new groups. They issue ambiguous instructions which presume that everyone comes from the same background. For example, one Western company urged its employees to “act like an owner” without realising that, in some cultures, acting like an owner means playing golf all day. They evaluate people on their willingness to speak up without realising that some people—women especially, in many countries—are brought up to hold their tongues and defer to authority. Mr Livermore argues that managers need to work harder at getting members of silent minorities to speak up and, failing that, give them other ways of contributing to the collective effort. Beyond box-ticking Your columnist would add a third challenge: distinguishing between genuine cultural diversity and the box-ticking sort. It is easy for companies to think that they have embraced diversity if they appoint the right number of people with the right biological characteristics. That can be hollow if they all come from the same backgrounds—if, say, all the black people a firm promotes to management are Harvard-educated sons of diplomats. The growing diversity of the workforce should be a cause for celebration. Getting rid of discrimination against minorities represents a triumph for natural justice as well as a chance to make society as a whole stronger. But the celebration needs to be mixed with hard work and clear thinking. Companies will find it hard to make a success of diversity if they refuse to recognise that it brings challenges as well as opportunities. And they will find it impossible to confront these challenges if they dismiss any reasonable question that is raised about diversity policies as if it were a plea to go back to the age when white men ruled the roost.IF THE start of the year has been desperate for the world’s stockmarkets, it has been downright disastrous for shares in banks. Financial stocks are down by 19% in America. The declines have been even steeper elsewhere. Japanese banks’ shares have plunged by 36% since January 1st; Italian banks’ by 31% and Greek banks’ by a horrifying 60% (see chart). The fall in the overall European banking index of 24% has brought it close to the lows it plumbed in the summer of 2012, when the euro zone seemed on the verge of disintegration until Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank (ECB), promised to do “whatever it takes” to save it. The distress in Europe encompasses big banks as well as smaller ones. It has affected behemoths within the euro area such as Société Générale and Deutsche Bank (see article)—both of which saw their shares fall by 10% in hours this week—as well as giants outside it such as Barclays (based in Britain) and Credit Suisse (Switzerland). The apparent frailty of European banks is especially disappointing given the efforts made in recent years to make them more robust, both through capital-raising and tougher regulation. Euro-zone banks issued over €250 billion ($280 billion) of new equity between 2007, when the global financial crisis began, and 2014, when the ECB took charge of supervising them. Before taking on the job, it combed through the books of 130 of the euro zone’s most important banks and found only modest shortfalls in capital. Some of the recent weakness in European banking shares arises from wider worries about the world economy that have also driven down financial stocks elsewhere. A slowdown in global growth is one threat. Another is that the negative interest rates being pursued by central banks to try to prod more life into economies will further sap banks’ profits. A retreat in Japanese bank shares turned into a rout following such a decision in late January. Investors in European banks fret not just about lacklustre growth but also a possible move deeper into negative territory by the ECB in March. On February 11th Sweden’s central bank cut its benchmark rate from -0.35% to -0.5%, prompting shares in Swedish banks to tumble. But the malaise of European banking stocks has deeper roots. The fundamental problem is both that there are too many banks in Europe and that many are not profitable enough because they have clung to flawed business models. European investment banks lack the deep domestic capital markets that give their American competitors an edge. Deutsche, for instance, has only just resolved to hack back its investment bank in the face of a less hospitable regulatory environment following the financial crisis. And there are still too many poorly performing smaller banks within national markets. Although this year’s share-price declines have been steepest in Greece, these largely reflect renewed political tensions over implementing the country’s third bail-out. The banks arousing fresh concern are those in Italy, whose troubles go beyond an excess of them. One specific worry is the dire state of the country’s third-biggest (and the world’s oldest) bank, Monte dei Paschi di Siena, which has long been in intensive care and whose share price has fallen by 56% this year. Its woes reflect poor governance, a problem that plagues Italian banks, many of which are part-owned by local, politically connected foundations. A more general worry is that Italy’s banking sector as a whole is weighed down with bad loans which have built up during recent years. Although Italian GDP has been expanding since the start of 2015, it is still around 9% lower than its pre-crisis peak in early 2008. This has hurt Italian firms—and their pain has been transferred to the banks that lent to them. Gross non-performing loans amount to €360 billion (18% of the total), of which €200 billion are especially troubled. There is nothing new about Italy’s high level of non-performing loans; if the recovery can be sustained they should eventually start to come down. Moreover, over half of the sourest loans are covered by provisions, which means that the potential bill is more manageable, at around €90 billion rather than €200 billion. What has changed this year is a new European approach to tackling troubled banks, which shifts the burden for bail-outs from taxpayers to creditors who are “bailed in” when big losses arise. These rules, which have come fully into force this year (a few countries applied them in 2015), mean that senior bondholders and depositors with balances above €100,000 can be stung when banks are resolved. Bank bonds are generally held by institutional investors who can look after themselves, but in Italy around €200 billion are in the hands of retail customers who were lured to invest in them until 2011 by favourable tax treatment. These retail bonds would be vulnerable if banks run short of capital after big write-downs. This danger was highlighted late last year when four small banks were rescued in a rush to avoid this year’s more stringent bail-in provisions. That process ensnared retail bondholders holding junior debt, who could already be bailed in under the previous rules. One committed suicide. The furore has unnerved Italians. Ignazio Visco, governor of the central bank, has said that a less abrupt transition to the new bail-in regime would have been better. The strict rules have also curtailed the ability of the Italian government, led by Matteo Renzi, to calm nerves by excising the bad loans from the banking system. Instead of setting up a state-backed “bad bank” to remove them, Mr Renzi has had to adopt a feebler approach in which the government will guarantee the senior tranches of securitised bundles of the bad loans. Investors plainly doubt this scheme will help much, to judge by the performance of Italian bank shares. Frustration with European constraints on Italy’s attempt to sort out its banks is one reason why Mr Renzi has been making barbed attacks on the German way of running the euro area. Such political tension is adding to jitters about Italian banks. Portuguese banking shares have also tumbled, in part because a new left-of-centre coalition government alarmed international investors by its decision to impose heavy losses on some senior bank bonds late last year. In seeking to transfer the risk of failing banks away from taxpayers to creditors, European policymakers may have thought they were depoliticising the banks. In the euro-zone periphery, however, politics is never peripheral.CENTRAL banks are supposed to target inflation and in some cases, economic growth or full employment. As the “lender of last resort”, they also have responsibility for safeguarding the financial system. But do they in fact target asset prices as well? That has been the suspicion from the late 1980s onwards, when the Federal Reserve began cutting interest rates when equity markets wobbled. This approach became known as the “Greenspan put” (Alan Greenspan was the chairman of the Fed from 1987 to 2006, and the put option is a form of insurance against falling prices). The implicit guarantee from central banks became a bit more explicit in the era of quantitative easing (QE)—the creation of new money to buy assets. Central banks hoped that QE would have a “portfolio rebalancing effect”, with investors being forced out of low-yielding government bonds and into corporate debt and equities. However, the relationship between market movements and central banks may have an even longer history. That is the implication of new research by Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh and Mike Staunton of the London Business School for the latest Global Investment Returns Yearbook, published by Credit Suisse. They looked at the historical relationship between movements in interest rates and in financial markets, with particular reference to America and Britain. Unsurprisingly, they found that markets performed much better when rates were falling than when they were rising. Since 1913 (when the Fed was founded) American equities have returned an average of 9.3% a year in real terms during easing cycles, defined as the period between the first cut and the first increase. In contast, real returns during tightening cycles were just 2.3% a year. Government bonds returned 3.6% during easing cycles and 0.3% in tightening ones. This rule applied in most of the 21 countries covered by the trio’s data, going back to 1900. On average, equities earned 8.4 percentage points more in real terms in the year after a rate cut than in one following an increase. Alternative assets such as houses, art and gold also did better when rates were falling. That is how the markets reacted to central banks. Perhaps the more interesting finding is how central banks have responded to the markets. The chart shows the changes in volatility for equity and bond markets before and at the time of rate increases and rate cuts. Although stockmarkets (and the British bond market) were a lot more volatile after a rate rise, there was little sign of increased volatility before a rise. In contrast, both the British and American stockmarkets were almost as volatile before a rate cut as after one. The academics suggest central banks are following a rough rule of thumb. They postpone rate increases when volatility is high, for fear of causing further upset, but respond to high volatility with rate reductions. Investors may thus have learned that if they throw the equivalent of a toddler’s tantrum, central banks will eventually come to their rescue. Over the long run this might have encouraged risky behaviour of the kind that was common in the run-up to the crisis of 2007-08. The power of tantrums may still apply. In September the Fed postponed a rate increase in part because markets seemed to point to a slowdown in the global economy. The latest turmoil—the Vix measure of stockmarket volatility has risen from 15 to 26.5 over the past three months—may have induced another bout of caution. Before the start of the year the markets expected several rate increases in 2016; now there is a marginal consensus in favour of unchanged rates. This week’s comments by Janet Yellen, the Fed’s current chairman, to Congress about less supportive financial conditions will bolster that view. Whether central banks should be so sensitive to the whims of financial markets is another matter. There are wealth effects that reverberate in the broader economy when asset prices fall, although housing (where prices are still rising on both sides of the Atlantic) has more impact than equities. And market turmoil may be an indicator of trouble in the global economy: figures out this week showed sharp falls in British, French, German and Italian industrial production in December. Then again, central banks ought to be able to work out the economic outlook on their own.
