Fuelled by economic uncertainty THE Valentine Day’s special at Sharps Pixley, London’s first high-street bullion showroom, is a £115 ($166) rose dipped in gold. But what that special someone would really want is the £27,000 “kilobar”, smaller than a slab of chocolate but reassuringly weighty in this time of turmoil in financial markets. Both have sold well since the shop opened last month, says Ross Norman, the boss. Yet he is struck by how “apologetic” his British clients are about buying gold. It suggests many are novices, gingerly placing their first bets against the global economy. They are not alone. From libertarians in America to Indian housewives, gold’s fans have helped push spot prices up sharply this year, defying the rout in global commodity markets (although gold also defied the prior boom in commodities—see chart). In early trading on February 11th gold surged above $1,200 an ounce, its highest level in more than eight months, amid a big sell-off in global stockmarkets. Mr Norman notes that January rallies in the past two years quickly petered out, partly for seasonal reasons: retail buying in the biggest markets, India and China, starts with the Hindu Diwali festival in late autumn and ends at this time of year with Chinese new year. He says the rally is still tentative, though this year “it has a bit more oomph.” Fear is one source of oomph. One Swiss-based bull likes to call gold “a hedge against ignorance”, noting the myriad question-marks hanging over the global economy. They include the strength of China’s economy, the impact of falling oil prices on emerging-market producers, the debt woes in America’s shale-oil industry and the fragility of global banks. What’s more, the dollar—which rivals gold as a haven—has also weakened recently. Other factors have been on gold’s side. Its recent rally has coincided with falling oil prices and renewed fears of deflation that have pushed down interest rates. Because gold offers no yield, the lower the returns offered by alternative investments such as bonds, the more attractive it looks. The move by big central banks to impose negative interest rates on commercial-bank deposits makes gold an even more attractive store of value—the shiny equivalent of cash under the mattress. Supply may also help the bulls’ case. The World Gold Council said on February 11th that the amount of gold mined in the fourth quarter of 2015 was down by 3%, its first quarterly drop since 2008. It expects the trend to continue as cash-strapped mining firms trim investment. The demand picture is more nuanced. Overall, global demand dipped slightly in 2015. But Indians vastly increased their holdings of gold jewellery in the second half of last year, befitting one of the world’s fastest-growing economies. In China, shoppers bought fewer gold trinkets but more gold coins and bars as investments, perhaps reflecting concerns about their falling currency and stockmarket. This year the latest data suggest there has been a net inflow of funds into gold-related exchange-traded funds, which are investment vehicles that account for about a tenth of global gold demand, says the World Gold Council’s Juan Carlos Artigas. He expects buying by central banks in the developing world, which surged in the fourth quarter, to continue as they diversify their assets. Sceptics—among them Goldman Sachs, an investment bank—nonetheless argue that gold will fall for a fourth straight year in 2016, largely because of higher interest rates in America. On February 10th Janet Yellen, chair of the Federal Reserve, offered a downbeat assessment of the American economy in testimony to Congress. Though she still left the door ajar to further rate rises, stockmarkets and the dollar reacted negatively, while gold rallied. The more pressing financial fears become, the higher it is likely to go.WHEN governments bailed out banks during the financial crisis, they tended to insist that shareholders suffer big losses. Most bondholders, however, got off scot-free. In theory, bondholders should have lost money too—but working out just how bankrupt the banks were, apportioning the losses and risking contagion among bondholders elsewhere seemed too risky to contemplate as the financial system was seizing up. Regulators have since pushed banks to fund their activities with less debt and more loss-absorbing capital. The simplest form of capital is equity—the money raised by selling shares or retaining profits. But trimming dividends or increasing the number of shares reduces the value of the existing ones. So bankers and regulators dreamt up a new financial instrument that would act like debt, thus sparing shareholders dilution, unless capital was urgently needed. These instruments are called contingent convertible bonds, or “cocos”, also known as additional Tier-1 securities. In exchange for annual interest of around 6-7%, investors take on the risk that, if the going gets tough, the bank may suspend interest payments, convert the bond into equity or write it off altogether. Cocos have proved popular, given how low most bond yields are: about €91 billion ($103 billion) of them have been issued since 2013. But this week analysts at CreditSights, a financial-research firm, questioned whether Deutsche Bank would have enough “available distributable items” (ADI, a subset of earnings from which interest on cocos must be paid) to cover the €350m due on its cocos next year. Their price promptly slumped to 70 cents on the euro (see chart). Other European banks’ cocos also suffered, although not quite as badly.   It is not unreasonable for investors to be nervous about Deutsche. It made a record loss last year. Its newish boss, John Cryan, has suspended the dividend for last year and this. Its big investment bank is a perennial underperformer. Many risks still lie ahead, from the costs of restructuring and regulatory infractions to potential losses on loans to energy firms. Explore our interactive guide to Europe's troubled economies If all this proves more expensive than imagined, it may exceed ADI, which has already been diminished by the bank’s recent losses. The problem is more acute at Deutsche than at other banks, both because it has performed especially poorly in recent years and because the German definition of ADI is narrower than in most other European countries. (Deutsche insists it will meet the payments with ease.) The hullabaloo at Deutsche, along with the poor performance of European banks more broadly, seems to have prompted a broader reassessment of the riskiness of cocos, argues James Chappell of Berenberg, a bank. “People have misunderstood them,” he says. On top of everything else, the market for them is relatively illiquid, which makes prices more susceptible to sudden jolts. The irony is that even those shunning Deutsche’s cocos accept that its cushion of capital is relatively thick, at 11%. The problem is its profits, or rather the lack of them. In other words, its cocos appear to have been poorly designed, at risk of taking money away from investors before the bank truly faces calamity. It would not be the first time a financial innovation did not work as advertised.LABOUR markets are hotbeds of inequality. For every dollar a white American man in full-time work earns, the average white woman earns 78 cents and the average Latina only 56 cents. Marriage is a boon for male earnings; motherhood drags female earnings down. Likewise, gay men earn about 5% less than heterosexual ones in Britain and France, and 12-16% less in Canada and America, even after controlling for things like education, skills and experience. Yet one minority appears immune to this scourge: lesbians. Marieka Klawitter of the University of Washington looked at 29 studies on wages and sexual orientation last year.* On average, they found a 9% earnings premium for lesbians over heterosexual women, compared with a penalty of 11% for gay men relative to straight men. This discrepancy has been borne out by research on America, Britain, Canada, Germany and the Netherlands. Even after adjusting for the fact that lesbians are on average more educated than straight women, and less likely to have children, the gap persists. Research on this topic should be taken with a pinch of salt. Some studies rely on direct questions about sexual orientation. But around half of the 29 studies surveyed by Ms Klawitter were based on surveys in which respondents were not asked directly whether they were gay. Instead, they were asked who they live with and what their relationship with them is. Both methods tend to find a wage premium. But they may both miss some gay women in a way that distorts the results. If getting good data is tough, pinning down why there might be a wage premium for lesbians and a penalty for gay men is even tougher. Perhaps lesbians who are “out” are more competitive than their heterosexual peers. After all, studies tend to find that men are more competitive than women, which could explain some of the wage gap between the sexes. But a working paper published last year found that whereas gay men behaved less competitively than straight men (accounting for roughly two-fifths of their earnings penalty), there was no such difference between lesbians and other women. Lesbians may not need to behave differently to be treated differently. They could face positive discrimination, if employers promote them on the assumption that they will not have children and so devote more time to work than straight colleagues. A study Ms Klawitter published in 2011 found that gay men working in the public sector suffered a smaller penalty than those in the private sector, whereas lesbians enjoyed a premium in the private sector but none in the public sector. One interpretation could be that discrimination of all sorts is more fiercely policed in government offices, dampening prejudice against gay men and in favour of gay women. Lesbians’ higher earnings could also be a function of the gender of their partner. Men earn more than women, straight or gay; lesbians, deprived of the extra earnings a male partner would bring, may work harder to compensate. At any rate, they work more hours per day and weeks per year than straight women, on average (see chart). Over time this could translate into more experience and better chances of promotion. There is a clue in a paper from Nasser Daneshvary, C. Jeffrey Waddoups and Bradley Wimmer of the University of Nevada, which finds that lesbians who have previously been married to men receive a smaller premium than those who have not. Finally, it could be that in same-sex couples women do not feel obliged to do as much childcare or housework, giving them more freedom to fulfil their potential in the workplace. Lesbian couples tend to work more equal hours, even when they have children, and several studies find that same-sex households share chores more evenly than heterosexual ones. Whatever the reason for lesbians’ wage premium, it does not make them a privileged group. There is evidence that they face discrimination in hiring relative to straight women, even though their pay is better. Poverty rates among lesbian couples are 7.9%, compared with 6.6% among heterosexual ones. And for boosting earnings, as in so many realms, nothing beats being a straight, white, married man.If only the budget were as finely balanced SRI LANKA ought to be sitting pretty. Its growth has averaged 6% a year over the past decade. Seven years after a protracted civil war ended, its economy is still reaping a peace dividend. It is also a beneficiary of the collapse in commodity prices, which has trimmed its hefty bill for imports of fuel. Yet last week, after long debate, its leaders requested a loan from the IMF. If so much is so rosy, why is Sri Lanka going cap in hand to the IMF? The immediate concern is the capital flight that has buffeted emerging markets around the world. Although Sri Lanka’s current-account deficit had been declining steadily over the past few years, the country suffered big capital outflows last year as foreign investors sold down their holdings of government bonds. The central bank fought against the tide for a while, using up some $2 billion, or more than a fifth, of its foreign-exchange reserves to defend the rupee. After it relented in September, the currency fell to a record low against the dollar and has since weakened further. To hear it from Ravi Karunanayake, Sri Lanka’s finance minister, the country is a victim of the woes that have beset other emerging markets: “If China devalues and India devalues, little Sri Lanka gets caught in between.” Yet the main source of Sri Lanka’s fragility is its own fiscal mistakes, not external turbulence. A combination of cumbersome debts and a rickety tax system has made it vulnerable to the withdrawal of foreign funding. At nearly three-quarters of GDP, its public debt is large for a developing country. It does not help that a chunk of that debt was borrowed from China under the previous president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, to pay for infrastructure built by Chinese firms, including several expensive but pointless vanity projects. The principal on these loans will not fall due until the early 2020s, but the interest on them is high, adding to Sri Lanka’s already weighty debt-servicing costs. That points to what many in Colombo see as the root cause of their headache: a threadbare tax system. Revenues amount to a paltry 13% of GDP. Countries with similar levels of income typically take in 20%. The new administration, in power for just over a year, has made things messier. It slashed corporate and income taxes, introducing flat rates of 15%, hoping to lure investors to Sri Lanka. To make up for some of the shortfall, it has relied largely on one-off measures such as an extra levy on a few dozen highly profitable companies. Anushka Wijesinha, chief economist of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, says businesses are not asking for tax breaks but rather for a more predictable tax regime. The government has also driven up its costs by awarding public servants a big pay rise to make good on an election promise. It had initially aimed to keep the fiscal deficit to 4.4% of GDP last year. Instead it hit 7.2%. Even so, calling on the IMF does not mean that Sri Lanka faces a crisis. Arjuna Mahendran, the governor of the central bank, is careful to point out that Sri Lanka has not missed a debt payment in years and is not about to do so. Instead, the government views the IMF loan as a buffer, which it thinks will help it gain credibility with foreign investors. Bringing in the IMF is not cost-free, however. It will want to see the government strengthen its fiscal system. That may be the point: a stern external force should help catalyse fiscal reforms. It could also pave the way for an additional loan from the World Bank. Sri Lanka still has much going for it. It is working to position itself as a trading hub for South Asia. Sitting about midway on shipping lanes between Singapore and Dubai, it offers deepwater ports, easy access to India and some of South Asia’s best highways. Sorting out the infrastructure of its tax system is far less glamorous but just as critical.DATING is a treacherous business. There may be plenty of fish in the sea, yet many are unhygienic, self-absorbed, disconcertingly attached to ex-fish, or fans of Donald Trump. Digital dating sites, including a growing array of matchmaking apps, are meant to help. Their design owes more to hard-nosed economics than it does to the mysteries of the heart. In a sense, searching for a mate is not so different from hunting for a job. Jobs, like prospective partners, have their strengths and weaknesses, which makes finding the right one a matter of complicated trade-offs. Such exchanges are different from other transactions, in that both parties must be enthusiastic about the match for it to happen. A supermarket, in contrast, does not particularly care whose wallet it is draining, nor does the power company agonise about whether a customer is worthy of its watts. Alvin Roth, who won a Nobel prize in economics for his work on market design, made a career of studying such “matching markets”, where supply and demand are not balanced by price. Instead, people transact based on information. An apple-seller can nudge down his prices until the whole cart is sold. Yet if Apple were looking to hire two workers, it would not set a salary so puny that only two people applied. The quality of new hires often matters at least as much as their salaries. Mr Roth, who won the prize jointly with Lloyd Shapley in 2012, found that the structure of matching markets made a significant difference in determining who wound up with whom. Systems designed to elicit people’s true preferences generated better matches between hospitals and doctors, for example. But the entire medical profession has an interest in improving matches, and so can set up a national clearing house to do just that. The lovelorn must instead rely on an array of digital matchmakers. Good matches depend on good information. Even without digital help, people usually have some inkling of how much they have in common. Cosmopolitan strivers move to New York, say, rather than sleepier cities, in part because they will meet other ambitious types with similar interests. Within New York, the places people choose to spend their time—whether Yankee Stadium or a yoga studio—determine which sorts of people they come into contact with. Because it is expensive to live in New York, and to spend time sweating in a yoga studio or swearing in the stands, people in such settings can be reasonably confident those around them are in some sense like-minded. But one critical bit of information is missing: whether there is mutual interest. The act of asking someone out is fraught. In the non-digital world, approaching a potential partner brings the risk of awkwardness or humiliation. Digital dating reduces this cost dramatically. Apps like Tinder and Happn, for example, reveal that a user likes another only when the feeling is mutual. The best matching markets are those that are “thick”, with lots of participants. The more people there are seeking digital dates, the greater the chance of finding a good match. Odds improve that another person in the crowd also enjoys Wagner, Thai food, or discussions about the economics of matching markets. INTERACTIVE: Compare romantic city-breaks across the globe with our "Cost of Loving" ranking The wealth of information many dating sites request may help to home in on the perfect match, but if the effort involved is enough to deter potential mates from joining in the first place, then it does more harm than good. When Tinder first launched, largely to facilitate casual sex, users assessed one another based only on looks, age and gender. Simplicity worked wonders; there are 26m matches made between Tinder users each day. The advantages of thick markets are lost, however, if they become too “congested”, with users overwhelmed by the number of participants and unable to locate a good match among them. One response is to specialise. JSwipe, for instance, caters to Jewish singles while Bumble, an app where women must initiate contact, is meant to attract feminists. But the most popular apps seek to help their users filter possible mates using clever technology. Tinder, for example, only provides users with profiles of fellow Tinderites who are nearby, to make it that much easier to meet in person. It has also introduced a “super like” feature, which can be deployed only once a day, to allow smitten users to signal heightened interest in someone. In addition, last year it started allowing people to list their jobs and education, to help users to sort through the crowds. Users get the benefits both of a big pool of potential partners and various tools to winnow them. Sext and the city The emergence of matching apps, for those seeking love or theatre tickets or a lift, has certainly made once-onerous tasks more convenient. They may also contribute to more profound economic change. Dating apps could strengthen the trend toward “assortative mating”, whereby people choose to couple with those of similar income and skills. By one estimate, the trend accounts for about 18% of the rise in income inequality in America between 1960 and 2005. A recent study of online dating in South Korea found that it boosted sorting among couples by education. Better matching may also mean bigger cities. Metropolitan goliaths have long been melting-pots, within which those early on in their adult lives link up with jobs, friends and mates. Matching apps, romantic or not, make it easier to navigate the urban sprawl and sample all it has to offer. That, in turn, should make the biggest cities relatively more attractive to young people. Apps cannot yet make break-ups less painful. And love remains mysterious enough that even the most refined algorithms cannot predict mutual attraction with confidence. But they clearly help, judging by their legions of users. After all, it is better to have super-liked and lost than never to have super-liked at all.TWO black holes circle one another. Both are about 100km across. One contains 36 times as much mass as the sun; the other, 29. They are locked in an orbital dance, a kilometre or so apart, that is accelerating rapidly to within a whisker of the speed of light. Their event horizons—the spheres defining their points-of-no-return—touch. There is a violent wobble as, for an instant, quintillions upon quintillions of kilograms redistribute themselves. Then there is calm. In under a second, a larger black hole has been born. It is, however, a hole that is less than the sum of its parts. Three suns’ worth of mass has been turned into energy, in the form of gravitational waves: travelling ripples that stretch and compress space, and thereby all in their path. During the merger’s final fifth of a second, envisaged in an artist’s impression above, the coalescing holes pumped 50 times more energy into space this way than the whole of the rest of the universe emitted in light, radio waves, X-rays and gamma rays combined. And then, 1.3 billion years later, in September 2015, on a small planet orbiting an unregarded yellow sun, at facilities known to the planet’s inhabitants as the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), the faintest slice of those waves was caught. That slice, called GW150914 by LIGO’s masters and announced to the world on February 11th, is the first gravitational wave to be detected directly by human scientists. It is a triumph that has been a century in the making, opening a new window onto the universe and giving researchers a means to peer at hitherto inaccessible happenings, perhaps as far back in time as the Big Bang. Finger on the pulsar The idea of gravitational waves emerged from the general theory of relativity, Albert Einstein’s fundamental exposition of gravity, unveiled almost exactly 100 years before GW150914’s discovery. Mass, Einstein realised, deforms the space and time around itself. Gravity is the effect of this, the behaviour of objects dutifully moving along the curves of mass-warped spacetime. It is a simple idea, but the equations that give it mathematical heft are damnably hard to solve. Only by making certain approximations can solutions be found. And one such approximation led Einstein to an odd prediction: any accelerating mass should make ripples in spacetime. Einstein was not happy with this idea. He would, himself, oscillate like a wave on the topic—rescinding and remaking his case, arguing for such waves and then, after redoing the sums, against them. But, while he and others stretched and squeezed the maths, experimentalists set about trying to catch the putative waves in the act of stretching and squeezing matter. Their problem was that the expected effect was a transient change in dimensions equivalent to perhaps a thousandth of the width of a proton in an apparatus several kilometres across. Indirect proof of gravitational waves’ existence has been found over the years, most notably by measuring radio emissions from pairs of dead stars called pulsars that are orbiting one another, and deducing from this how the distance between them is shrinking as they broadcast gravitational waves into the cosmos. But the waves themselves proved elusive until the construction of LIGO. As its name states, LIGO is an interferometer. It works by splitting a laser beam in two, sending the halves to and fro along paths identical in length but set at right angles to one another, and then looking for interference patterns when the halves are recombined (see diagram). If the half-beams’ paths are undisturbed, the waves will arrive at the detector in lock-step. But a passing gravitational wave will alternately stretch and compress the half-beams’ paths. Those half-beams, now out of step, will then interfere with each other at the detector in a way that tells of their experience. The shape of the resulting interference pattern contains all manner of information about the wave’s source, including what masses were involved and how far away it was. To make absolutely certain that what is seen really is a gravitational wave requires taking great care. First, LIGO is actually two facilities, one in Louisiana and the other in Washington state. Only something which is observed almost, but not quite, simultaneously by both could possibly be a gravitational wave. Secondly, nearly everything in the interferometers’ arms is delicately suspended to isolate it as far as possible from distant seismic rumblings and the vibrations of passing traffic. Moreover, in order to achieve the required sensitivity, each arm of each interferometer is 4km long and the half-beam in it is bounced 100 times between the mirrors at either end of the arm, to amplify any discrepancy when the half-beams are recombined. Even so, between 2002 when LIGO opened and 2010, when it was closed for upgrades, nary a wave was seen. Holey moly Those improvements, including doubling the bulk of the devices’ mirrors, suspending them yet more delicately, and increasing the laser power by a factor of 75, have made Advanced LIGO, as the revamped apparatus is known, four times as sensitive as the previous incarnation. That extra sensitivity paid off almost immediately. Indeed, the system’s operators were still kicking its metaphorical tyres and had yet to begin its official first run when GW150914 turned up, first at the Louisiana site, and about a hundredth of a second later in Washington—a difference which places the outburst somewhere in the sky’s southern hemisphere. Since then, the team have been checking their sums and counting their lucky stars. As they outline in Physical Review Letters, the likelihood that the signal was a fluke is infinitesimal. When one result comes so quickly, others seem sure to follow—particularly as the four months of data the experiment went on to gather as part of the first official run have yet to be analysed fully. A rough estimate suggests one or two other signals as striking as GW150914 may lie within them. For gravitational astronomy, this is just the beginning. Soon, LIGO will not be alone. By the end of the year VIRGO, a gravitational-wave observatory in Italy, should join it in its search. Another is under construction in Japan and talks are under way to create a fourth, in India. Most ambitiously, a fifth, orbiting, observatory, the Evolved Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, or e-LISA, is on the cards. The first pieces of apparatus designed to test the idea of e-LISA are already in space. Together, by jointly forming a telescope that will permit astronomers to pinpoint whence the waves come, these devices will open a new vista on the universe. As technology improves, waves of lower frequency—corresponding to events involving larger masses—will become detectable. Eventually, astronomers should be able to peer at the first 380,000 years after the Big Bang, an epoch of history that remains inaccessible to every other kind of telescope yet designed. The real prize, though, lies in proving Einstein wrong. For all its prescience, the theory of relativity is known to be incomplete because it is inconsistent with the other great 20th-century theory of physics, quantum mechanics. Many physicists suspect that it is in places where conditions are most extreme—the very places which launch gravitational waves—that the first chinks in relativity’s armour will be found, and with them a glimpse of a more all-embracing theory. Gravitational waves, of which Einstein remained so uncertain, have provided direct evidence for black holes, about which he was long uncomfortable, and may yet yield a peek at the Big Bang, an event he knew his theory was inadequate to describe. They may now lead to his theory’s unseating. If so, its epitaph will be that in predicting gravitational waves, it predicted the means of its own demise.UNLESS creatures such as yeti and Bigfoot turn out to be real, the only kind of human in the modern world is Homo sapiens. But that is only recently true. For most of Homo sapiens’s 200,000-year history, it shared the planet with several cousins. The most famous were the Neanderthals, who were larger and heavier and who lived in Europe and Central Asia. Neanderthals died out 40,000 years ago. Whether they were killed off directly by modern humans or were out-competed is a perennial topic of debate. But, either way, there was more to relations between the two species than just inter-hominid rivalry. In the past decade researchers have found that between 1% and 4% of the DNA of modern Europeans and their descendants on other continents is of Neanderthal origin. There must, in other words, have been a certain amount of interbreeding going on back in the day. What is less clear is the effect today of the DNA so acquired. Neanderthal DNA is not easy to come by (it must be garnered from fossils that have been particularly well preserved), and doing extensive genetic testing on large numbers of modern humans, which is necessary to untangle the influence of even a relatively small chunk of their genomes, is expensive. Nevertheless, as they report in Science, exactly such a comparison has just been made by a team lead by Corinne Simonti of the Vanderbilt Genetics Institute, in Tennessee. Rather than doing the genetic tests themselves, Dr Simonti and her colleagues used data from the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics Network. This gave them both the medical histories and the genotypes of thousands of people. They picked out 28,416 people of European descent and compared the genomes of these individuals with genetic information recovered from the toe-bone of a Neanderthal woman that was found in a cave in Russia, in 2010. They found 135,000 bits of modern human DNA which they thought were probably of Neanderthal origin. Previous research had found such Neanderthal DNA to be especially common near parts of the genome associated with illnesses like depression, heart disease and seborrheic keratosis, a complaint in which scaly lumps form on a sufferer’s skin. Because Dr Simonti’s data included people who actually suffer from such conditions, she was able to check those associations. When she did so, she found that particular chunks of Neanderthal DNA were indeed correlated with the presence of all three complaints. And the team found a clutch of other phenomena for which Neanderthal genes seemed to put their carriers at additional risk. These ranged from obesity and blood-clotting disorders to certain types of malnutrition, and even smoking. At first blush this seems to suggest Neanderthal DNA is a curse. But that is almost certainly not the case. Forty millennia is plenty of time for evolution to get to work. This means that unfavourable traits should have been weeded out, while beneficial ones spread. There is evidence of exactly this. Some parts of the human genome are unusually free from Neanderthal influence, suggesting natural selection has removed harmful genes. Other parts, where Neanderthal DNA presumably offers benefits, are full of the stuff. And just because something is bad for modern humans does not necessarily mean it was bad for their hunting-and-gathering ancestors. Some genes might put their bearers at risk of obesity in the modern world of fatty, sugary snacks. But in a world where food is scarce (as it presumably was in the northern latitudes where modern humans and Neanderthals mixed), those same genes might help their owners through lean periods. Neanderthal DNA seems to put modern humans at risk of a specific sort of malnutrition caused by a lack of thiamine, a B vitamin that is vital for carbohydrate metabolism. But, says Dr Simonti, that same genetic variant may also make it easier to digest fats. Millennia ago, when people obtained less of their energy from refined carbohydrates, the trade-off may have been worthwhile. In a world where grain crops have become a staple food, it may not be. Finally, and most prosaically, Dr Simonti and her colleagues were looking at medical records. These, by definition, will contain information only about diseases. Evolution is often a trade-off, and for Neanderthal DNA to have survived as long as it has, it must offer some advantages to those carrying it. For the time being, exactly what those advantages are is a mystery. But more research will surely illuminate them.The shadows are Synechocystis cells. The arrows indicate the direction of illumination SCEPTICS of evolution often point to the human eye and ask how such a complex object could have evolved when the imperfection of any part of it would cause the whole thing to be useless. It is a silly argument, confusing imperfection with simplicity. Simpler eyes than a human’s can work perfectly well, even if they do not produce such sophisticated images. And now what is probably the simplest eye imaginable has been described. It consists of a single cell—and a bacterial cell, to boot. But because it is a bacterium, this simplest-possible eye is also an entire organism. The organism in question is Synechocystis. It belongs to a group called the cyanobacteria which, like plants, can photosynthesise. (Indeed, the photosynthetic elements of plant cells, known as chloroplasts, are thought by most biologists to be the descendants of cyanobacteria that teamed up symbiotically with the first single-celled algae.) Cyanobacteria have been known for over a century to be phototactic, meaning they can orient in the direction of, and travel towards, light sources. Synechocystis, whose cells are spherical and three microns across, is among these phototactic species. It propels itself across surfaces using protuberances called pili. Nils Schuergers of the University of Freiburg, in Germany, and his colleagues wanted to find out how it knows where to go and, as they write in eLife, they think they have the answer.   Their first thought was that pigmented structures inside Synechocystis cells were acting as shades, meaning the illuminated side of a cell would receive more light than the far side. That would tell the bacterium which direction to travel in. But this turns out not to be the case. In fact, as the picture shows, the side of a cell opposite the light source actually lights up. Like a glass bead, the entire bacterial cell acts as a lens, focusing light on the point on the cell wall farthest from the source. From the image thus formed (though by a mechanism as yet unelucidated) Synechocystis can thus work out which direction the life-sustaining light is coming from, and travel towards it.LIVERS and alcohol do not get on well together. That is well known. But precisely how alcohol destroys the liver of someone who drinks too much has been a mystery. Though alcohol (technically, ethanol—the type of alcohol that has two carbon atoms and is produced by yeast fermentation) wreaks some damage directly, experiments suggest this is by no means the whole explanation. The serious and irreversible harm of cirrhosis seems to have another cause, hitherto unknown. Now, though, perhaps it has been unmasked. For a team of medical researchers led by Bernd Schnabl of the University of California, San Diego suggest the culprit is alcohol’s effect on the gut, and the bacteria therein. Fortunately for those who like a pint or a dram, the liver is a regenerative marvel. New cells constantly take the places of old ones. Indeed, huge chunks can be cut from the organ, only to grow back within days. This is just as well, for one of the liver’s tasks is to deal with the stream of toxic chemicals people ingest as part of their food and drink. Ethanol is one of these. Though large quantities may induce a build-up of hepatic fat known as steatosis, abstinence will often reverse this. But even the liver can stand only so much. The scarring involved in cirrhosis is a one-way trip that ends in the organ’s failure. One curiosity is that certain antibiotics seem to ameliorate alcohol’s effect on the liver. The livers of mice given antibiotics which clear their intestines of bacteria before they are dosed with ethanol suffer far less damage than those of similar animals not so dosed. Five years ago that knowledge prompted Dr Schnabl to start looking into the relationship between alcohol and gut bacteria. His latest findings have just been published in Cell Host and Microbe. Over the course of his research Dr Schnabl found that heavy consumption of alcohol hampers the intestine’s antibacterial defence system. In particular, it suppresses production of two proteins called REG3B lectin and REG3G lectin. These keep the number of bacteria in the gut under control, so their sudden absence leads to a population explosion. And that, Dr Schnabl hypothesised, lets bacteria escape through the intestinal wall to the liver. To test this idea he designed an experiment. For eight weeks, he and his colleagues fed ethanol both to ordinary mice and to mice genetically engineered to lack the two pertinent lectin molecules. They also engineered some of the rodents’ gut bugs to make the bacteria in question fluoresce. This let them track these bugs, and see if any left the intestines. They did. As the mice were exposed to more and more alcohol, the glow-in-the-dark bacteria underwent population explosions that let them escape the intestines. Once out, they migrated to the liver, where they triggered strong immune reactions. These drew large numbers of white blood cells into the liver, causing inflammation. The white cells themselves engulf and consume bacteria, but prolonged inflammation also damages host tissue. Both groups of mice were affected, but the effect was more intense in the lectin-deficient animals. In both their livers and their intestines, their bacterial populations were 50% larger than those of the control mice. As a consequence, they ended up with livers that were much more badly damaged. The researchers then tried things in reverse. They ran the experiment with mice engineered to produce more lectins than normal, and found these animals could endure extensive exposure to alcohol without developing large bacterial populations or showing any signs of liver damage. All this suggests that tinkering with the gut bacteria of alcoholic people might help. Dr Schnabl has started to look into the matter by studying the bacterial populations of eight alcoholics and comparing them with those of five non-alcoholics. Preliminary results indicate that the findings from mice apply to human beings, too. Finding a way to boost REG3-lectin production in those who drink too much might thus do them a power of good.
