North Korea declared that it had launched a satellite into space, violating UN sanctions. The launch is likely to have been a cover for testing a long-range ballistic missile. Days later reports surfaced that the army chief of staff, Ri Yong Gil, had been executed. He was one of several bigwigs to have been purged recently by the dictator, Kim Jong Un. Meanwhile, South Korea, displeased at the launch and at an earlier underground nuclear test, shut the industrial park at Kaesong that it operates with North Korea. See article.  A “fishball riot” broke out in Hong Kong following reports that officials were trying to clear unlicensed food-hawkers from a working-class neighbourhood. More than 120 people were injured, including 90 police. Members of a political group called Hong Kong Indigenous, which wants the territory to be more separate from China, played a prominent role. See article.  Celebrations in Beijing of the lunar new year were somewhat quieter than usual. At the start of the holiday, workers swept away 400 tonnes of firework debris from the streets, down by more than a third compared with last year. Worries about pollution, as well as a slowing economy, may have dampened sales. The prime minister of Australia, Malcolm Turnbull, admitted that attempts to improve the lives of Aborigines were falling short. Infant mortality has fallen and the proportion of Aboriginal students who finish high school has nearly doubled. But Aborigines die younger and are more likely to be unemployed than non-indigenous Australians. Show of force Ahead of a two-day meeting of NATO defence ministers in Brussels, Germany and Turkey proposed that the alliance set up patrols in the Aegean Sea to police refugee flows. Meanwhile the European Commission drew up a list of steps it expects Greece to take to improve the situation of asylum-seekers. The lower chamber of the French parliament voted on a proposal to write into the constitution the power to strip French nationality from dual citizens who are convicted of terrorism. The amendment was adopted but divided both the majority and the opposition. This was not the final vote, but it was a test for François Hollande, the French president, who needs three-fifths of the votes in both chambers. Two trains crashed in Germany leaving ten people dead and more than 80 injured. Five years on… Fears grew of a new humanitarian catastrophe in Syria, as forces loyal to Bashar al-Assad, backed by heavy Russian bombing, came close to encircling Aleppo, where 300,000 people are in danger of being cut off and starved. UN investigators accused the Syrian government of a crime against humanity, after a report found that detainees are being killed on a massive scale, amounting to a state policy of civilian “extermination”. See article.  A grandson of Ayatollah Khomeini, who led Iran’s Islamic revolution, will not be allowed to stand in this month’s election in Iran, the body charged with vetting candidates reaffirmed. Hassan Khomeini is seen as a reformist. A plane leaving Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, survived what appears to have been a blast that killed only the suspected suicide-bomber. The bomb exploded after take-off, blowing a hole above the wing of the plane out of which the bomber was sucked. No one else died. Encouraging peace Barack Obama said he would ask Congress for $450m to help Colombia implement a peace agreement with the FARC, a guerrilla group with which Colombia’s government has been at war for more than 50 years. Among other things, the “Peace Colombia” aid package will help pay for clearing mines. Colombia’s government and the FARC have set March 23rd as a deadline to sign a peace deal. Haiti’s president, Michel Martelly, left office as scheduled, but without handing power to a successor. A run-off vote in the presidential election was postponed until April after several candidates complained of irregularities in October’s first round. Parliament is to select an interim president. Anabel Flores Salazar, a crime reporter for a newspaper in the Mexican state of Veracruz, was kidnapped from her home by at least eight uniformed men and murdered. Her body was found on a road in the neighbouring state of Puebla. Six journalists who lived or worked in Veracruz have been killed since 2011. The government of Argentina offered a partial repayment to bondholders whose refusal to accept a debt restructuring prompted the country to default in 2014. It is offering $6.5 billion to bondholders, who are claiming $9 billion. Fulfilling an election promise, Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said that the country will stop bombing Islamic State in Iraq and Syria by February 22nd. It is to withdraw six jets but will continue to refuel aircraft flown by its allies, keep two surveillance planes in the region and triple its number of troops training Kurdish fighters. Bern, baby, Bern In the New Hampshire primary Bernie Sanders won on the Democratic side, beating Hillary Clinton by a stonking 60% to 38%. Donald Trump came first in the Republican contest with 35%. The winning margins for both men were bigger than had been forecast. John Kasich came second in the Republican primary on 16%, followed by Ted Cruz, Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio. Support for the party’s mainstream challengers to Mr Trump was split. See article.  After their poor placing in the primary Chris Christie and Carly Fiorina pulled out of the Republican race. America’s Supreme Court temporarily halted the implementation of the Clean Power Plan, the backbone of Barack Obama’s policy to cut emissions from power plants. The plan gives states leeway over achieving this, but some contend it is too burdensome. The White House sent its budget to Congress. The document was deemed dead on arrival, as Republican leaders are this year forgoing the traditional charade of even pretending to listen to the administration’s budget director at public hearings. See article. More KAL's cartoonsIT IS like a hash-induced hallucination: row upon row of lush, budding plants, tended by white-coated technicians who are bothered by the authorities only when it is time to pay their taxes. Cannabis once grew in secret, traded by murderous cartels and smoked by consumers who risked jail. Now, countries all over the world have licensed the drug for medical purposes, and a few are going still further (see article). Four American states have so far legalised its recreational use; little Uruguay will soon be joined by big, G7-member Canada in the legal-weed club. Parliaments from Mexico to South Africa are debating reforms of their own. Those (including this newspaper) who have argued that legalisation is better than prohibition will welcome the beginning of the end of the futile war on weed. Cannabis accounts for nearly half the $300 billion illegal narcotics market, and is the drug of choice for most of the world’s 250m illicit-drug users. Legalising it deprives organised crime of its single biggest source of income, while protecting and making honest citizens of consumers. Yet the repeal of prohibition marks the start of complex arguments about how to regulate cannabis. What sound like details for bureaucrats—how to tax it, which varieties to allow, who should sell it and to whom—are questions that force policymakers to decide which of legalisation’s competing aims they value most. Trailblazers like Canada are writing rules that the rest of the world will copy; once laid down, they will be hard to uproot. Getting these decisions right will ultimately determine whether legalisation succeeds or fails. Have your hash cake and eat it Legalisation’s proponents are an odd mix of libertarians, who want to maximise personal and commercial freedom, and conservatives, who grasp that prohibition is less effective than pragmatic legalisation and regulation. The hippies and hardliners created a powerful alliance for legalisation. But when asked to say exactly how the cannabis trade should work—at what rate to set taxes or whether to place limits on consumption, for instance—they can find themselves at odds. Libertarians may ask why cannabis, which has no known lethal dose, should be regulated at all for adults who can make free, informed decisions. There are two reasons for care. First, cannabis appears to induce dependency in a minority of users, meaning the decision whether to light up is not a free one. Second, cannabis’s illegality means that the research on its long-term effects is hazy, so even the most informed decision is based on incomplete information. When decisions are neither always free nor fully informed, the state is justified in steering consumers away, as it does from alcohol and tobacco. Hence the libertarians must cede ground. States can tax users to deter consumption—though not so much as to make consumers turn first to the untaxed black market. The “right” level of tax will depend on a country’s circumstances. In Latin America, where abuse is rare and the black market is bloody and powerful, governments should keep prices low. In the rich world, where problem use is more common and drug-dealers are a nuisance rather than a threat to national security, prices could be higher. One model is the United States after Prohibition: alcohol taxes were set low at first, to drive out the bootleggers; later, with the Mafia gone, they were ramped up. A similar trade-off applies when determining what products to allow. Cannabis no longer means just joints. Legal entrepreneurs have cooked up pot-laced food and drink, reaching customers who might have avoided smoking the stuff. Ultra-strong “concentrates” are on offer to be inhaled or swallowed. Edibles and stronger strains help put the illegal dealers out of business, but they also risk encouraging more people to take the drug, and in stronger forms. The starting-point should be to legalise only what is already available on the black market. That would mean capping or taxing potency, much as spirits are taxed more steeply and are less available than beer. Again, the mix will vary. Europe may be able to ban concentrates. America already has a taste for them. If the product were outlawed there the mob would gladly step in.  In one respect, governments should be decidedly illiberal. Advertising is largely absent in the underworld, but in the legal world it could stimulate vast new demand. It should be banned. Likewise, alluring packaging and products, such as cannabis sweets that would appeal to children, should be outlawed, just as many countries outlaw flavoured cigarettes and alcohol-spiked sweets. The state should use the tax system and public education to promote the least harmful ways of getting high. The legal market has already created pot’s answer to the e-cigarette, which reduces the damage done by smoke to lungs. INTERACTIVE MAP: Marijuana and the disjointed states of America In America the federal ban on cannabis means the task of writing its first regulations has fallen to overstretched civil servants in a few small states. Testing potency, setting safe-driving limits and solving a hundred other puzzles is no easier when the federal agencies that would normally advise them (such as the Food and Drug Administration, the world’s most advanced pharmaceutical regulator) are sitting on their hands. And the absence of federal curbs on pot advertising means that the drug is more widely promoted than tobacco, by companies pleading the First Amendment. The federal government’s wait-and-see policy sounds prudent; in fact it is irresponsible. Be cautious, but be bold Campaigners for and against legalisation need to adjust to the new reality, too. Those who would rather ban the drug should stop flogging the dead horse of prohibition and start campaigning for versions of legalisation that do the least harm (just as the temperance movement these days lobbies for higher taxes on booze, rather than a ban). Legalisers, meanwhile, should open their eyes to the fact that the legal marijuana industry, which until now has only had to prove itself more worthy than organised criminals, now needs as much scrutiny as the other “sin” industries that defend their turf jealously. Rather than one day having to take on Big Cannabis, it would be better to get policy on pot right from the start.ON SOCIAL media the rioting that erupted in Hong Kong on February 8th has been dressed up as a righteous political protest: “#FishballRevolution” is the hashtag used to discuss the violence that racked a working-class district of the city for ten hours, resulting in injuries to 124 people, including 90 police officers (see article). The mayhem was triggered by reports that officials were trying to clear away illegal food stalls selling fishballs, a local delicacy. In no sense was the violence righteous. Most Hong Kong residents were appalled. Their city is renowned for the peacefulness of its many protests. In an unusually prolonged outbreak of unrest late in 2014, known as the Umbrella Movement, pro-democracy protesters mostly remained on good terms with police. Not since the 1960s, during the madness of Mao’s Cultural Revolution in mainland China, have the territory’s streets seen such bloodshed. Nonetheless, #FishballRevolution was undeniably political. Activists from a group called Hong Kong Indigenous, which stresses Hong Kong’s separateness from mainland China, were involved in the mêlée. Their pretext was the protection of a cherished tradition—eating from food stalls during the Chinese new-year holiday—from zealous officialdom. Hong Kong Indigenous is a fringe group. Officials will be tempted to dismiss its resort to violence as an aberration over a triviality. In fact the central government in Beijing, and that of Hong Kong, should see what happened as evidence of social and political discontent. They have a role in putting it right. When the Umbrella Movement eventually sputtered to an end in December 2014, both governments hoped that the public’s misgivings would abate. China had refrained from leaning on Hong Kong’s government to follow up its tear-gas assaults on the Umbrella protesters with even tougher measures and the tactic was quickly abandoned. But China also turned a deaf ear to the demonstrators’ demands for fully democratic elections for the territory’s leadership. Leung Chun-ying, the unpopular chief executive, showed no willingness to explain the protesters’ anxieties to his overlords in Beijing. As a result, resentment towards officials has grown. The emergence of radical groups such as Hong Kong Indigenous is an extreme manifestation of the simmering discontent. Fears of China’s influence are evident even in debates about building transport links with the mainland (see article). Anxieties have been fuelled by the apparent abduction in recent months of five Hong Kong booksellers by Chinese agents—three while visiting mainland China, one from a resort in Thailand and another from Hong Kong itself. Many suspect that the men were “disappeared” because of plans to publish a tell-tale book about China’s president, Xi Jinping. A fine kettle of fishballs The months ahead in Hong Kong will not be calm. Elections will be held this year for the Legislative Council; and there will be a (rigged) election in 2017 for the chief executive. Mr Leung could help reduce tensions by launching a thorough investigation of the recent violence, including its social causes. Young people are concerned not just about high politics, but also about everyday issues such as unemployment and house prices. But it is China’s government that most urgently needs to act: by releasing the booksellers, apologising for their treatment and heeding calls for political reform. Above all, it needs to recognise that its “one country, two systems” formula depends on preserving Hong Kong’s freewheeling way of life. It should seek to persuade the people of Hong Kong to see themselves as Chinese through attraction, not intimidation.FOR those who worry that a repeat of the crisis of 2007-08 is imminent, this week brought fresh omens. Shares of big banks tumbled; despite a mid-week rally, American lenders are down by 19% this year, European ones by 24% (see article). The cost of insuring banks’ debts against default rose sharply, especially in Europe. The boss of Deutsche Bank felt obliged to declare that the institution he runs is “absolutely rock solid”; Germany’s finance minister professed to have no concerns (thereby adding to the concerns). This is not 2008: big banks are not about to topple. But there are reasons to worry, and many of them converge on one country. Start with the better news. Banks are more strongly capitalised than they were. Even in Europe, where lenders have been slower than their American counterparts to raise capital, banks have plumped up their core equity cushions from an average of 9% in 2009 to 12.5% in 2015. Managers at European banks are making a renewed effort to adjust to the post-crisis landscape. New rules on everything from capital to liquidity are forcing them to change. John Cryan, Deutsche’s newish co-chief executive, was brought in to trim its investment bank. He is jettisoning whole divisions, and suspended the dividend this year and last. Credit Suisse is undergoing similar surgery. Just now, this is weighing on the banks’ share prices. Yet, however painful for investors, the sensible goal is ultimately to create slimmer, safer, more profitable outfits. Also salutary, if painful, is how investors in bank debt are coming to understand that they bear greater risk than they did. New European rules that came fully into force at the start of this year stipulate that troubled banks must deal with capital shortfalls by “bailing in” holders of bank bonds before any call is made on the taxpayer. The chance that bondholders might lose money suddenly seems more real. The turmoil at Deutsche this week stemmed partly from fear that the bank might struggle to pay interest next year on a type of bond that is designed to act as a buffer in a crisis (see article). There are some design flaws in the bail-in regime, but the possibility that European banks are at last repairing themselves at a cost to their investors is the silver lining to this week’s spasms. The clouds, alas, still loom. One source of anxiety is the health of the world economy. The factors that spook markets more broadly—the slowdown in China, plunging commodity prices and indebted energy firms, political upheaval from Greece to New Hampshire—all weigh heavily on banks in particular. Banks do well when the economies they serve are growing, and miserably when they are not. The receding prospect of higher interest rates leaves American banks with less hope of widening the margin between the rates they pay depositors and what they charge for loans. In Japan, where bank shares have fallen by 24% this month, and Europe central banks have imposed negative rates, in effect levying a fee on some reserves—one that banks have not yet been able to pass on to depositors. With the economic outlook growing gloomier, margins being squeezed and restructuring costs still hitting profits, investors have good reason to fret. Worse, some countries appear to have taken so long to deal with their banks that they will now struggle to clean them up at all. The IMF reckons that the total amount of non-performing debt in Europe was around €1 trillion ($1.13 trillion) at the end of 2014. Bail-in is an especially ugly prospect in countries where bank debt is owned not only by diversified financial institutions but also by local retail investors. Under such conditions, politicians may find that they cannot force the cost of cleaning up balance-sheets on voters without causing uproar. Rome is where the hurt is No country is more impaled on this dilemma than Italy. The gross value of non-performing loans makes up a whopping 18% of their total lending; retail investors own some €200 billion of bank bonds, equivalent to 12% of GDP. A government plan to buy bad debts from the banks at close to face value would fall foul of European rules against “state aid”. But selling the loans at a significant discount would force Italian banks to recognise losses, some of which could be borne by retail investors. The prime minister, Matteo Renzi, headed down this road late last year, when the efforts to save four small banks clobbered the savings of individual Italians and seemingly resulted in a high-profile suicide. He will not want to do so again. The European Union and the Italian government recently agreed on a half-baked alternative to bail-in, though few think it will cleanse banks’ balance-sheets. Instead Italy seems trapped between the rock of hurting small savers and the hard place of a banking system strangled by bad debts. If Mr Renzi cannot negotiate his way round the new rules on bail-in, Italy’s banks and economy risk years of more stagnation, poisoning relations with the EU. Behind this week’s banking headlines is the threat of something very bad coming out of Italy.FEW places still capture the romance (and frustration) of the early days of flight quite as Africa does. Although air travel in the continent is safer and more common than ever before (see page 53), it still has some charming anachronisms. In Nigeria everyone applauds when the plane touches down. On tiny propeller-driven planes in Botswana the cabin attendants hand you a little bag of biltong, the dried meat that once fed people on long overland treks. In Tanzania, where on some flights almost half the passengers are taking to the skies for the first time, many of the faces in the cabin betray a sense of wonder tinged with fear. Yet African airlines feel like a prop-blast from the past in regrettable ways, too. In most places, schedules are about as reliable as they were when planes could take off or land only in clear weather. Tickets are costly. Routes are convoluted: a passenger wanting to fly from Algiers to Lagos may have to go via Europe, turning a four-and-a-half-hour journey into one that takes at least nine hours. Most airlines are state-owned and protected from competition. Like a lot of national carriers elsewhere, they tend to be chronically unprofitable and to need frequent bail-outs from taxpayers. Across Africa, airlines wanting to fly new routes from one country to another need the agreement of both governments first. Getting this can take years of lobbying and, in some cases, bribes. If the airline is not owned by one of the two states, its chances of winning permission nosedive. Fastjet, a London-listed low-cost carrier with operations across Africa, had to wait three years for a green light to fly between Tanzania and neighbouring Kenya. Zimbabwe recently announced that it would not let any airline besides its national carrier fly from Harare to London—although Air Zimbabwe does not currently service this route, for fear that as soon as its planes land they will be impounded by creditors. Closed markets carry jumbo-sized costs. It is not just that badly run African state airlines lose money ($300m last year, or $3.84 for every airline ticket sold on the continent). Far bigger are the opportunity costs. Lousy air links inhibit trade, exports and investment. In many parts of the world air travel grows about twice as fast as GDP. In Africa it has been expanding by about 5% a year, which is slower than the 6% or so that economic growth has averaged over the past decade. The lesson from other parts of the world is that when markets are freed, fares fall. This stimulates a huge increase in air travel and gives a boost to all the businesses that depend on mobility. In African countries that have liberalised a bit, this has indeed happened: after a bilateral open-skies deal, fares between South Africa and Zambia fell by almost 40% and passenger numbers rose nearly as much. After Morocco opened its market to European airlines in 2005, the number of passengers jumped by 160% and the number of routes more than tripled, from 83 to 309 in eight years. A study commissioned by the International Air Transport Association (IATA), a club of big airlines, estimates that if just 12 of Africa’s bigger economies opened their skies to one another, fares would fall by more than a third and traffic between them would soar by 81%, to roughly 11m passengers. More than 155,000 new jobs would be created, and $1.3 billion would be added to GDP. This may well be an underestimate, given Africa’s vast size and sparse, shoddy road network, which is about a fifth as dense as the world average and mostly unpaved. Where air travel expands, so do unexpected new industries, such as growing roses in Kenya for export to Europe. Fly freedom In 1988 most African governments signed up to the Yamoussoukro Declaration, pledging to open their skies. To date not one has done so fully (although some, such as South Africa, have opened up a lot). Rather than encouraging competition, most African leaders seem more concerned with mollycoddling their bust national carriers. This provides jobs for pals and jets that can be commandeered for presidential shopping trips to Paris. But it is terrible for Africa. The continent will struggle to take off economically while its people are stuck on the runway. Time to let Africans fly.THE greatest of all South-East Asia’s waterways and the world’s 12th-longest river, the Mekong, is a natural wonder that ties together the destinies of half a dozen countries. Born from snowmelt at over 17,000 feet (5,200 metres), it bolts off the Tibetan plateau like a runaway horse; by the time it leaves China it is starting to slow and spread. When it reaches Cambodia, via Laos, it is tropical and ample and, with the monsoon rains, parts of it curiously change the direction of their flow. Farther down, it reaches the South China Sea through a filigree delta. The Mekong watershed nurtures extraordinary biodiversity, with new species of plants and animals discovered every year. It has also nurtured humans. Tens of millions of people—much of the population of Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam—depend on the Mekong. Its fish are their protein and its delta is the world’s rice basket. No wonder its name, in Thai or Lao, means “mother of rivers”.   Planners think the mother has one more gift to give: hydropower. China has 14 dams planned or under construction on its stretch of the Mekong in Yunnan province, joining six already built. Today the river is undammed below China, but that will soon change. Laos has nine dams planned or under way; Cambodia has two. Dozens more dams for tributaries are on the drawing board. To the planners, the case for building dams is obvious: they generate electricity and much-needed cash. Poor, landlocked Laos wants to become the dynamo of South-East Asia, selling its energy to Thailand and others; it dreams of hydropower becoming its biggest earner in just a decade. Long wretchedly poor, the Mekong region is now booming. Hydropower will help meet its energy demands, which are expected to double over the next ten years. Yet there are flaws in the planners’ case. For one, they overestimate the river’s potential. At most, says the Mekong River Commission (MRC), the intergovernmental body charged with co-ordinating the river’s management, dams will meet just 8% of the lower Mekong basin’s projected power needs. Worse, the planners underestimate the harm that dams will do to ecosystems as well as to food security. As our essay on the Mekong points out (see article), dams threaten the stocks of migratory fish on which many South-East Asians depend. Farmland will either become less productive because less sediment reaches it from upstream, or disappear under rising river levels or, in the delta, suffer incursions of salt water. The dams, in other words, come at a high environmental cost, imperil food security and, far from increasing overall prosperity, promise to aggravate the poverty of millions of people. They may also increase regional tensions. China and Laos will reap most of the hydropower benefits, while downstream Cambodia and Vietnam pay most of the price. The biggest problem with the dam-building schemes is their lack of co-ordination. An individual dam, high up the river system, would not be a big worry, especially if it was fitted with ladders for migrating fish and the like. But the question is not what one dam will do. It is what 25 of them will do, and how each will affect the next. The dams’ sponsors are not thinking about that. Just keep it rollin’ along Isn’t this the MRC’s task? Well, yes, and it tries to do its job. But it has no enforcement power, struggles to promote good river management and is woefully short of cash. Besides, China, the Mekong’s biggest threat, refuses to be a member. The MRC proposes a ten-year moratorium on dam-building, and has urged studies of hydropower projects, such as run-of-the-river schemes, that would not block the Mekong’s flow. That is prudent advice; but few governments are listening. The scale of the harm that damming the Mekong might cause is huge, and would be irreversible. Without giving enough thought to what they are about to undertake, governments are messing dangerously with the mother of all rivers.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Property deals in Bosnia I’d like to add some points to your article on Arab investment in Bosnia (“Ottoman comfort”, January 23rd). Land-development deals are being made in a completely non-transparent manner. Officials with the necessary party and foreign ties are making favourable deals with Arab investors without input from the broader community. Some of the land being sold is public, and municipal officials are playing fast and loose with zoning regulations to clinch deals. There are reports that private landowners (often non-Muslims who remained after the war in what are now majority-Muslim areas) are being pressured to sell as foreign buyers seek large land holdings. Beyond the value of developments catering to other Arab buyers, the aim of these investments is seemingly less about profit and more about longer-term presence and influence. The only Bosnians “delighted” about these deals are the elites who directly profit from them. The residents in this still-divided society are troubled by opaque terms that will result in gated communities, catering to thousands of foreign nationals. There is a marked difference between favourable globalisation and open markets, and the narrow economic fruits of poor governance, weak rule of law and corruption. VALERY PERRY African energy Regarding your article on stalled electrification plans in Africa (“Power hungry”, January 9th), electricity-distribution companies across the continent are generally state-owned and governments are usually the largest electricity consumers. They are the main culprits for either late or non-payment. What does a state-owned electricity company do when its owner and biggest customer doesn’t pay? The generators of that energy are then not paid or paid in arrears. The shortfall in generation is plugged using emergency diesel generators at four times the cost of grid power. This is symptomatic of a greater failure in sub-Saharan energy markets. Schemes such as Barack Obama’s Power Africa plan are welcome, but the focus should be on reforming markets and recapitalising and privatising distribution companies under qualified, accountable management. A functioning power market will attract foreign capital for expansion, which is vital for broader economic growth and poverty alleviation in Africa. DIARMUID TWOMEY The battle of backwater loos The debate over making restrooms inclusive to transgender people is too narrow (“Restroom rumpus”, January 30th). Rethinking restrooms for all genders would better serve families by, for example, letting a father with a daughter or a caregiver looking after someone from the opposite sex take them to the toilet. Public restrooms don’t meet modern society’s needs in many ways. JENNIFER GEREND Batteries not included * I was surprised that you cited lithium-ion batteries as the “technology of our time” (“A plug for the battery”, January 16th). A consensus is emerging within the industry that electricity storage will require a number of complementary technologies. Where there is no one dominant technology, the suitability of a storage system depends on how and where it is going to be used. You highlighted the limitations of lithium in storing grid-scale power which alternatives can address. Flow batteries, for example, store energy in tanks of liquid electrolyte and so neatly sidestep this problem, since more energy can be stored through a simple increase in tank size. Vanadium, the most commonly used metal in flow battery technology, is a significantly more plentiful element, and therefore does not suffer from the supply restrictions which you rightly noted are driving up prices. Based upon US Geological Survey resource data and current usage, we have 1000 years supply of vanadium. Whilst lithium has enjoyed success in short duration applications, it is longer duration services that will drive the de-carbonisation agenda and smooth imbalances between generation and consumption. I would suggest that the flow battery is the real “technology of our time” and that it should not be eclipsed by its younger, and often noisier, cousin. Natural-born thriller Although Ted Cruz is an American citizen by virtue of his mother, it is simply not the case that “his eligibility to be president is beyond serious doubt” (“Outsiders’ chance”, January 30th). Mr Cruz was born in Canada. The phrasing in Article II of the constitution requires that “No person except a natural-born citizen… shall be eligible for the office of president.” Neither the constitution nor statutory law defines “natural born”. As a former foreign-service officer, I point you to volume seven of the “Foreign Affairs Manual”, section 1131.6-2: “It has never been determined definitively by a court whether a person who acquired US citizenship by birth abroad to US citizens is a natural-born citizen within the meaning of Article II of the constitution and, therefore, eligible for the presidency.” Thus, “the fact that someone is a natural-born citizen pursuant to a statute does not necessarily imply that he or she is such a citizen for constitutional purposes.” HOWIE MUIR In the pipeline * Regarding the global market for natural gas (“Step on it”, January 30th) one area to watch is the development of a liquid wholesale natural gas market in China. Domestic consumption is growing and there is diversity and competition of supply sources. Important policy changes are forthcoming from the National Development and Reform Commission, including third-party access to gas pipelines and potential pipeline sales. The infrastructure is being restructured. China could finally be the answer to the “Asian Gas Index”, providing a long awaited reference for LNG contracts in the region, and playing the role of the Henry Hub index in the East. An Economist reader passes I am writing to tell you of the death of Martin Bud, possibly The Economist’s longest-ever subscriber. He received his subscription on his 18th birthday in January 1938, and his last copy was delivered after more than 78 years of uninterrupted readership. His life was in many ways a mirror of the 20th century. Born Jewish in Weimar Berlin to the family of a self-made economist and banker, his mother died of appendicitis when he was four, in the age before antibiotics. Returning from school one day he found himself between a great crowd and a motorcade, face to face with Hitler. His family escaped as refugees to England in 1935, where he qualified as an accountant with PriceWaterhouse. His father stopped him from joining the Republicans in the Spanish civil war and later the British army. At the family firm, ENM, he developed sophisticated research tools for sales forecasting, which would later form the basis for some celebrated work by the music industry on modelling the long tail of digital consumption. In the 1960s he pioneered the use of microelectronics by British industry. The years after ENM’s purchase were difficult, as this heir to the German industrial tradition chafed at what he felt was the plutocratic, lax and irrational management of the new owners. He later supplied equipment to many of the world’s state lotteries, and enjoyed working in an industry which thrived by applying rational reasoning to the irrational. His wife of 58 years, Hanna, was a research chemist with Margaret Thatcher at J. Lyons Research. In 2009 the producers of Harry Potter wanted to use his house as a location. He conducted negotiations for the complex contract entirely in verse. ANDREW BUD Pioneers of punk More than a few elderly New Yorkers would dispute whether the “place of punk rock’s birth in 1976” was the King’s Road in London (“Punk reaches middle age”, January 30th). The Ramones, were playing punk rock in New York in 1974. When I lived in London in 1978 my landlady complained that punk was an evil American influence. PETER WEVERKA Death to the collaborators! Schumpeter is one smart dude for capturing the destructive underbelly of technology’s tidal wave of collaboration and consequent disruption (January 23rd). He would do well to read “The Circle” by Dave Eggers, a chilling story that would leave him even more despondent. RICHARD HETKE Collaboration also allows ineffective employees to skirt responsibility. As the saying goes, meetings are the practical alternative to work. TIMOTHY KLAAS * Letters appear online onlyIN AN anonymous-looking building a few minutes’ drive from Denver International Airport, a bald chemotherapy patient and a pair of giggling tourists eye the stock on display. Reeking packets of mossy green buds—Girl Scout Cookies, KoolAid Kush, Power Cheese—sit alongside cabinets of chocolates and chilled drinks. In a warehouse behind the shop pointy-leaved plants bask in the artificial light of two-storey growing rooms. Sally Vander Veer, the president of Medicine Man, which runs this dispensary, reckons the inventory is worth about $4m. America, and the world, are going to see a lot more such establishments. Since California’s voters legalised the sale of marijuana for medical use in 1996, 22 more states, plus the District of Columbia, have followed suit; in a year’s time the number is likely to be nearer 30. Sales to cannabis “patients” whose conditions range from the serious to the notional are also legal elsewhere in the Americas (Colombia is among the latest to license the drug) and in much of Europe. On February 10th Australia announced similar plans. Now a growing number of jurisdictions are legalising the sale of cannabis for pure pleasure—or impure, if you prefer. In 2014 the American states of Colorado and Washington began sales of recreational weed; Oregon followed suit last October and Alaska will soon join them. They are all places where the drug is already popular (see chart 1). Jamaica has legalised ganja for broadly defined religious purposes. Spain allows users to grow and buy weed through small collectives. Uruguay expects to begin non-medicinal sales through pharmacies by August.   Canada’s government plans to legalise cannabis next year, making it the first G7 country to do so. But it may not be the largest pot economy for long; California is one of several states where ballot initiatives to legalise cannabis could well pass in America’s November elections. A majority of Americans are in favour of such changes (see chart 2). Legalisers argue that regulated markets protect consumers, save the police money, raise revenues and put criminals out of business as well as extending freedom. Though it will be years before some of these claims can be tested, the initial results are encouraging: a big bite has been taken out of the mafia’s market, thousands of young people have been spared criminal records and hundreds of millions of dollars have been legitimately earned and taxed. There has so far been no explosion in consumption, nor of drug-related crime. To get the most of these benefits, though, requires more than just legalisation. To live outside the law, Bob Dylan memorably if unconvincingly claimed, you must be honest; to live inside it you must be regulated. Ms Vander Veer points to a “two-inch thick” book of rules applicable to Medicine Man’s business. Such rules should depend on which of legalisation’s benefits a jurisdiction wants to prioritise and what harms it wants to minimise. The first consideration is how much protection users need. As far as anyone has been able to establish (and some have tried very hard indeed) it is as good as impossible to die of a marijuana overdose. But the drug has downsides. Being stoned can lead to other calamities: in the past two years Colorado has seen three deaths associated with cannabis use (one fall, one suicide and one alleged murder, in which the defendant claims the pot made him do it). There may have been more. Colorado has seen an increase in the proportion of drivers involved in accidents who test positive for the drug, though there has been no corresponding rise in traffic fatalities. The chronic harm done by the drug is still a matter for debate. Heavy cannabis use is associated with mental illness, but researchers struggle to establish the direction of causality; a tendency to mental illness may lead to drug use. It may also be the case that some are more susceptible to harm than others. Jonathan Caulkins of Carnegie Mellon University has found that cannabis users are more likely than alcohol drinkers to say the drug has caused them problems at work or at home. It is an imperfect comparison because most cannabis users are, by definition, lawbreakers, and therefore perhaps more prone to such problems. Nonetheless it is clear that pot is, in Mr Caulkins’ words, a “performance-degrading drug”. What’s more, some struggle to give it up: in America 14% of people who used pot in the past month meet the criteria by which doctors define dependence. As in the alcohol and tobacco markets, about 80% of consumption is accounted for by the heaviest-using 20% of users. Startlingly, Mr Caulkins calculates that in America more than half of all cannabis is consumed by people who are high for more than half their waking hours. INTERACTIVE MAP: Marijuana and the disjointed states of America To complicate matters, the public-health effects of cannabis should not be looked at in isolation. If taking up weed made people less likely to consume cigarettes or alcohol it might offer net benefits. But if people treat cannabis and other drugs as complements—that is, if doing more pot makes them smoke more tobacco or guzzle more alcohol—an increase in use could be a big public-health problem. No one yet knows which is more likely. A review of mostly American studies by the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, found mixed evidence on the relationship between cannabis and alcohol. Demand for tobacco seems to go up along with demand for cannabis, though the two are hard to separate because, in Europe at least, they are often smoked together. The data regarding other drugs are more limited. Proponents of the Dutch “coffee shop” system, which allows purchase and consumption in specific places, argue that legalisation keeps users away from dealers who may push them on to harder substances. And there is some evidence that cannabis functions as a substitute for prescription opioids, such as OxyContin, which kill 15,000 Americans each year. People used to worry that cigarettes were a “gateway” to cannabis, and that cannabis was in turn a gateway to hard drugs. It may be the reverse: cannabis could be a useful restraint on the abuse of opioids, but a dangerous pathway to tobacco. More bong for your buck Danger and harm are not in themselves a reason to make or keep things illegal. But the available evidence persuades many supporters of legalisation that cannabis consumption should still be discouraged. The simplest way to do so is to keep the drug expensive; children and heavy users, both good candidates for deterrence, are particularly likely to be cost sensitive. And keeping prices up through taxes has political appeal that goes beyond public health. Backers of California’s main legalisation measure make much of the annual $1 billion that could flow to state coffers. Setting the right level for the tax, though, is challenging. Go too low and you encourage use. Aim too high and you lose one of the other benefits of legalisation: closing down a criminal black market. Comparing Colorado and Washington illustrates the trade-off. Colorado has set its pot taxes fairly low, at 28% (including an existing sales tax). It has also taken a relaxed approach to licensing sellers; marijuana dispensaries outnumber Starbucks. Washington initially set its taxes higher, at an effective rate of 44%, and was much more conservative with licences for growers and vendors. That meant that when its legalisation effort got under way in 2014, the average retail price was about $25 per gram, compared with Colorado’s $15. The price of black-market weed (mostly an inferior product) in both states was around $10. The effect on crime seems to have been as one would predict. Colorado’s authorities reckon licensed sales—about 90 tonnes a year—now meet 70% of total estimated demand, with much of the rest covered by a “grey” market of legally home-grown pot illegally sold. In Washington licensed sales accounted for only about 30% of the market in 2014, according to Roger Roffman of the University of Washington. Washington’s large, untaxed and rather wild-west “medical” marijuana market accounts for a lot of the rest. Still, most agree that Colorado’s lower prices have done more to make life hard for organised crime. Uruguay also plans to set prices comparable to those that illegal dealers offer. “We intend to compete with the illicit market in price, quality and safety,” says Milton Romani, secretary-general of the National Drug Board. To avoid this competitively priced supply encouraging more use, the country will limit the amount that can be sold to any particular person over a month. In America, where such restrictions (along with the register of consumers needed to police them) would probably be rejected, it will be harder to stop prices for legal grass low enough to shut down the black market from also encouraging greater use. Indeed, since legalisation consumption in Colorado appears to have edged up a few percentage points among both adults and under-21s, who in theory shouldn’t be able to get hold of it at all; that said, a similar trend was apparent before legalisation, and the data are sparse. If, starved of sales, the black market shrinks beyond a point of no return, taxes could later go up, restoring the deterrent. There is precedent for this. When the prohibition of alcohol ended in 1933, Joseph Choate of America’s Federal Alcohol Control Administration recommended “keeping the tax burden on legal alcoholic beverages comparatively low in the earlier post-prohibition period in order to permit the legal industry to offer more severe competition to its illegal competitor.” After three years, he estimated, with the mob “driven from business, the tax burden could be gradually increased.” And so it was (see chart 3). Those taxes reflected the strength of what was for sale; taxing whiskey more than beer made sense as a deterrent to drunkenness. Here, so far, the regulation of cannabis lags behind. The levies on price or weight used by America’s legalising states are easy to administer, but could push consumers towards stronger strains. In the various lines sold by Medicine Man, for example, the concentration of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the chemical compound that gets you high, varies from 7% to over 20%. The prices, though, are mostly the same, and there is no difference in tax. Some like it weak, but on the whole, Ms Vander Veer says, the stronger varieties are what people ask for. If they cost no more, why not? The average potency on sale in Denver is now about 18%, roughly three times the strength of the smuggled Mexican weed that once dominated the market. Barbara Brohl, the head of Colorado’s Department of Revenue, says THC-based taxation is something the state may try in the future. But the speed with which the regulatory apparatus was set up—sales began just over a year after the ballot initiative passed in November 2012—meant that they had to move fast. “We’re building the airplane while we’re in the air,” she says. Uruguay, clear that it wants to be “a regulated market, not a free market”, as Mr Romani puts it, plans a more direct way of discouraging the stronger stuff. Dispensaries will sell just three government-approved strains of cannabis, their potencies ranging from 5% to 14%. Another issue for regulators is the increasing number of ways in which cannabis is consumed. The star performer of the legalised pot market is the “edibles” sector, which includes THC-laced chocolates, drinks, lollipops and gummy bears. There are also concentrated “tinctures” to be dropped onto the tongue and vaping products to be consumed through e-cigarettes. Foria, a California company, sells a THC-based personal lubricant (“For all my vagina knew, I was laying on one of San Diego’s fabulous beaches!” reads one testimonial). The popularity of these products looks set to grow; users appreciate the discretion with which they can be consumed, producers like the ease with which their production can be automated (no hand-picking of buds required). But edibles, in particular, make it easy to take more than intended. A hit on a joint kicks in quickly; cakes or drinks can take an hour or two. Inexperienced users sometimes have a square of chocolate, feel nothing and wolf down the rest of the bar—only to spend the next 12 hours believing they are under attack by spiders from Mars. The three cannabis-related deaths in Colorado all followed the consumption of edibles. Hospitals in the state also report seeing an increasing number of children who have eaten their parents’ grown-up gummy bears. In response the authorities have tightened their rules on packaging, demanding clearer labelling, childproof containers, and more obvious demarcation of portions. A second concern about new ways of taking the drug is that they could attract new customers. Ms Vander Veer says that edibles offer a “good way to get comfortable with how THC makes you feel”; women, older people and first-timers are particularly keen on them. If you see cannabis as a harmless high, this is not a problem. If you want to keep usage low, it is. The innovation seen to date is just a taste of what entrepreneurs might eventually dream up. On landing in Denver—which, uncoincidentally, is now the most popular spring-break destination for American students—you can call a limo from 420AirportPickup which will drive you to a dispensary and then let you smoke in the back while you cruise on to a cannabis-friendly hotel (some style themselves “bud ‘n’ breakfast”). You can take a marijuana cookery course, or sign up for joint-rolling lessons. Dispensaries offer coupons, loyalty points, happy hours and all the other tricks in the marketing book. Legalisation has also paved the way for better branding. Snoop Dogg, a rap artist, has launched a range of smartly packaged products called “Leafs by Snoop”. The estate of Bob Marley has lent its name to a range of “heirloom marijuana strains” supposedly smoked by the man himself. Roll up for the mystery tour Branding means advertising, which may itself promote use. Many in America would like to follow Uruguay’s example and ban all cannabis advertising, but the constitution stands in their way. When Colorado banned advertising in places where more than 30% of the audience is likely to be under-age cannabis companies objected on the grounds of their right to free speech, though the suit was later dropped. As well as moving into advertising, the industry is growing more professional in its lobbying. In legalisation initiatives the “Yes” side increasingly outspends the “No” side: in Alaska by four to one, in Oregon by more than 50 to one. Rich backers help—in California Sean Parker, an internet billionaire, has donated $1m to the cause. In some states, ballot initiatives have been heavily influenced by the very people who are hoping to sell the drugs once they are legalised. In November 2015 voters in Ohio soundly rejected a measure that would have granted a cannabis-cultivation oligopoly to the handful of firms that had backed it. Worries about regulatory capture will increase along with the size of the businesses standing to gain. Big alcohol and tobacco firms currently deny any interest in the industry. But they said the same in the 1960s and 1970s, a time when Philip Morris and British American Tobacco, it has since been revealed, were indeed looking at the market. Brendan Kennedy, the chief executive of Privateer Holdings, a private-equity firm focused on the marijuana industry, says that several alcohol distributors have invested in American cannabis firms. Even without such intervention big companies are likely to emerge. Sam Kamin, a law professor at Denver University who helped draft Colorado’s regulations, suspects that eventual federal legalisation, which would make interstate trade legal, could well see cannabis cultivation become something like the business of growing hops, virtually all of which come from Washington, Oregon and Idaho. Big farms supplying a national market would be much cheaper than the current local-warehouse model, driving local suppliers out of the market, or at least into a niche. The industry has so far been helped by the fact that many on the left who might normally campaign against selling harmful substances to young people are vocal supporters of legalisation. That could change with the growth of a business lobby that, although understanding that an explosion in demand would trigger a backlash, may have little long-term interest in restraint. The prospect of such a lobby could also serve as an incentive for states to take the initiative on legalisation, rather than waiting for their citizens to demand it. Fine-tuning Colorado’s regime, Mr Kamin says, has been made harder by the fact that the ballot of 2012 enshrined legalisation in the state constitution. Other states “might want [their rules] to be defined instead by legislation, not citizens’ initiative,” suggests Ms Brohl, the Colorado tax chief. Different places will legalise in different ways; some may never legalise at all; some will make mistakes they later think better of. But those that legalise early may prove to have a lasting influence well beyond their borders, establishing norms that last for a long while. It behoves them to think through what needs regulating, and what does not, with care. Over-regulation risks losing some of the main benefits of liberalisation. But as alcohol and tobacco show, tightening regimes at a later date can be very difficult indeed.
