THE nativist rage Donald Trump is whooping up across America translates into actual votes—lots of them. So does the left-wing populism with which Bernie Sanders is thrilling an expanding chunk of the Democratic Party. These were the messages of the New Hampshire primary held on February 9th; and their repercussions, blown from the icy New England state down south and out west, where America’s quarrelsome primary contest moves to next, could be tremendous. Mr Trump hoovered up 35% of the vote in New Hampshire. John Kasich, the governor of Ohio, came second with 16%. That means the Republican establishment still has no answer to Mr Trump’s assault on conservative ideology and their party’s good name; or to Ted Cruz, an ultra-conservative troublemaker who won in Iowa and came third in New Hampshire. Mr Kasich is too pragmatic and, in a fraught time, too genial for most Republican primary voters. Marco Rubio, a likelier establishment champion who was widely expected to surge from the mainstream pack, did abysmally. He won less than 11%, which put him fifth behind Jeb Bush, the ridiculed scion of a divisive dynasty. Democratic Party bosses were similarly confounded. They think Mr Sanders could not win a general election; they are probably right. The veteran senator vows to break up banks, make college education free, squeeze the pips out of rich people, then squeeze them again. He calls himself a democratic socialist; most Americans hear only the second word, and shudder. Yet he won 60% of the vote in New Hampshire, which represented one of the biggest victories in a contested Democratic primary—and trouble for Hillary Clinton. Mr Sanders trounced the Democratic front-runner in almost every voter group. Exit polls suggested he won over 80% of younger voters, which was startling, if predicted, given how college crowds love to “feel the Bern”. He also beat Mrs Clinton among men and women, college graduates and non-graduates, those with guns and those without. The only voters who mainly stayed loyal to Mrs Clinton were high-earners and those aged 65 and over. At an almost-hysterically upbeat defeat rally, Mrs Clinton acknowledged that she needed to do more to win the love of youngsters. But it is the votes of Hispanics and, especially, blacks that will now concern her most. African-Americans, who have hitherto favoured Mrs Clinton over Mr Sanders by 3:1, represent half of all Democrats in South Carolina, which will hold its primary on February 27th. So long as Mrs Clinton can keep them onside, she will probably win the nomination. Yet, given the immensity of Mr Sanders’s victory, that seems a bit less certain than it did. He had a couple of big advantages in New Hampshire. It is crammed with white lefties, his main target audience, and next-door to Vermont, which he has represented in Washington for a quarter of a century. Yet the result also showed how fundamental Mrs Clinton’s weaknesses are. She represents continuity, and voters want change; exit polls in New Hampshire suggest that 42% of Democrats want a more left-wing president than Barack Obama. They, naturally, are another group Mr Sanders swept. He promises a “political revolution”; Mrs Clinton pledges to secure Mr Obama’s legacy. With a little tinkering, that should not be a losing promise; the president is extremely popular among Democrats. The trouble for Mrs Clinton is that, despite her cool head, tough streak and ironclad grip on policy, she lacks the subtlety and easy charisma that lesser politicians would deploy to change gears. She has charm, but of a programmatic sort. Having failed, so far, to fire up many women with the promise of America’s first woman president, she is struggling even to get them to like her. A persistent controversy over her use of a private e-mail account as secretary of state has made that harder, by playing to her reputation for being rather shifty. Her supporters decry both, reputation and scandal, as malicious Republican slander, of which there has been plenty aimed at Mrs Clinton. But the impression endures, and there is little reason to think black and Hispanic voters, whom Mr Sanders is about to lovebomb with revolutionary promises, will be immune to it. “I worry that Hillary is dishonest,” said Reina Rodriguez, a retired teacher emerging from a polling station in the New Hampshire town of Nashua, after casting her vote for Mr Sanders. She thought the senator “a beautiful politician, a true democrat”. Ominously for Mrs Clinton, she was speaking in Spanish. If Mrs Clinton must rethink, her old New York buddy, Mr Trump, can rejoice. In Iowa, the property tycoon performed less well than opinion polls suggested he should. That implied his support was flaky, because the working-class whites who flock to his rallies, to hear him crack jokes, insult people and promise border walls, do not flock to vote. Mr Trump did little to salve that concern. He campaigned less in New Hampshire than almost any of his rivals, spending only 30 days in the state and little money. Much of what he spent went on aviation fuel and red baseball caps emblazoned with his Reaganite slogan, “Make America Great Again”. His campaign had the look of a Potemkin effort, cobbled together in a half-hearted bid to show journalists he was serious. Mr Bush, by comparison, spent 57 days in the state; he and the super-PAC supporting him, Right to Rise, spent $30m on television advertising there, chiefly to attack his mainstream rivals, Mr Rubio, Mr Kasich and Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar For Republican patricians and moneymen, Mr Rubio’s failure was an even bigger shock than Mr Trump’s win. Had the senator from Florida merely repeated his performance in Iowa, by beating his mainstream rivals convincingly, he would have been saluted as the man to foil Messrs Trump and Cruz—and his campaign deluged with money. That could still happen. Mr Rubio is suffering from a perception that he is too green to be president. An ill-timed gaffe in a televised debate on February 6th, in which Mr Rubio responded to Mr Christie’s accusation that he was rote-learned and untested by robotically repeating a rehearsed attack on Mr Obama, appears to have reinforced that. Yet he remains clever and attractive—and if he is not to be the mainstream Republican champion, it is not at all clear who is. Mr Bush has money, but seems as alien to the Republican mood as Mr Kasich. Mr Christie, who won a pathetic 7% of the New Hampshire vote, has dropped out. Worse for the patricians, the identity of the putative anti-Trump, anti-Cruz candidate, for whom about 40% of the primary vote is available, now cannot be settled until after the party’s South Carolina primary on February 20th. That is excellent for Mr Trump and Mr Cruz, who spent similar time and less money in New Hampshire than the Donald. They can concentrate on building their campaigns and racking up delegates. Mr Rubio and the rest are meanwhile locked in a mutually enfeebling brawl. Not that any of them is likely to do particularly well in South Carolina. Opinion polls put Mr Trump just as far ahead there as he was in New Hampshire, with 36% of the vote. They put Mr Cruz, with 20%, securely in second place. All the mainstreamers are lagging far behind.Power to the tax planners HOW radical is Bernie Sanders? The self-declared socialist likes to remind voters that many of his policies—say, on health care, or on paid family leave—simply copy most of the rest of the rich world. Compared with left-wingers there—Jeremy Corbyn in Britain, for instance—Mr Sanders is no socialist. It is freewheeling America which puts Mr Sanders on the far-left. The truly socialist thing about Mr Sanders’s admirably detailed economic plan is not its goals. It is that it is completely unworkable. Under President Sanders taxes, particularly on high earners, would soar. Mr Sanders wants to make public universities free, increase infrastructure spending and expand Social Security (pensions). His most ambitious policy calls for the government, rather than private insurers, to pay health-care bills. That would cost $14 trillion over a decade, requiring new taxes on most workers worth 8.4% of their income. Expanding Social Security means a further big tax rise for those making more than $250,000. Income-tax rates would become more steeply progressive, too. Totting up all the levies, the top marginal rate of federal tax—which would be levied on households earning more than $10m—would rise to about 67%. (Adding in state taxes would take it higher still.) That is not without precedent: in the 1970s, the top rate was around 70%. This would probably dent growth, and it is at the high end of estimates of the rate which maximises revenue. Taxes might have to go higher still. Mr Sanders plans to tax capital gains as ordinary income. High earners can decide whether or not to sell assets, making this tax easy to dodge. Partly because of this, the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, an advocacy group, reckons Mr Sanders has highballed his revenue estimates by $3 trillion over a decade. Mr Sanders knows that soaking the rich can get him only so far. He is also banking on health-care costs tumbling. Health spending per person is two-and-a-half times the average for the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries. The immense bargaining power of a government buyer could help to control waste. Medicare, government-funded health insurance for the over-65s, already provides care at a lower cost than private insurers. Mr Sanders predicts $6.3 trillion of savings over a decade. That looks like wishful thinking. A costing of Mr Sanders’s plans by Kenneth Thorpe of Emory University, using more conservative assumptions, found that the plan was underfunded by nearly $1.1 trillion (or 6% of GDP) per year. If Mr Thorpe is right, higher taxes will be required to make the sums add up. In 2014 Mr Sanders’ own state, Vermont, abandoned a plan for a single-payer system on the basis that the required tax rises would be too great. Getting health-care costs down is easier than it sounds. Mr Sanders hopes to save a bucketload on administration. But 20% of health spending flows to doctors, nurses and the like. A study published in Health Affairs, a journal, in June 2015 found that the average nurse earns about 40% more, and the average doctor about 50% more, than comparably educated and experienced people in other fields. To bring costs down to British or Canadian levels, these salaries would have to fall. Half a million Americans work in the private health-insurance industry, which would shrink or disappear if Mr Sanders had his way. His plan is “radical in a way that no legislation has ever been”, argues Henry Aaron of Brookings, a think-tank. Mr Sanders has bold plans for monetary policy and banking, too. He supports a movement headed by Rand Paul, an erstwhile Republican runner, to get politicians more involved in decisions on interest rates, because he thinks Fed policy is too tight. To loosen it, he would bar the Fed from raising rates when unemployment is above 4%. Mr Sanders’ plans tend to suffer from a fallacy of composition. Although the average American might not mind paying higher taxes instead of a health-insurance premium, some—such as firms that do not provide health insurance—would face big losses. With such concentrated costs, Mr Sanders’s plans would have no chance of making it past Congress, even an improbably friendly one.MANY ingredients went into making Donald Trump. An under-appreciated one is the distinctively German, or rather Kallstadtian, tinge to his family history. Mr Trump is descended from German immigrants who arrived in America penniless and succeeded quickly through hard work, a free relationship with the truth, opportunism, shrewd business tactics and a great sense of family loyalty. Fred Trump, Donald’s father, who was a strict taskmaster with all his five children, told his three sons to be “killers”. Fred Trump’s father, Friedrich Trump, came to America in 1885 as a 16-year-old from Kallstadt, a village in Rhineland-Palatinate, a region known for wine and stuffed pig’s stomach. After working for a few years as a barber in New York, he headed west and opened a restaurant in a mining town in Washington state where workmen were treated to hearty food, liquor and assignations with women in the back rooms of the establishment. Having amassed a nest-egg, Friedrich returned to Kallstadt to marry Elisabeth Christ, the girl next door, whom he took with him to America. Elisabeth was homesick, so they soon went back to Germany. Yet the authorities refused to let them repatriate because they said Friedrich, who was an American citizen by then, had dodged his military service. The young Trumps were thus forced to emigrate to America. In 1905 their first son, Fred, was born in New York. When Fred Trump was 11 America entered the first world war and a period of intense anti-German sentiment followed, abating in the interwar years and then flaring up again during the second world war. German books were burnt, sauerkraut was renamed “liberty cabbage” and frankfurters became “hot dogs”. Friedrich died of Spanish flu in 1918 at the age of only 49 and left Fred and his mother a tidy sum of money, which they used to set up a company, E. Trump & Son, and invested in property. After graduation from high school in 1923, Fred started to work full-time in construction. He realised quickly that his German origins could be a hindrance, so he pretended that his parents were Swedish, though his mother spoke English with a thick German accent and baked Apfeltorte for family reunions. Donald was Fred Trump’s favourite child, and followed him into the building business. “Fred taught Donald a lot and he was a very good student,” says Gwenda Blair, the author of a book on three generations of Trumps. Part of Donald Trump’s success in the casino and property business was down to his early understanding of the power of branding. “Trump” lends itself to big lettering on buildings because it suggests luck and success. Like his father, though, he thought his German origins might not endear him to possible backers. He stuck to Fred’s tale and wrote in his autobiography, “Trump: The Art of the Deal”, that his father was of Swedish descent. Challenged on this point in an interview with Vanity Fair in 1990, he replied: “My father was not German; my father’s parents were German…Swedish, and really sort of all over Europe.” The Trumps were typical of German-Americans, the country’s biggest single ethnic group, in trying so hard to assimilate and obscuring their origins. Yet Donald Trump has occasionally changed his story. Simone Wendel, a filmmaker from Kallstadt, visited him at Trump Tower a few years ago for her documentary “Kings of Kallstadt”, a portrait of this village of 1,200 inhabitants, which also produced the Heinz family, founders of the Ketchup empire. He was rather reserved at first during the meeting, says Ms Wedel, but he warmed to the topic when she showed him photographs of his grandparents and of his grandfather’s modest house. “I love Kallstadt,” says Mr Trump in her documentary. “Ich bin ein Kallstädter.” The braggadocious Mr Trump has probably more Kallstadt in him than he knows. The people of Kallstadt are affectionately known as Brulljesmacher, meaning braggart in the regional dialect. Were he to become president, Mr Trump would not be the first occupant of the White House of German descent. Dwight Eisenhower’s family was originally called Eisenhauer and hailed from Karlsbrunn, close to the German-French border. Herbert Hoover’s ancestors were called Huber and came from Baden in southern Germany. They both made little of their origins—but they did not go so far as to invent new ones.Valentine’s day“I still love New Hampshire.” Girls just wanna have fun“When you’re young, you’re thinking, ‘Where are the boys?’ The boys are with Bernie.” Fourth is the new first“This campaign is not dead.” Déjà vu all over again“There it is. There it is. The memorised 25-second speech. There it is, everybody.” 50 Shades of Christie“I’ll beat her rear end on that stage.” The Invisible Man“I could drop my pants. Moon the whole crowd. Everybody would be aghast, except the press…would never notice.” Cicero it ain’t“She said a terrible thing. You know what she said? Shout it out, because I don’t want to say…OK, you’re not allowed to say and I never expect to hear that from you again…She said: ‘He’s a pussy.’ That’s terrible.” Go ahead, make my day“Please run.”Rick Tyler, Ted Cruz’s spokesman, reckons Michael Bloomberg’s still-being-mulled-over candidacy would help his man. The Financial Times Animal House“And then somebody complains when, you know, a terrorist gets waterboarded, which quite frankly is no different than what happens on college campuses and frat houses every day.” A blessing“Sometimes when I am on a stage like this, I wish that we weren’t married, then I could say what I really think...I don’t mean that in a negative way. I’m happy.”                Porcupining for freedom AFTER successful careers in engineering, Dan and Carol McGuire could have pursued retirements of highbrow ease—the couple’s interests range from American history to collecting modern art. Instead they moved across the country from Washington state in response to an essay by a young libertarian, Jason Sorens, arguing that if enough believers in limited government moved to a single state (ideally one with a small population and a “live and let live” ethos), they could exert real influence. That essay spawned the “Free State Project” (FSP), whose early members voted to make New Hampshire their testbed. This was a nod to the state’s modest scale, its culture of Yankee self-reliance and low taxes, and its unusually accessible political system, starting with the state’s House of Representatives, whose 400 members answer to a few thousand constituents each, and are paid $100 a year. The FSP devised a pledge for activists to sign, by which they agreed to move to New Hampshire if 19,999 other libertarians made the same commitment. Once that critical mass was reached, FSP members pledged to make their own trek within five years. The FSP announced on February 3rd that the 20,000 target has been reached. In the past decade 2,000 pioneers could not wait and moved anyway. A total of about 40 Free Staters have been elected to New Hampshire’s statehouse at various points, among them the McGuires, husband-and-wife Republican legislators who represent overlapping districts. Free Staters have helped to legalise gay marriage and ease rules on everything from home schooling to selling unpasteurised milk.   Some wins were easy. A repeal of all state knife laws passed in 2010: Mr McGuire shows off a now-legal switch-blade that can be opened with one hand, noting that such knives are handy tools for paramedics. Mrs McGuire is proud of a law making it simpler for farmers to slaughter their own chickens and rabbits. The couple credit Free Staters with making New Hampshire juries more aware of their right to throw out cases that seem to offend natural justice, under the centuries-old principle of nullification. Future battles loom over school choice and over using public money to send children to private schools. Free Staters are yet to overcome national partisan divisions. In 2015 New Hampshire’s Democratic governor vetoed a law making it legal to carry a gun without a licence, backed by conservatives of all stripes, some of them libertarians. Interviewed at her suggestion in a smoke-filled Manchester cigar bar, the FSP’s president, Carla Gericke, stresses that some Free Staters have run for office as Democrats (though they are a small minority). One Democratic Free Stater is currently trying to legalise prostitution. Others are moved by internet privacy and alternative currencies such as bitcoin. Ms Gericke would like to see New Hampshire become a “mix between Alaska and Amsterdam on personal freedoms, and Hong Kong on economic freedoms”. That is a stretch. As a fine place to live New Hampshire attracts lots of newcomers, many of them more conventional than the FSP’s shock-troops. Still, Ms Gericke hopes that are allies on the way. Pledge-signers have e-mailed to say that their homes are on the market, she says. New Hampshire boasts a property firm founded by a Free Stater (and former member of the state House) to help project members move. It is called Porcupine Real Estate, after a favourite libertarian animal, honoured as a beast which is dangerous only when attacked.AMERICA’S bold effort to cut carbon-dioxide emissions from power plants is on hold. On February 9th the Supreme Court, divided five to four along partisan lines, putting the brakes on Barack Obama’s flagship environmental policy, pending a possible ruling this summer. The plan forms the core of America’s recent commitments to cut emissions, made at the UN climate talks in Paris. Power plants are America’s largest source of greenhouse gases, accounting for just under a third of all emissions. The Clean Power Plan, under the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), gives orders to each state which, considered together, should amount to removing 870m tonnes of carbon dioxide from power-station emissions by 2030 (as measured against 2005 levels). The regulations give states some flexibility over how and when to cut emissions. But each one is required to submit plans by 2018 and to show some progress on them by 2022. If the goals are met, the reduction by 2030 will be equivalent to taking 80m cars off the road. The legal basis for the regulation was thought to lie in a ruling by the Supreme Court in 2007, which declared CO2 a pollutant, thereby placing it under the EPA’s remit. The court upheld most of an agency rule requiring new or rebuilt factories and power plants to use the “best available technology” to limit their emissions of greenhouse gases in 2014. That year the justices also supported the EPA’s regulation of pollution that drifts over state lines. But the agency was rebuked for its overreach in 2015: the Supreme Court reprimanded it for regulating mercury, arsenic and other substances emitted by power plants without taking proper account of the costs. The Court’s new order suggests it may eventually conclude that the president has again exceeded his authority. States, utilities and mining companies have declared the plan to be too much, too soon. The attorney-general of West Virginia, one of the states opposing it, said he was “thrilled” after the court issued its stay. Richard Lazarus, from Harvard Law School, calls the intervention “extraordinary”. Although compliance with the regulation is not required until 2022, the deadline for submitting first plans to cut back on emissions was supposed to be September. (States also had the option then to ask for more time.) That date will now almost certainly need to be pushed back.ASH Carter may be one of the most formidably qualified defence secretaries to preside over the Pentagon, but the $582.7 billion 2017 budget request sent to Congress on February 9th is likely to be his only shot at creating a lasting legacy. After December’s two-year budget deal there will be less squabbling over funding levels than in recent years. But because this defence budget will not become law until after the election of a new president, it will need bipartisan support for Mr Carter’s vision to survive intact. Last week Mr Carter outlined the strategic thinking that had informed his decisions. Seen from the Pentagon, the world, he says, looks “dramatically different” from how it has for the past 25 years. He identifies five challenges: the return of great power competition with Russian aggression in Europe and China’s rise threatening the stability of the Asia-Pacific region; North Korea as a nuclear-armed rogue state; the continuing malign intentions of Iran despite the nuclear deal; and the “tumour” of jihadist terrorism, above all in the form of Islamic State (IS), “metastasising” around the world. There is nothing controversial about that list, but it means that the Pentagon must be able to deter sophisticated armed forces who are striving (quite successfully) to erode America’s traditional technological superiority; it must credibly reassure those allies who feel vulnerable to regional bullies; and at the same time it must relentlessly counter a variety of ever more potent threats posed by non-state groups. Even with rising spending that would be daunting. But this budget is already $22 billion below what had been projected last year, so money will be tight (in a half-trillion-dollar sort of way). Mr Carter’s biggest bet is on the Pentagon’s ability to deliver the future technologies that will maintain America’s military advantage. To that end, research and development is to be boosted by 4% over the previous year, to $71.8 billion. In the shorter term, the Strategic Capabilties Office, created by Mr Carter in 2012, is tasked with getting cutting-edge kit into the field as fast as possible. Mr Carter is particularly excited about all kinds of “swarming autonomous vehicles” to overwhelm opponents and inexpensive “hypervelocity smart projectiles” that can be fired from existing artillery to shoot down incoming missiles. In the meantime, current threats have to be addressed. The European Reassurance Initiative, a response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, is getting $3.4 billion, a fourfold increase over last year to rotate more combat brigades in and out of Europe and position a lot more tanks and armoured fighting vehicles. The campaign to destroy Islamic State is getting $7.5 billion, a 50% bump from last year. In addition, because of the rate at which smart bombs and laser-guided rockets are being used against the jihadists, $1.8 billion will buy 45,000 more of them. The fight against IS has also earned the venerable A-10 “tankbuster” a popular reprieve. So devastating is it against low-tech enemies that it will soldier on until 2022. Aside from politics, the threat to Mr Carter’s budget comes less from the things he wants to do—which include spending $7 billion on cybersecurity—but from the difficulty of finding cuts elsewhere needed to pay for them. He proposes small reductions in a raft of legacy programmes with the some further savings from big-ticket items, such as the navy’s controversial Littoral Combat Ship (one fewer next year, down from 52 to 40 in total) and the air force’s F-35A Joint Strike Fighter (down by five next year, but 45 over five years). One solution to the funding gap suggested by congressional Republicans is to raise the $58.8 billion Overseas Contingency Operations budget, a useful slush fund, by about $15 billion. A deal between the next president and Congress to lift the 2011 Budget Control Act caps before 2021 is also likely. If a successor with more money endorses this plans he has set out, Mr Carter will be happy.NOT all that long ago, “You could set your watch to when the first lobsters would start moulting,” says Carl Wilson, head of Maine’s bureau of marine science. When the forsythia bloomed, spring lobsters would soon move offshore. Lobster boats have radar, sonar and other electronic aids, but Steve Train, a lobsterman for more than 30 years, still likes to keep an eye on apple and cherry blossoms. “And if we start catching mackerel off the dock, then usually we get shedders,” he says. (Lobsters grow by shedding their shells.) “New-shell lobsters come between two weeks and 20 days later”. Those natural patterns are starting to break down. Early moulting in 2012 caused a glut in lobsters and a drop in prices. At the same time, there was a decline in cod and other natural predators of the lobster larva. This allowed the lobster population to flourish. Big hauls, or landings, are now the norm. To accommodate the larger volume, dealers began looking in earnest at overseas markets, especially Asia. Maine’s lobster exports to China have tripled since 2012. Chinese new year in February is an especially busy time for shippers. In Chinese lobster is called long xia, or dragon prawn, which has an auspicious ring to it. Tom Adams, owner of one of the larger live-shippers to China, says the critters must be carefully packed to survive the long journey. But Mr Adams, as bullish as he is on lobsters, is worried about the long term. The lobster industry collapsed in southern New England and the Long Island Sound because of warming waters. The state’s 6,000 lobstermen, most of whom work on family-owned boats, are already protective of their lobsters. In 1872 they stopped catching egg-bearing females. They notch tails to identify good breeders. The state has minimum and maximum size restrictions to protect the young and the robust. Diving and dragging was banned in the 1960s. Only traps are permitted, which must have escape hatches for tiddlers and be biodegradable. The industry is mostly self-regulated. “I throw ten to 20 back for every one I keep,” said Mr Train. This is as well-managed as fisheries get. But if ocean temperatures rise, that may not be enough.TO MAKE sense of the Republican race for the White House, here is a short cut: get in a car, turn on the radio and drive. On the face of it, the conservative activists tasked with choosing the Republican Party’s next presidential candidate are in a confounding mood. Until about five minutes ago, the received wisdom was that grassroots Republicans prize ideological purity above all—yet in the New Hampshire primary on February 9th they handed a thumping win to Donald Trump, a New York billionaire who invited Hillary Clinton to his most recent wedding and thinks government should play a much bigger role in providing health care. The same wisdom holds that in a time of anti-establishment rage, voters are desperate for plain-spoken authenticity. But on February 1st activists handed victory in the Iowa caucuses to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a Princeton and Harvard-educated lawyer whose wife works for Goldman Sachs, and whose highly polished campaign speeches lurch from sermonising—“Father God…awaken the Body of Christ, that we might pull back from the abyss”—to Ivy League pomposity, as when he tells crowds that this election represents an “inflection point” in history. Mr Cruz did well in New Hampshire too, coming in third even though the state’s Republicans are less pious and more live-and-let-live than most. At snow-buffeted campaign rallies, a surprising number of New Hampshire conservatives said they liked both Mr Trump and Mr Cruz, two very different candidates who between them eventually scooped nearly half the state’s Republican primary vote. A key to this puzzle can be found on conservative talk radio. It is a world of its own, built around codes of tribal identity, grievance and scorn for The Other. Each day such radio stars as Rush Limbaugh, Mark Levin or Glenn Beck describe a simple world, in which good guys would win and America’s foes tremble if only its rulers were braver (talk radio is keen on Mr Trump’s plan to bar Muslims from America, and likes Mr Cruz’s talk of carpet-bombing Islamic radicals). On talk radio Barack Obama is an America-hating, anti-white racist, and Republican Party bosses his collaborators. Even the advertisements seethe with paranoia, promoting gold coins as a hedge against economic collapse, or ammunition and survival provisions for those wishing to prepare themselves for civil unrest. In recent elections, notably in 2008 and 2012, talk-radio hosts could not prevent the nomination of candidates whom they considered traitors. For Republicans, that was a relief: hewing to talk radio’s sour, chauvinist world view is no way to win a general election (for all their clout, even the top-rated talk-radio hosts pull in just 13m listeners a week, most of them older white men). One way of summing up the crisis facing Republicans in 2016 is this. Mr Trump and Mr Cruz are each, in their own way, tribunes of talk-radio America. Mr Trump has the medium’s temperament down pat—one minute playing the snarling demagogue, and the next gleefully hurling schoolboy insults at rivals. Mr Cruz is a master of talk radio’s politics of insinuation, suggesting that Mr Obama has yet to defeat Islamic State not because that fight is complicated and hard, but because he is an “apologist for radical Islam”. No plausible candidate with a broader, sunnier message has yet emerged from the Republican pack. Talk radio despises the Republican who came second in New Hampshire, Governor John Kasich of Ohio. Mr Kasich may have balanced budgets and put forward conservative priorities. No matter. Along with such figures as Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, Mr Kasich is derided as a quasi-Democrat. His crime is to defend the pragmatic business of governing. Worse, Mr Kasich often expresses empathy for the poor and those who “live in the shadows”, and says that conservative hardliners lack Christian compassion. Mr Kasich is an interesting man, but he lacks a clear path through the mostly southern states up next. Beck and call Not every Trump or Cruz voter is a Rush Limbaugh fan. Mr Trump, in particular, offers (false) hope to many Americans buffeted by such large forces as globalisation, automation, female emancipation, civil rights and cultural change. But talk-radio’s power in this cycle is real. Just consider Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a young Cuban-American raised by working-class migrants, with the knack of advancing sternly conservative policies while expressing personal sympathy for underdogs. News reports focused on the gaffe that hurt Mr Rubio just before New Hampshire’s primary: a stilted performance in a TV debate when he used the same line on Mr Obama four times. The attack line causing Mr Rubio such trouble was a sop to talk radio. His stump speech used to be about the future, and how 21st-century America needs to equip its citizens to compete with workers anywhere in the world and with machines at home. More recently, though, to reassure the hard right (who think him soft on immigration) and to quash the idea that as an inexperienced first-term senator he is a second Obama, Mr Rubio has started painting the president as a malign super-villain. On the home-front, he accuses Mr Obama of deliberately transforming America’s “identity”. Turning to foreign policy, he says that Mr Obama sees America as “an arrogant country that needed to be cut down to size, so he guts our military and betrays our allies.” Mr Limbaugh duly praised Mr Rubio this week for saying what other Republicans “do not dare say”. The coming weeks of gruelling campaigning will show whether Mr Rubio can survive as a candidate. If you watch the senator work a rope-line, his sympathy for The Other—as when he praises the family values of some undocumented migrants—suggests he could be a champion for a more generous, open-minded conservatism. But in this race just now the loudest voices belong to the pinched demagogues.GOVERNMENT bean-counters do not, in most countries, have a reputation for derring-do. But in Argentina some have proved to be martyrs and heroes. Statisticians whose findings displeased Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, the country’s president from 2007 to 2015, were sacked and then prosecuted for their effrontery. “Teams were decimated,” says Jorge Todesca, who has been appointed by the new president, Mauricio Macri, to clean up and repair the government’s statistics institute (INDEC). If they were not fired, independent-minded statisticians “just resigned and left”, or were banished to back rooms without equipment. In 2011 Mr Todesca’s economic-consulting firm was fined 500,000 pesos ($123,000) for publishing an inflation index that contradicted the one put out by INDEC. It is not the only Augean stable Mr Macri discovered when he succeeded Ms Fernández in December. In addition to an economy in disarray, she and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner, who governed before her, left a state apparatus bloated by patronage and weakened by fiscal incontinence. Some 5-7% of public-sector employees do not bother to show up to work but collect roughly 20 billion pesos ($1.4 billion) in wages, estimates KPMG, an auditing firm. Even Tango 01, a 23-year-old Boeing 757 that serves as the presidential jet, is in disrepair. To get to Davos for the World Economic Forum last month, Mr Macri flew Air France. The mess at INDEC is one of the worst. That is because Ms Fernández took great pains to hide the consequences of her economic policies. The political appointees who oversaw INDEC leaned on statisticians to manipulate their results, especially the inflation rate. Graciela Bevacqua, a 24-year INDEC veteran, reckoned that consumer prices in January 2007 rose 2.1%. Her superiors demanded a number between 1.2% and 1.5%. They told her to take a holiday, and sacked her when she returned. INDEC appeared to respond to criticism by devising a new index, the IPCNu, which monitored prices nationally rather than just in Buenos Aires and its suburbs, as the earlier index had done (see chart). But it, too, swerved from reality, reporting inflation rates 50% lower than independent estimates. The Economist stopped publishing INDEC’s data in 2012. A year later Argentina became the first country to be censured by the IMF for misreporting GDP and prices. With poverty rising, in part because of high inflation, INDEC simply stopped reporting the poverty rate in 2014.    Mr Todesca, who appealed successfully against his fine, arrived to find the institute denuded and demoralised. Just 25% of its staff hold university degrees, he says. The team that gathered data on inflation was “destroyed”. On December 30th Mr Macri declared a “national statistical emergency”, a decree that gives Mr Todesca a free hand to appoint new directors and allows INDEC to suspend publication of data on GDP, inflation, poverty and unemployment until the end of 2016. Mr Todesca has rehired boffins who were ousted by the old regime, including Cynthia Pok, who will resume responsibility for poverty and employment data, and Ms Bevacqua, who is overseeing the construction of a new consumer-price index. By May Ms Pok intends to put together a “basic food basket” and publish its price, a step towards calculating the level of extreme poverty. She will also create a broader measure of poverty, using a bigger basket of goods and services, including transport. And she hopes to have a “multidimensional poverty index”, which is likely to include such things as access to health care and education, by early 2017. Putting together a new consumer-price index is expected to take until September, even though it will probably be based on the widely-used methodology of the International Labour Organisation and, much like the series used until 2014, on prices just in Buenos Aires and its suburbs. The national samples used in the IPCNu may not be reliable enough. Ms Bevacqua says she needs the time to rebuild the teams that collect and analyse the data. Until a new consumer-price index comes out, INDEC advises Argentines to consult two in which it has some confidence: those published by the city of Buenos Aires and by the province of San Luis. Data on GDP and employment will take longer. This will complicate the government’s efforts to steady the economy. Its early reforms, including a devaluation of the peso and a reduction in electricity subsidies, are pushing up inflation. To contain it, the government hopes to strike a deal on pay with trade unions. In the absence of reliable inflation data, it is “going into the negotiations blind”, says Juan Luis Bour, chief economist of FIEL, a think-tank. Union leaders want pay rises of at least 30%, their forecast of inflation this year. The government hopes to hold the rate to below 25% but may be forced to offer more. In the medium term, the statistical overhaul will help to normalise the economy. On February 5th Argentina took a step towards normalisation when the government made an offer to pay foreign bondholders who rejected a debt restructuring proposed by Ms Fernández’s government, which prompted the country to default in 2014. The government plans to submit to economic monitoring by the IMF; that is normal for members of the fund, but Argentina has refused it since 2006. Mr Todesca hopes the IMF will soon lift its statistical censure. “Argentina was once a pioneer in Latin America” in publishing data, he points out. Now, just being one of the crowd would be an achievement.
