ZIKA, a mosquito-borne virus, is the kind of epidemic that Latin America hoped it had put behind it. Yet in the past nine months Zika has spread to 23 countries in the Americas, infecting some 3m-4m people. The disease, which probably causes babies of infected mothers to be born with small brains, will put primary health providers and hospitals in the region under strain. Yet thanks to a complex but hugely positive transition towards universal health care, they are increasingly capable of coping with it. Historically, health systems in Latin America have been marked by fragmentation and gross unfairness. The rich have private health insurance and patronise private hospitals, some world-class and others merely overpriced. Workers with formal jobs are enrolled in contributory social-security systems. Unusually, these do not just provide health insurance but also run hospitals. As for the poor, who tend to work in the uninsured informal sector, they have had to rely on the patchy services provided by health ministries, often having to pay for drugs and even for syringes and sheets. Serious illness often bankrupted poor families. Over the past 30 years this picture has begun to change. Under democracy, many countries have written a right to health care into their constitutions. Latin Americans are living longer and are more in need of treatment for ailments such as cancer and diabetes that were once more prevalent in rich countries. In response, governments are stumbling towards universal health systems. There is no single route to that destination. But most have expanded both the coverage and quality of health care for poorer citizens. On many measures they are succeeding. One model is that of a tax-financed system with government as sole payer (as in Britain’s National Health Service). That applies, of course, to the famed health service in communist Cuba, as well as in Costa Rica. It also applies in Brazil, where the 1988 constitution set up the Sistema Único de Saúde, merging the health schemes of the Social Security Institute and the health ministry. It has delivered improvements. The problem has been how to finance and staff it in a country where nearly everyone turns to public hospitals for treatment after retirement, even though 25% of the population has private insurance. Other countries, including Mexico and Peru, have bolted on a subsidised insurance system for the poor. Colombia has taken insurance-based reform further, though not without problems. A new constitution in 1991 proclaimed universal care; a law separated purchasers from providers. The expectation was that two-thirds of the population would be covered by an expanded contributory scheme, says Alejandro Gaviria, the health minister. In practice, half are in a government insurance system in which they pay little or nothing. That encourages workers to remain in the informal economy. The longevity gap: Does big health care spending pay off The Constitutional Court ruled in 2008 that the benefit plans offered by each system have to be the same, even though the government scheme has less money. Drug companies got the courts to mandate prescription of expensive pills. Mr Gaviria, an economist, arrived in 2012 to find that many health-management companies, which rely in part on reimbursement from local governments in their role as insurers, were bankrupt. He has adjusted judicial aspiration to financial reality. He has set up an equivalent of Britain’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence to decide which drugs offer value for money. He is defining benefit plans more tightly, requiring more payments by patients who can afford them. He accepts there are still “a lot of inequities”, but argues that a poorer Colombian who lives in a big city gets better health care than her peer anywhere else in Latin America. Many health experts think the single-payer system is fairer and more cost-effective. But such radical reform faces resistance from vested interests. So it may be easier to merge contributory and non-contributory schemes into a single system, as France and Colombia have done. According to Daniel Cotlear, a health specialist at the World Bank, Latin America offers lessons in its acknowledgment that the poor cannot pay for health care, in improvements such as benefits packages covering specified treatments, even if these entail “implicit rationing”, and in making public providers more efficient by giving managers more autonomy. With the economic slowdown putting pressure on budgets, he urges governments to continue to give priority to enrolling the poor in health schemes and to small-town clinics. To that list must be added caring for victims of those insidious mosquitoes.At least Cuban-Americans can vote NEITHER Ted Cruz nor Marco Rubio fared as well in the hills of New Hampshire on February 9th as they did in the plains of Iowa a week earlier. Even so, the two Republicans (pictured) are both closer to winning the White House than any Cuban-American has come before. You might expect the citizens of the country from which their parents emigrated to take an interest in their political fortunes, and they do. But it is not a friendly one. “I’d rather vote for Donald Trump,” harrumphs a professor in Vedado, part of Havana. To judge from informal conversations and press chatter (nobody is systematically canvassing opinion) Cubans are underwhelmed by the prospect of a Cuban-American president. A big part of the reason is that both Mr Cruz and Mr Rubio are hardliners on the subject of Cuba, the traditional stance of émigrés and their families. Mr Rubio, who is the better known because he is a senator from nearby Florida, would roll back the rapprochement between Cuba and the United States initiated by the countries’ presidents in 2014. He has threatened to put Cuba back on the State Department’s list of state sponsors of terrorism. Mr Cruz is no friendlier to the new policy. The Obama administration is “being played by brutal dictators”, among them Cuba’s president, Raúl Castro, he thunders. Mr Rubio “is the one who represents interests associated most with the politics of Bushiana,” wrote a commenter on the state-controlled Granma website, blackening him with George W. Bush’s reviled name. Some Cubans express pity for the Cuban-American duo, seeing them as dupes of the Miami-based diaspora, which is traditionally hostile to Cuba’s government (though it is warming to the idea of better relations). The candidates’ ideas are based on outdated stories that their exiled parents told them, says the professor. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar Several habaneros summed up their sense of betrayal with a well-worn expression: No hay peor astilla que la del mismo palo (“There is no splinter worse than one from the same stick”). Messrs Cruz and Rubio, in other words, spurn their own kind. “Unfortunately, it’s kind of a Cuban trait,” laments a rueful doctor. Of all the front-runners, the one whose philosophy is closest to that of Cuba’s leaders is Bernie Sanders, a Democratic senator from Vermont, who calls himself a “democratic socialist”. Cubans, who live with undemocratic socialism, seem to find this baffling rather than attractive. “Has anyone told him that socialism is a bad thing?” whispers a secretary in her office on the Malecón, Havana’s oceanfront esplanade. Donald Trump gets the most press coverage, as in the United States, but does not enrage Cubans as he does Mexicans. When Mr Trump fumes about immigrants, Cubans sense he does not mean them. The clear favourite to win the Havana primary is Hillary Clinton, who has promised to continue Barack Obama’s opening toward Cuba. When it comes to rooting for a candidate to be the next occupant of the White House, Cubans seem to want continuity, not change.THE backwater Colombian town of La Hormiga near the border with Ecuador has experienced many booms and busts. In the 1990s there was coca, the raw material for cocaine. That frenzy ended when herbicide-spraying aeroplanes destroyed the crops. In the 2000s a pyramid scheme made many townsfolk rich, then ruined them. The government shut it down in 2008. Today La Hormiga, a sweltering town surrounded by pasture in the department of Putumayo, is experiencing a somewhat more salubrious sort of boom. Merchants are cashing in on the sharp depreciation of the Colombian peso against the United States dollar, which Ecuador uses as its currency. The peso lost a quarter of its value in 2015 and continues to slide this year. This has been a windfall for Ecuadorean shoppers living near—and sometimes not so near—the border, and for Colombian shopkeepers who serve them. “We can buy things 50% cheaper here than at home,” says Juan Carlos Andrade, who on a recent weekend drove for four hours from Coca in Ecuador to Putumayo with his family. They returned in a car laden with clothes and nappies for their two small boys. In Ecuador a pack of 50 Huggies nappies costs $18; the Andrades bought one in La Hormiga for the equivalent of $7. As well as selling more, merchants in La Hormiga are charging higher prices. The price of clothes has doubled over the past year while that of fruit and vegetables has risen by 30-40%, according to Fernando Palacios, the town’s mayor. Shops and bakeries are diversifying by providing pop-up currency-exchange services. A ticket seller at a roadside bus terminal moonlights as a money changer, buying dollars at 2,800 pesos and selling them to banks at a rate of around 3,200, making a handsome profit for little effort. Not everyone is happy. Residents of La Hormiga accuse shopkeepers of price-gouging. Mr Palacios has urged local merchants to show restraint. “I told them that if they keep raising prices the Ecuadoreans will shop elsewhere and locals will, too,” he says. Retail tourism is also a worry for Ecuador’s government. The country adopted the dollar as its currency in 2000 to escape from hyperinflation. Its current strength, along with weak productivity and low prices for oil, Ecuador’s biggest export, helped make the economy contract by an estimated 0.6% in 2015. Colombia, by contrast, grew by around 3% last year and should grow by more than 2% in 2016 despite the oil slump, in part because its weaker currency is expected to boost non-oil exports. To fight the downturn, Ecuador’s government is calling on its citizens to shop at home. “Prefer what’s ours,” pleaded a government statement issued in September. As long as the dollar is strong, many Ecuadorean shoppers will prefer Putumayo.GUO, the driver, pulls his car to a merciful halt high above a crevasse: time for a cigarette, and after seven hours of shuddering along narrow, twisting roads, time for his passengers to check that their fillings remain in place. Lighting up, he steps out of the car and dons a cloth cap and jacket: sunny, early-summer days are still brisk 3,500 metres above sea level. Mr Guo is an impish little dumpling of a man, bald, brown-toothed and jolly. He is also an anomaly: a Shanghainese in northern Yunnan who opted to stay with his local bride rather than return to his booming hometown. The ribbon of brown water cutting swiftly through the gorge below is rich with snowmelt. With few cars passing, its echoing sound fills the air. In the distance, the Hengduan mountains slump under their snowpack as if crumpled beneath its weight. Mr Guo recalls the drivers who have taken a switchback too quickly and fallen to their deaths in the valley below. He tells of workers who lost their footing or whose harnesses failed while building a bridge near his home town of Cizhong, 20 or 30 kilometres south. He pulls hard on his cigarette. “This river”, he says, “has taken so many lives.”   It has sustained many more. From trickles of meltwater in arid Qinghai, the river grows quickly as it passes through Tibet and Yunnan. Leaving China, and in doing so changing its name from the Lancang to the Mekong, it descends through a landscape ripening into jungle. Swollen by rainforest tributaries, it defines the Myanmar-Laos border and most of the Laos-Thailand border. It cuts Cambodia in two, and then splits into distributaries in south-western Vietnam, the lush, claustral delta landscape opposite in every way to the craggy austerity where it began. The Mekong region is Asia’s rice bowl: in 2014 lower Mekong countries (Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam) produced more than 100m tonnes of rice, around 15% of the world’s total. The region’s fertile soil depends on nutrient-rich sediment that the Mekong carries downriver, mainly during the rainy season from June to October; more than half the sediment in central Cambodia comes from China. The river and the nutrients it brings also support the world’s biggest inland fishery, accounting for a quarter of the global freshwater catch, feeding tens of millions of people. The region boasts remarkable biodiversity; only the vast basins of the Congo and the Amazon compare to or surpass it. There are more than 20,000 types of plant and nearly 2,500 animal species; freshwater dolphins and giant catfish; spiders 30 centimetres across and, in a limestone cavern in Thailand, a day-glo pink, cyanide-secreting millipede. The human diversity is striking, too: Tibetan monks pray; Burmese traders buy and sell; Cambodian fishermen cast nets; Thai farmers reap; Vietnamese markets float. The history is as rich as the soil. The Buddha smiled while resting at the northern Lao city of Luang Prabang. Angkor Wat on the Mekong-fed Tonle Sap lake was among the biggest cities of the preindustrial world. The Khmer empire that built it dominated South-East Asia for longer than there have been Europeans in the Americas. Since its French colonial days the Mekong has been more of a backwater. But the life-changing development seen elsewhere in Asia is spreading into this mostly rural world. Pickup trucks are replacing bullock-carts, karaoke bars dot lonely two-lane roads, fishermen can catch up on soap-operas at night. People are getting richer, and their lives longer. And as modernity comes into the region, it also seeks to take something out. Countries see a new resource in the Mekong: not the support it offers rich networks of life, but the simple fact of its flow. The hydroelectric dams now built on and planned for the Mekong amount to one of the largest-ever interventions in a river’s course. As its currents are rechannelled down copper conduits to power far-off cities the river itself will be trapped behind a series of concrete walls. Its fisheries, agriculture and biodiversity will suffer; the lives lived on its banks will be reshaped with scant regard for the feelings of those who lead them In teaching his students that change was the one true constant, the philosopher Heraclitus told them that no one ever steps in the same river twice. At the second step both man and river are not what they once were. In space and in time, from narrow gorges to salty seas and from great empires to impoverished peasantry, the river at Mr Guo’s feet encompasses more change than most. These new developments, though, feel like something more profound. Flow means change, but it also brings identity, because it embodies continuity. As the river is stilled, precious identities risk being lost for ever. THE scent of woodsmoke from Mr Guo’s cast-iron stove hangs heavy in the brisk evening air. The household generatoris switched off for the night, and the low kitchen in which his family and two guests gather is made cozy by the light of kerosene lamps. His wife brings a succession of bowls to the table: steamed rice, chunks cut from a salted pig’s leg that hangs above the stove, lettuce braised with garlic, scraps of beef sautéed with chilies, and tsampa, a roast barley powder favoured by his ethnically Tibetan family. His mother-in-law serves a medicinal-tasting infusion made from local leaves and berries, as well as eggshell cups of local wine. The wine tastes as though it was made by someone who knew only two things about wine: it is supposed to be red, and it is supposed to get you drunk. French missionaries brought grapes and the Gospel to Yunnan in the late 19th century; wine has been made in Cizhong ever since. They left a more enduring monument too: a sombre stone church with a charmingly incongruous Tibetan-style roof that sweeps skyward at its edges. A priest from Inner Mongolia holds masses there for ethnic-Tibetan Catholics. Cizhong spreads out from the church like the bottom half of a Chagall painting: donkeys wander the stone streets; ramshackle houses squat along alleyways; vineyards and rice paddies frame the view. But that is about to change. A little way downriver, a state-owned power utility is building the 990-megawatt Wunonglong dam. In 1995 the Manwan dam, some 600km farther downstream, became the first to stem the river’s flow. Since then five more dams have been finished along its Chinese reach; the Wunonglong dam is one of a further 14 being planned or built there. China’s Communist Party has long been keen on dams. At least 86,000 have been built over the past six decades, providing 282 gigawatts (GW) of installed hydroelectric capacity by 2014. The government is building yet more to curb the country’s greenhouse-gas emissions. By 2020 it wants an astonishing 350GW of installed hydropower capacity; in the European Union that would be enough to meet about three-quarters of total electricity needs. The dam at Wunonglong, about 300 metres long and more than 100 metres high, will provide a smidgen less than one of those extra gigawatts. The other 13 are expected to add 15.1GW more. Downriver countries intend to build another 11 large dams on the Mekong, with dozens more planned for its tributaries. In 20 years the Mekong could well be dammed from Tibet to just above Phnom Penh, where the delta begins. In no other large river basin in the world is the planned rate of growth of hydropower as great. The dams will change the quality of the water in the river and the rate at which it flows. Some of this change could be for the better. Dams can prevent flooding by regulating the flow of water downstream. But some Mekong riverbank agriculture would not welcome too steady a flow. Increasing water in the dry season would shrink riverbeds, leaving less space for crops—millions of Mekong-basin dwellers grow vegetables on riverbanks. Reducing water in the rainy season produces smaller floodplains with less sediment deposited in them, impoverishing the soil. According to International Rivers, an environmental NGO, the full cascade of dams planned for the Lancang would trap nearly all of the sediment coming from China, cutting the water’s sediment load in half. That will be bad for soils and bad for fish; the sediments provide the river’s nutrients. And the dams lower down could worsen the problem; the clear, “hungry” water that flows from them in spates will carry away existing sediment in riverbanks and riverbeds. Some of that will be deposited farther still downstream; some will wash uselessly out to sea. Those lower dams will also make things yet harder for the nutrient-deprived fish. The 11 proposed in Laos and Cambodia could block the migration of around 70% of the Mekong’s commercial fish catch. Interfering with the fish’s feeding and reproduction to that extent would imperil the food security of populations across the lower Mekong basin, where the average person eats some 60kg of freshwater fish per year, more than 18 times what is on the menu in Europe or America. Considering how poor many of the people here are, replacing fish as a primary protein source is virtually impossible. Dams restrict the movement of fish; they force movement on people. Along the road leading out of Cizhong, past the dormitories housing the construction workers for the Wunonglong dam, He Zhenghai, a friend of Mr Guo, points to a denuded spot where a village used to be. A few kilometres farther on he points out the resettlement: rows of squat, charmless concrete structures plonked down along the side of the road, near nothing. Estimates by NGOs of the total number of Chinese people resettled because of dam projects exceed 20m. Dams on the Lancang have already added thousands more, mostly poor rural farmers, to the total. In 2013 the compensation received on relocation was about 80,000 yuan ($12,500). Some farmers complain that they have been resettled on sheer hillsides ill-suited to farming and, to add insult to injury, chronically short of water. The Wunonglong dam will inundate Yanmen, a nearby village whose residents will be resettled on Cizhong’s rice paddies. And this means that, in a way, Cizhong, too, will vanish. Brian Eyler, deputy director of the South-East Asia programme at the Stimson Centre, an American think-tank, says Yanmen sits above Cizhong in China’s administrative league tables, meaning that after resettlement Cizhong will be renamed Yanmen, losing its name along with much of its charm. AT HUAY XAI on the Thailand-Laos border, around 1,000km downriver from Mr Guo’s house in Cizhong, a sampan’s tubercular engine kicks in with a wheeze, a gag and a violent sneeze of black smoke. As the motor stammers a tiny conductor terrorises the boat, calling brusquely for tickets, chastising people for where and how they sit, shouting at the pilot to get a move on. As the boat pulls away she jumps off, smoking and yelling the whole time. Some of the locals immediately set about the business of napping, using rice sacks as pillows. Others spread bolts of fabric to picnic on, pulling out plastic bags of grilled chicken, sticky rice, bamboo shoots and tiny, floral South-East Asian oranges. The tourists, meanwhile, open cans of beer—except for the Brits, who open bottles of rotgut Thai whiskey. Tourists and locals alike start the journey staring at their phones. Eventually reception wanes and they are forced to gaze out at the wonder on all sides. By the time it reaches Huay Xai the Mekong has already run more than the entire length of the Rhine and descended more than 3,000 metres—handily more than the Rhine manages. It still has almost two Rhine-lengths to go—but along that journey it will only drop a further 400 metres. It is a lowland river now, lush and steady. The evening chill of Mr Guo’s kitchen has been replaced by ripe, vaguely fetid South-East Asian warmth. About two hours into the two-day journey east from Huay Xai to Luang Prabang, the boat pulls over to a muddy shore, distinguished only by a concrete staircase cut into the side of a mountain. As the boat approaches people suddenly appear out of the jungle at the top of the stairs. The scene repeats itself with minor variations throughout the journey: a muddy path rather than a staircase, a rickety little jetty or two. A couple of hours before the boat pulls in to regally sleepy Luang Prabang, it passes the Pak Ou caves: two caverns in a mountainside from which hundreds of Buddha statues brought by devotees stare down at passing boats. Just downstream from Luang Prabang, the $3.5 billion, 1.3GW Xayaburi dam is rising—one of nine this country of 6.8m mostly rural, mostly poor people plans for the Mekong mainstream. Laos wants hydropower to be its main source of revenue by 2025: it plans to sell its capacity to neighbouring countries. The Thai government has agreed to buy 95% of Xayaburi’s power. Six Thai banks have financed the dam and a Thai construction firm is building it. Laos’s downstream neighbours are far less enthusiastic. Cambodia (two dams of its own planned) and Vietnam (no suitable sites for dams at all), worried about the impacts that the Xayaburi dam will have on fisheries and water flow, have lodged objections with the Mekong River Commission that was set up by Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam in 1995. The MRC is meant to facilitate co-operation among the countries that share the watershed; China and Myanmar have the status of “dialogue partners”. Environmental groups warn that by turning a free-flowing river into a series of reservoirs the upstream Lao dams could wipe out the Mekong’s two largest freshwater species: the giant catfish and the giant pangasius. Similar warnings have been raised about the Don Sahong dam—which would span the Mekong across the breathtakingly beautiful Si Phan Don (Four Thousand Islands) region near Laos’s border with Cambodia—and about Cambodia’s giant Sambor dam, which may destroy one of the last remaining habitats of the Irrawaddy dolphin. The Xayaburi dam’s builders have redesigned its sluice gates to allow more nutrient-rich sediment to flow downstream, and widened its fish pass to accommodate more fish of different species. The Lao government says these tweaks will alleviate the worst harms. Environmentalists are less certain. Fish passes in dams have been repeatedly found not to live up to promises made for them, particularly when fish must pass through multiple sets, as they would if Laos builds all its planned dams. The Mekong might survive a few big mainstream dams, but a dozen—plus dozens more on its tributaries—present a qualitatively different sort of threat. This highlights a recurring theme of Mekong development: dam-builders tend to assess the impact of each dam individually; NGOs pay more attention to the cumulative effect of multiple dams. The NGOs also worry that with every new dam built, further dam-building becomes more normal, and the next project thus becomes easier to justify. Environmentalists think both that such synergies make the harm done by dams greater than governments claim, and that the benefits are overestimated. Touting hydropower as “green” because it can be used in the place of fossil-fuel derived electricity overlooks external costs such as compensation and relocation, lost agricultural productivity and biodiversity and lowered water quality. And although benefits may be large (especially for electricity exporters), they are hardly overwhelming, especially in the context of broader development. Power demand in the region is expected to more than double between now and 2025—having already doubled from 2005. According to Richard Cronin, a Mekong specialist at the Stimson Centre, an American think-tank, the nine Lao and two Cambodian dams currently discussed would provide just 6-8% of the total electricity needs of the lower Mekong basin by 2030, with most of the power going to Thailand. “For that,” Mr Cronin asks, “you’re going to kill the river?” Pressure from downstream countries and international NGOs has slowed Laos’s progress on its next two dams, the Don Sahong and the Pak Beng, and has forced developers to spend more money studying potential downstream harms. But Laos is a poor country with few natural resources that sees hydropower as its route to development. In the absence of better options, concerned citizens and the governments of the downstream neighbours may be able to do little more than delay Laos. For now the Mekong remains blissfully unobstructed as it passes from Laos into Cambodia—except for the bloom of tiny islands that give Si Phan Don its name. People live on just a few of these islands. Some cater to tourists happy to spend a few days rafting the occasional rapids and listening to the Mekong rush past. But many are little more than a clump of rock and mud on which sprays of rivergrass and shrubs have taken root, still green against flowing brown. Past the waterfalls roiling the water into spume the river relaxes again. On clear days it becomes a hazy mirror, the stark blue above turning to indistinct brightness below. CHANG NAA stands up on the prow of his narrow wooden canoe and casts a small net into the water under the watchful eyes of his son Chang Thung, a four-year-old as solid and sombre as his father is lithe and placid. Beneath the canoe’s tattered fabric roof his wife stirs a pot of samlaa macchu, a sour soup. Before serving it she rinses the dishes in the murky water. The Tonle Sap river is a two-way tributary which joins the Mekong about 800km downriver from Xayaburi, at Phnom Penh. In drier seasons it drains South-East Asia’s biggest freshwater lake, also called the Tonle Sap, into the Mekong; during the monsoon it flows the other way, bringing water and sediment from the Mekong to the lake. Mr Chang Naa and his family live in one of the river’s floating villages. He is 33 years old; he has been fishing the Tonle Sap for 15 years. His father fishes these same waters. In time, says Mr Chang Naa, so will Chang Thung: “With us, what the father does, the son will also do.” Mainly he catches what he calls chkok and onpun—small, silvery fish. Some are destined for his wife’s soup pot. The rest—he catches between two and three kilos per day—he sells for prahok and tuk trey, a chunky paste and clear brown liquid both made from salted, fermented fish. Some fishermen supplement their meagre income with rice farming, but Mr Chang Naa and his family own no land. Like most people he knows, he is working off a perpetual debt incurred by money borrowed at extortionate rates for food, fuel and equipment. A fisherman from a village near Mr Chang Naa’s says he spends four or five months a year paying off local moneylenders. The Tonle Sap lake yields around 300,000 tonnes of fish a year, accounting for most of Cambodia’s freshwater catch. In all, the MRC estimates that the Mekong yields around 2.6m tonnes of wild fish each year, worth at least $2 billion in dockside sales. Add in secondary industries such as fish processing, markets, fuel and equipment sales and boat building, and the total value of the Mekong’s fisheries is between $5.6 billion and $9.4 billion. Small-scale fishing predominates along the Mekong—most boats in Cambodia weigh less than five tonnes and use engines with less than ten horsepower. Mr Chang Naa’s livelihood is not that different from his father’s or the vast majority of his peers. But that is starting to change with the rise in aquaculture. Production in the fish farms of Vietnam’s delta is now larger than that from its other freshwater and seawater fisheries combined. Prices for wild-caught fish are rising—Khai Ratana, who fishes a little way upriver from Mr Chang Naa, says he gets 12,000 riel ($3) per kilo, up from 3,000 riel five years ago—but that is because they have grown scarcer in recent years. At this point in the river’s descent to the sea, its potential as a power generator has been used up. The lowest lying of the dams under discussion, Cambodia’s dam at Sambor, lies around 300km upriver. Cambodia’s fisheries thus illustrate the fundamental political tension at the heart of the region’s development: upstream economies overwhelmingly reap the benefits of changes to the river’s regime, while those downstream bear the cost. This is the way with all rivers, but all the more so with the Mekong, because the geographical hierarchy reflects the geopolitical one. China, the most powerful nation, has the high ground and the most hydropower potential. It is also least dependent on the river’s water for other purposes (though it has plans to divert some of it away to its thirsty east anyway), the least susceptible to civil-society pressure and the least interested in binding itself to an international order. This worries everyone downstream. China and Thailand have long enjoyed good relations, and China has bought goodwill in Laos and Cambodia with massive infrastructure investments. But Myanmar has opened up to the West in the past five years in part to counterbalance Chinese influence. Vietnam fears its powerful northern neighbour—China invaded as recently as 1979, and the two countries contest territory in the South China Sea—and anti-China sentiment has been rising in Laos. As China has grown more regionally assertive, Laos and Vietnam have sought to deepen their relations with America. Yet that will probably do very little to dissuade China from building more dams, any more than the objections of Laos’s vastly richer and more populous neighbour Vietnam deterred it from building its dam at Xayaburi. These tensions will be kept in check by the general desire for a commodity quite as valuable as water: peace. For a long time it was in short supply, with decades of war, political division and the spiralling horrors of the Khmers Rouges perversely protecting the Mekong from exploitation. Nobody wanted to put up the capital for a dam that would be bombed, nationalised or left to rack and ruin. Those days are over; none would wish them back. The problem is managing equitably, and without permanent environmental degradation, the prosperity peace brings A hundred kilometres or so south-east of Mr Chang Naa’s fishing grounds, tourists in Phnom Penh sip mojitos in front of cafés as an endless parade of late-model sedans and smoke-spitting tuk-tuks jostles for space along Sisowath Quay. It is Cambodia’s one big, bustling city, with a sleazy edge to its tattered colonial elegance. Away from the river tens of thousands live in crowded slums—mainly rural Cambodians yearning for a bit of urban prosperity. Chang Naa expects his son, Chang Thung, to fish in his footsteps; he may want it so. But like all sons Chang Thung will step into a different river—or perhaps, in this case, onto a different shore. Phnom Penh was a city of just 189,000 in 1980. It could be home to 2.5m by 2030, and Chang Thung may choose to be one of them. His choice may be a free one. People in backwaters, both figurative and literal, choose cities all the time. But it may not be. By the time he reaches working age, the fears of dam sceptics may have been realised. There may be no more fish for him to catch. FIVE waitresses work the busy rooftop bar, ferrying drinks to the bright young things of Can Tho, the Mekong delta’s biggest city. Melodic, minor-key Vietnamese pop blares from the speakers as smartly turned-out young men and women sip lurid drinks, their faces lit by their phones. In the early evening the Hau river, a broad Mekong distributary, has taken on the same blue-grey cast as the sky, reflecting rows of quayside lamps as it flows into the distance, reaching for the sea. Can Tho has the feel of a minor boomtown: scooters still outnumber motorcycles which still outnumber cars; there is plenty of commerce but few chain stores; tourists remain rare enough that a wedding party will invite a passing foreigner to eat, drink and toast with them. It is a gentler, friendlier place than Phnom Penh, but with an underlying sadness that one does not feel further upstream: Phnom Penh will grow more crowded and unmanageable in the coming decades; Can Tho may vanish. To drive the four hours from Phnom Penh to Can Tho is to witness an increasingly blurry line between land and water. Narrow, glittering streams bisect rice fields. Rills, canals and other waterways flow deep into lush jungle, while the river itself wanders lazily toward the sea. Cambodians like to remind visitors that much of this delta region was theirs before the French partitioned the territory in 1949. The Vietnamese dispute this. The delta’s fertile soil has long been worth arguing over—or fighting for. The famous floating markets of the delta are a little way south of Can Tho; their products abound on the city’s streets. Older women preside over rainbow mounds of dragonfruit, pomelo, durian and jackfruit, while young men tend grills of muddy-tasting snakehead fish. Of the Mekong delta’s 18.6m people, about a fifth of Vietnam’s population, more than three-quarters work in agriculture; on its roughly 4m irrigated hectares, the average farm size is just 1.2 hectares. From only 12% of Vietnam’s surface area the region provides most of the country’s fish and fruit, as well as half its rice; farmers can get seven crops in two years. Dang Kieu Nhan, a researcher at Can Tho university, points to an old Vietnamese saying: “If you want to make a good living, go to the Mekong delta: it’s hard to be hungry there.” The worry is that some of what the region enjoyed in the past may now be beyond purchase. Few places in the world are as threatened by climate change as the Mekong delta. A brief stroll around Can Tho already leaves you coated in sweat, and the city is set to grow much sweatier. Average temperatures in Can Tho rose by 0.5ºC between 1979 and 2009. Vietnam’s natural-resources ministry predicts that temperatures will rise by a further 1.1-3.6ºC by 2100. It also expects more severe storms, wetter wet seasons and drier dry ones; all those effects, it says, will be greatest in the south. Though rice thrives in wet, warm climates, it cannot stand too much of either. Rice fails when submerged underwater for long periods. Flooded fields can also hinder planting, and therefore harvesting. Rice yields may decline by an average of 10% for every 1ºC rise in average night-time temperatures. A changing climate may also lead to a flourishing of weeds and pests in rice fields. Rising sea levels threaten not just the crops, but also the fields themselves. A report from the International Centre for Environmental Management, a consultancy, projects a 28-33cm rise in Vietnam’s seas by 2050, and 65-100cm by 2100—levels exacerbated, in the delta, by declining sediment flow from upstream. A sea-level rise of one metre could flood more than a quarter of the delta, and leave five million homeless. Can Tho is just 80cm above sea level. The ocean could make farming impossible well before it finally swallows the land. Rising seas cause saline intrusion: seawater moving into places unaccustomed to it, such as wetlands and freshwater aquifers. Salt in a rice field can ruin the crops. Up to 70% of the delta’s agricultural land could be subject to saline intrusion this century. Some delta farmers have responded by switching from rice farming to aquaculture: shrimp, in particular, thrive in brackish water. But they fare poorly when the water gets as salty as the sea proper, meaning rising sea levels will eventually render shrimp farming just as impossible as rice farming. Mangroves once provided a healthy buffer against both salinity intruding into the water table and the heavy winds that drive seawater inland, but population pressure and aquaculture have put paid to a lot of Vietnam’s mangrove forests. That leaves the delta reliant on dykes and hydraulics to mitigate saline intrusion, and these are expensive to build and maintain. Less intensive agriculture could relieve the stress on the delta, but Vietnam has a growing population to feed, and makes billions of dollars from exporting rice, fish, shrimp and fruit. Sediment carried downstream can help repair coastal erosion, but not if dams trap it in reservoirs. Mr Nhan mentions the prospect of shifting crops: cultivating rice and shrimp in the brackish lowlands, fruit and vegetables in the centre and high-value export rice in the upper delta. This makes sense—it may be the best that can be done until drought ruins the rice and rising seas reach the fruit. For now the Mekong, which began as a trickle of snowmelt high up in Tibetan cloud-country, slices through riots of tropical green to meet the South China Sea in a network of river mouths known as the “nine dragon river delta” in what appears to be much the same way as it always has. Tourists who watch women haggling in floating markets over baskets of mangosteen and fresh fish, or who see peasants in conical hats farming paddies by hand, imagine that they are witnessing something timeless—life as it always has been, its rhythms dictated by seasons, land and sea. But though it seems they are witnessing a pastoral, what they are seeing is in fact the opening scene of a tragedy: the part where the characters act as they always have, but their fate looms large. Eventually, all rivers empty into oceans; water comes together with other waters. But for this river, at this delta, the sense of an eternal return is lessened, that of an ending heightened. The seas, driven by a century of global industry, rise higher, while for the sake of a little more industrial power, the gifts of the river are being squandered. Life as it has been is not life as it will be. The days of stepping into the river are numbered.NORTH KOREA sent its latest satellite into orbit on February 7th, five days after Groundhog Day. Much of the world could be forgiven for thinking that, like the protagonist in the 1993 film of that name, they are stuck in a time loop. They wake up, North Korea tests a nuclear weapon, other countries condemn its actions and the UN Security Council descends into bickering until the cycle begins again. But just as in the film each day is subtly different, so with North Korea now: the latest test may actually mark the end of a period in which China was prepared to get tougher on its unruly client. From now on, China and America may disagree more strongly about how to deal with the nuclear risks that North Korea poses. In 2012, after Kim Jong Un, the North’s third-generation dictator (pictured above), last tested a satellite, China endorsed a UN resolution that tightened sanctions against his regime and even sounded a warning, via Global Times, a Communist Party newspaper, that if the North “engages in further nuclear tests, China will not hesitate to reduce its assistance”. Three years on, a Chinese spokeswoman merely expressed “regret” at the new launch, while the foreign minister, Wang Yi, sounded a warning that any UN resolution “should not…destabilise the Korean peninsula”. In contrast to such mildness, South Korea said it would shut down the Kaesong industrial complex that it runs jointly with the North. That is a big step. The factory park just on the north side of the two countries’ border employs 54,000 North Koreans working for dozens of South Korean companies. It is the first time the South has shut the park—previous closures were initiated by the North, when it wanted to apply pressure on the filthy capitalists running the South. South Korea’s move over Kaesong is an indication of how seriously it takes both the satellite launch, which was really a cover for testing a long-range missile, and the test of a nuclear device, the fourth such, which took place on January 6th. The three fatties A change in China’s attitude does not reflect greater friendliness towards the regime in Pyongyang. Leaders are exasperated with Mr Kim. Ordinary Chinese deride him online as “the third fatty”. (The previous two were his grandfather, Kim Il Sung, and his father, Kim Jong Il.) Junior’s insistence on the satellite test made China’s president, Xi Jinping, look ineffectual. Mr Xi had sent a veteran diplomat, Wu Dawei, to Pyongyang, presumably to persuade Mr Kim to postpone or scrap the trial. All the same, after a period in 2012-14 when Chinese officials engaged in a lively and sometimes public debate about whether North Korea really was a strategic asset, China’s government has reasserted its traditional support for its troublesome neighbour. According to diplomats, Mr Xi took the decision last summer: a domestically stable North, he ruled, was preferable to an unstable one, even if the country is building a nuclear arsenal. China will keep the North afloat. And so China has done little to shut off the flow of goods to the North. That matters. The $7 billion-odd a year in bilateral trade is nine-tenths of North Korea’s total trade. Nearly half of the North’s food, seven-tenths of its oil and four-fifths of its consumer goods come from China. China has long feared that upheaval in the North could cause a refugee crisis. But the clinching argument for Mr Xi may have been that he saw relations with the North in the context of deteriorating relations with America. “It is impossible to co-operate fully on the Korean peninsula,” one official told a visiting professor from South Korea, “so long as the United States continues to engage in provocative behaviour in the South China Sea.” It may be doubted who is really being provocative there. But China’s calculation is that North Korea is a buffer between itself and South Korea, a staunch American ally and host to American forces. At a time when China sees itself as a rival in Asia to the United States, that buffer grows more important. Yet the cost of keeping the buffer may be going up for China. Jonathan Pollack of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank in Washington, DC, sees “tangible changes in the tone and substance” of American policy since North Korea’s satellite and nuclear tests. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, called the nuclear test “reckless and dangerous…an overt threat”. He demanded more UN sanctions, just as America’s House of Representatives passed a bill to allow America to punish firms from third countries, such as China, if they help the North evade American sanctions. Fantasy reunification: What the two Koreas would gain from each other if Kim Jong Un's regime fell Further, after the satellite launch South Korea began talks with America on deploying an advanced missile-defence system, the Terminal High-Altitude Air Defence platform (THAAD), meant to destroy missiles from the North. China thinks the system could be used against its own weapons; for years it has tried to stop deployment. It has expressed more concern about THAAD than North Korea’s satellite. Perhaps that is not surprising. South Korea’s decision to adopt THAAD is a big setback for Mr Xi. He has met Park Geun-hye, his South Korean counterpart, six times (in contrast, he has never met Mr Kim). If he had hoped to tempt South Korea to downgrade its alliance with America, he has failed. In addition to talking about THAAD, the two countries said they would hold larger joint military exercises this year. In short, and to China’s dismay, North Korea has provided America with the justification for increasing military deployments in North-East Asia. Mr Kim may one day test Mr Xi’s patience to destruction. For now, the gap is widening between America and China as they try to rein in Mr Kim’s nuclear ambitions. At least until the next Groundhog Day.FOR 27 years Yvonne and Noel Gerke ran a transport business, hauling logs from Tasmania’s forests to mills grinding woodchips for customers in Japan and elsewhere in Asia. Then came the global financial downturn as well as campaigns to protect Tasmania’s native forests (see article). It clobbered the timber industry. “We employed 45 people until it crashed and burned,” says Ms Gerke. Four years ago the Gerkes took a payout from Australia’s federal government to quit logging. They are now gambling on another commodity: water. Australia is the world’s driest continent. Climate change is expected to make its droughts even more frequent. The country is still paying for years of overexploitation of its biggest river system, the Murray-Darling basin. The federal government in Canberra is spending A$3.2 billion ($2.2 billion) buying up and cancelling farmers’ water entitlements in a bid to reduce salinity and repair other environmental damage stretching back a century. While mainland farmers are being paid to give up water, those in wetter Tasmania are being enticed to buy more. The island state accounts for just 1% of Australia’s land mass and 2% of its population. Yet it receives 13% of the country’s rainfall. Tasmania may be blessed with water, but most of it falls in the mountains of the west, making it useless to farmers elsewhere. So the island has embarked on a project to capture more water for its drier east and north, shifting it through pipes to these regions’ farms. Almost 800 farmers have already bought into ten irrigation schemes that are up and running. They will allow farmers to do more than graze sheep and cattle; they will be able to grow fruit and vegetables, including more of Tasmania’s exotic stuff: cherries, grapes for the island’s increasingly fashionable wines and even poppies (the island is a big opium supplier for legitimate pharmaceuticals). If another five planned schemes involving 200 farmers go ahead, Tasmania’s investment in shifting its water around the island will be almost A$1 billion. The federal and Tasmanian governments are putting up some of the money. But that comes with conditions. Farmers and other investors must first agree to meet at least two-thirds of the costs of each irrigation project before governments commit the rest. The Gerkes have bought into one of the newer projects near Scottsdale in northern Tasmania (see map). Pastures in this dairy region are parched after Tasmania’s lowest spring rainfall on record. In recent years two timber mills and a vegetable-processing factory have closed. Jeremy Rockliff, Tasmania’s deputy premier, says the region is among those “most devastated” by the forest industry’s downturn. He reckons the irrigation projects will “future-proof” Tasmania against drought. Perhaps. But the prospect of water prompted the Gerkes to swap the known risk of timber for the unknown one of farming. They bought 445 hectares (1,100 acres) of grazing land north of Scottsdale. “It was run down,” says Ms Gerke. A creek was its only water source, “and that dried up.” When Tasmanian Irrigation (TI), the public company that operates the irrigation schemes, proposed one for Scottsdale, the Gerkes and 91 other farmers offered to buy in. But that was not quite enough to secure public money for the scheme. So Dorset council, the region’s local-government authority, said it would invest A$1.7m in the water. Greg Howard, the mayor, argued it would help bring back jobs. TI designed a storage dam on a rivulet near Scottsdale, with pipes to start pumping water to each of the participating farmers’ gates in two years. It will flow through about 70 kilometres of pipes before it reaches the Gerkes’ farm. Joining the scheme will cost them A$189,000. This entitles them to 135 megalitres of water a year; if other farmers want more, they will have to pay more. The irrigation company will charge the Gerkes another A$11,000 a year towards maintaining the network’s pipes and pumps. By the time they pay for their own infrastructure to distribute the water on their farm, they estimate their total investment in obtaining water at almost A$500,000. They plan to use the water to turn some grazing land into vegetable plots. On the rest of their land, they hope to grow lusher grass for livestock. So they will probably make more money. And once the water reaches them, they can trade some of it each year with other irrigators in their scheme who need more. The Gerkes’ water will not be fixed at A$1,400 a megalitre, the price they paid: the market will find the new price. “Everyone in the area is quite excited,” says Ms Gerke. “We’ve taken such a hit recently.” Tasmania’s new water market has already been kind to one of its biggest investors. David Williams, a Melbourne banker, owns no Tasmanian farms. But he put A$10m into two central Tasmania irrigation schemes after local farmers had bought in. Mr Williams likens the arrival of reliable water in such regions to technological change: “I punted that it would change the way land is used.” He calculates that trading his water entitlement with farmers in both schemes could turn his investment into A$16m. Mr Williams compares water management on Australia’s eastern mainland, where he lives, unflatteringly with Tasmania’s approach, which looks more efficient. Small hydroelectricity systems have been designed to power three of Tasmania’s schemes. This will cut farmers’ energy costs, and even raise revenues from sales to the public grid. In some mainland states Tasmania’s public-private partnership approach is seen as a model for mending old improvident ways with water. In Tasmania there are hopes that a water boom could make people think differently about the state’s economy. A mainland mining bonanza, linked to trade with China, enriched the rest of Australia but bypassed Tasmania. Instead, it boosted Australia’s currency and hurt Tasmanian exporters of timber and farm products. Now that the mining bonanza is over, signs of a Tasmanian upturn are emerging. Attracted by a cheaper currency, more than 1m people visited Tasmania in the latest fiscal year, a record. Tourists are drawn to Tasmania’s clean air, natural beauty, good food—and increasingly hip image. A huge and provocative underground gallery, the Museum of Old and New Art, or MONA, opened five years ago just outside Hobart, the capital. With installations that include a machine that makes excrement, it has proved a hit with visitors. Among the foreign tourists coming to sample Tasmanian Riesling, oysters and marbled beef are plenty of Chinese. When China’s president, Xi Jinping, visited Hobart in late 2014, he sent signals that China wanted more seafood, beef and other costlier food exports from Tasmania. China’s relentless pursuit of reliable food supplies is likely to do Tasmania a lot of good. Lu Xianfeng, a Chinese businessman, is bidding to buy a big dairy producer, Van Diemen’s Land, in north-west Tasmania. Mr Lu says he wants to tempt China’s newly affluent class with top-quality food from Tasmania. In a recent report to the Tasmanian chamber of commerce, Saul Eslake, an economist, pondered a large gap that has opened between Tasmania’s economic performance and the rest of Australia’s. Tasmania’s gross state product per person was 27% below the national average last fiscal year. Mr Eslake reckons that making more niche goods of the type that attract Mr Lu (he highlights wool, wine and wagyu beef) offers Tasmania a better chance of closing the gap than the “bulk, undistinguished products” of old, like woodchips. Water can be turned not only into wine, but also into wealth.The race is not always to the swift BRUNY island, off south-eastern Tasmania, is a home to the swift parrot. Small and green, with patches of red and blue, it breeds only in Tasmania, feeding on nectar from the blue gum tree, a eucalypt, and migrating to south-eastern Australia for the winter. But the logging of Tasmanian forests has destroyed its habitat. (And the parrots’ habit of crashing into office windows of Hobart, Tasmania’s capital, does them no favours.) Only 2,000 individuals may survive. In November the state government stopped logging on Bruny Island after an outcry over the parrot’s plight. An earlier study by Dejan Stojanovic, of the Australian National University, and colleagues had revealed how logging and land-clearing for farms in Tasmania had left swifts, which breed in the trunks of old gum trees, vulnerable to predation by sugar gliders, an introduced possum. Unlike the swift parrot’s other Tasmanian breeding grounds, Bruny Island has no sugar gliders. But the Wilderness Society, a conservation group, says that the birds will still be harmed if logging goes ahead. It estimates that the logging planned on Bruny Island for the next two years would destroy almost 40% of the parrots’ habitat there. Loggers and environmentalists have long disagreed on what should be allowed in the forests that cover about half of Tasmania. Both sides signed a peace deal four years ago under a former Labor state government that protected more forests and bought off loggers. A UNESCO-listed world heritage wilderness area was expanded to embrace the Styx valley west of Hobart, thick with eucalyptus trees thought to be 600 years old. The listed region now covers almost a quarter of Tasmania. But the truce did not last. On becoming premier two years ago, Will Hodgman of the conservative Liberal party said he was tearing up the deal, concerned that his state’s growth lagged the rest of Australia. He now proposes opening up some protected areas for logging. UNESCO wants commercial logging in the listed forests banned. It will soon report to the federal government, also Liberal, which is responsible for protecting Australia’s world heritage regions. Meanwhile, as it promises a “management plan” for the swift parrot, Mr Hodgman’s government seems keen to expand logging outside Bruny Island. Protesters against plans to log in Lapoinya, in north-western Tasmania, were arrested last month. Some predict that Tasmania could be heading back to the old days of greens and lumberjacks at loggerheads.FOR two days next week Barack Obama will lay on a party for an unlikely club at Sunnylands, a Californian estate used for bigwig retreats. Among his guests are: a recent coup leader; Asia’s longest-serving autocrat; a prime minister who thinks there is nothing untoward in having several hundred million dollars paid into his bank accounts; two superannuated communist leaders; and a hereditary sultan with 420,000 loyal subjects and 257 bathrooms. Oh, and there are even a couple of democrats. The club is ASEAN, the ten-member Association of South-East Asian Nations. It is the first time an American president has played host to all South-East Asia’s leaders at once. Why the summit? Businesswise, ASEAN matters to America. Taken together, which increasingly it wants to be, its members would be the world’s seventh-biggest economy. American foreign investment in ASEAN was $226 billion in 2014, more than in China, South Korea and Japan combined. South-East Asia is young and economically vibrant. Second, democracy in South-East Asia needs the kind of boost Mr Obama’s attentions will provide. Myanmar’s extraordinary democratic transition remains fragile. In Thailand politics has lurched backwards since Prayuth Chan-ocha’s coup of May 2014 suspended democracy. This irks America, Thailand’s chief ally. As the annual Cobra Gold military exercises, involving Thailand, America and 25 other countries, began this week, the American ambassador in Bangkok called for a return to elected government. Meanwhile, in Malaysia the money scandals and racial politics of the prime minister, Najib Razak, are undermining democratic institutions. A little lecturing by Mr Obama behind closed doors would not hurt.   But, above all, American officials boast that the gathering underlines the success of Mr Obama’s “pivot” or “rebalancing” towards Asia. That is disingenuous, given the scant material evidence of a pivot. Certainly, Mr Obama has attended to South-East Asia more than his predecessors did. No president has made more trips to the region, with unprecedented visits to Cambodia and Myanmar and, later this year, to Laos and perhaps Vietnam, once America’s nemesis. Mr Obama has also appointed America’s first ambassador to ASEAN and has regularly attended ASEAN leaders’ meetings. And having spent four happy childhood years in Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital, he has a personal link with the region that is shared by no previous president. Yet leaders are coming to Sunnylands less because of Mr Obama’s engagement than because of China and its recent assertiveness. China’s once-vaunted “smile diplomacy” in the region has seemed to turn to scowl. Its expansive claims in the South China Sea have greatly strained relations with neighbours with overlapping claims. In 2014 China dragged an oil rig into Vietnam’s territorial waters, provoking confrontations at sea and violent anti-Chinese protests on land. Chinese aggression towards the Philippines in disputed waters near the Spratly Islands emboldened the government of Benigno Aquino to ask an international tribunal in The Hague to adjudicate on the nature of China’s South China Sea claims, which are as legally vague as they are grabby. Meanwhile, ASEAN members have boosted naval co-operation and defence ties with America, Australia, Japan and India. There is even talk of tensions driving a naval arms race. Some now divine a softening on China’s part. Perhaps it sees the public-relations damage. Perhaps it remembers how, in 2010-11, Myanmar plopped out of China’s orbit and into the West’s. At any rate, some of the smiles are being turned back on. Under its “one belt, one road” initiative of building globe-girdling trade links, China is promising to invest in ports and railways across South-East Asia, assisted by another Chinese-led venture, the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. (Besides the diplomatic payoff, this is intended to provide an outlet for goods from half-idle Chinese factories.) China has always welcomed South-East Asian autocrats such as Mr Prayuth and Hun Sen of Cambodia. Now even democrats with Nobel peace prizes are going to Beijing. Last year President Xi Jinping received Myanmar’s Aung San Suu Kyi, who had long been shunned. American policymakers sneer that, with its chequebook diplomacy, China is crudely attempting to buy influence across the region. Perhaps that is true. But if so, it hints that China understands the damage its sabre-rattling has done and is trying to make amends. ASEAN members no doubt appreciate its largesse. However, they remain suspicious of its intentions. So they turn to America as a counterweight to Chinese influence. Much like a Yorkshire Terrier sharing its bed with a Great Dane, small countries bordering big ones tend to be nervous: even if the big dog is inclined to be good-natured, it could still roll over and crush the Yorkie. Just ask Canada or Mexico. Hedges make good neighbours So the Sunnylands summit cannot have pleased China—especially since it was there that Mr Obama welcomed Mr Xi for a groundbreaking love-in in 2013. South-East Asian diplomats crow that the choice of place shows that America considers ASEAN to be just as important as China. Yet the meeting between the two presidents was an introduction. This one will be more like a valediction. At least five of the 11 leaders gathering in California, including Mr Obama, are on their way out of office. And among those who will remain, Mr Prayuth and Mr Hun Sen preside over dangerously fragile polities. The summit is unlikely to yield much more than the promise of future summits. But for ASEAN, obsessed with process more than with destinations, that may be just fine, with America remaining a hedge against China. If China really wants the region more firmly in its orbit, it will have to do a better job of speaking softly and concealing the stick.February 8th began as a day of celebration in Hong Kong: it was the start of the Chinese new year (this one influenced by the “fire-monkey”, according to Chinese astrology). It ended in the worst outbreak of rioting since the 1960s. The violence flared amid rumours that officials were trying to clear away unlicensed hawkers selling local delicacies, including fishballs. Reports that some rioters shouted “establish Hong Kong as a country!” suggest that it was about more than fried food. Ninety police were among more than 120 people injured. More than 60 alleged participants were arrested, including a leader of an anti-China group called Hong Kong Indigenous. Members of it had used social media to rally support.
