LAST week Vladimir Ashurkov, a former executive at Russia’s Alfa Bank, stood at the front of a tour bus full of journalists and academics threading its way through London’s Whitehall district, lecturing into a microphone as he pointed out an £11m ($16m) apartment belonging to a senior Russian official. Mr Ashurkov is a close ally of Alexei Navalny, a Russian anti-corruption campaigner and opposition politician, and the event was one of a series of “kleptocracy tours” organised by émigré activists to publicise how corrupt regimes launder their fortunes in London’s property market. Mr Ashurkov fled Moscow in 2014 after prosecutors, in the midst of a crackdown on Mr Navalny, targeted him in an investigation that he says was politically motivated. He was granted asylum in Britain, where he joins a growing community of exiles who have left or been pushed out of Vladimir Putin’s Russia. The first Russian to inquire about political asylum in Britain may have been Tsar Ivan the Terrible, who wrote to Queen Elizabeth I in 1570 asking whether she would take him in if things got too hairy in Moscow. (Elizabeth replied that he could come if he paid his own way.) Ivan never came, but England has since offered refuge to generations of Russian political exiles. Alexander Herzen, Russia’s first socialist, came to London in the 1850s and published his newspaper Kolokol (Bell), which was smuggled back into Russia. Lenin lived briefly in Bloomsbury, and is said to have met Stalin at a pub in Clerkenwell. Today London is home both to Mr Putin’s cronies and to opponents of his regime trying to lay the groundwork for the day it vanishes. Putin or the Ritz The most prominent political exile is Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who was one of Russia’s most powerful oligarchs until the government seized his companies and jailed him in 2003. Freed in 2013, Mr Khodorkovsky now calls London “the second-best place to be after Moscow, if you follow Russia”. From his Mayfair office he runs Open Russia, a civil-society group that sponsors discussions between Russian experts, journalists and artists, streamed to Russia via the internet. He has also launched an online university project that looks at Russia’s modern history, in particular the 1990s, not as a period of chaotic weakness (as Mr Putin describes it) but one of cultural vitality and opportunity. Unlike many earlier dissidents, Mr Khodorkovsky is not directly working to hasten the regime’s end. Instead he aims to nurture a new Russian political elite, so that when the transition comes “we don’t end up in the same place as we did when the Soviet Union collapsed”, lacking leaders with democratic experience. As for what might bring about that change, Mr Khodorkovsky does not think it will be elections. Either Mr Putin will anoint a successor, or there will be “a revolution, with luck a bloodless one”. He has no illusions about how long that might take. “Putin may stay till 2024. This is why I am not working with anyone who is over 40.” Mr Ashurkov, too, is thinking about the future: “We want to have a seat at a virtual round table about what Russia would look like after Putin.” As a first step, he has launched a project to analyse all the repressive laws passed by the Russian parliament in recent years that would need to be revoked by a future democratic Duma. A timeline of Vladimir Putin’s unshakeable popularity One obstacle to building a post-Putin elite is that many of the young people who might form one are leaving the country. The Soviet Union of the 1970s and 1980s prevented its citizens from defecting, forcing young, independent-minded people to sit tight and hope for change. In contrast, Russia has kept its borders open, letting the steam escape. The result has been one of the largest brain drains in Russian history. Leonid Bershidsky, a former editor of Vedomosti, a business daily, has called the latest exodus an “emigration of disappointment”. Mr Bershidsky himself moved to Germany in 2014, after his hopes that Russia would become a normal European country were dashed by the annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine. Shortly before leaving, he wrote on his Facebook page that he did not wish to “pay a single kopeck for Crimea. Stolen goods are stolen goods.” Most young Russians in London are neither exiles nor oligarchs, but professionals in search of the careers and intellectual fulfilment they can no longer find at home. Eduard Uraskulov, 30, who works at the London office of Goldman Sachs, was born in the small North Caucasus republic of Karachavo-Cherkessia. He considers himself a globalised Russian, wearing his nationality as lightly as his German, French or Brazilian peers. His road to London’s City started with a degree at Moscow’s prestigious New Economic School, then headed by Sergei Guriev, one of the country’s top economists. In 2013 Mr Guriev, who had advised Mr Navalny and testified in favour of Mr Khodorkovsky, was forced to flee himself. (Now a professor in Paris, he has just been appointed chief economist at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.) Like many of his friends, Mr Uraskulov was at the protests in Moscow’s Bolotnaya Square in the winter of 2011 that sparked off Russia’s latest saga of oppression and exile. “There was a really good atmosphere then. It is very sad that nothing came of it,” he says. Mr Uraskulov does not consider himself an émigré. “As soon as I see that things are starting to change, I will go back,” he says.IF BRITAIN adhered to Groucho Marx’s dictum of never joining a club willing to have him as a member, it would be on its way out of the European Union. The “renegotiation” of Britain’s EU membership pursued by David Cameron, the prime minister, has been a fanciful exercise designed to keep his Conservative Party in check. But it has at least forced Britain’s EU partners to accept that, if pushed, they are better off with the infuriating islanders as part of the family. The EU, said Bild, an exuberant German tabloid, would be “spiritually” poorer after a Brexit (even if that may be read as a plea not to be left with the French and Italians). The paper was responding to a draft settlement for Britain sent to EU governments last week by Donald Tusk, president of the European Council. Mr Cameron aims to convert Mr Tusk’s paper into a deal during a summit of EU leaders on February 18th-19th, and then put Britain’s membership to a referendum, probably in June. There is plenty of time for hiccups before then. The Poles and others are grumbling about an “emergency brake” that allows Britain to restrict benefit payments to working EU immigrants. France is suspicious about safeguards for non-euro members. Last week Martin Schulz, president of the European Parliament, warned an audience in London that Britain had tested Europe’s patience. He and his fellow lawmakers could hold up the legislation needed to implement parts of the deal. Mr Tusk himself admits that the situation is “fragile”. But broadly, although Mr Cameron has taken a hammering at home over the draft, the signs in Europe look good. Few seem in the mood for a showdown; even the Poles are less obstreperous than expected. Mr Cameron’s peers decided that they needed to give him enough goodies for him to make his case to voters. And the prime minister secured some victories that many had argued were beyond his reach, even if they hardly amount to the fundamental change in Britain’s membership that he once promised. For that Mr Cameron can thank the litany of woes afflicting Europe. Next to security fears, euro-zone sclerosis and the worst migrant crisis the EU has ever known, Britain’s little problem looks eminently solvable—and the departure of an economic and foreign-policy heavyweight an accident best avoided. Mr Cameron helped by steadily restricting the scope of his demands (see article). And the dread prospect, should Britain vote to leave, of spending years in painful negotiations over an exit settlement probably did Mr Cameron no harm. When everything else is falling apart, says a European official, at least the Britain talks give us a chance to get something right. Where does this leave the rest of Europe? Mr Tusk’s great fear was that other countries would seek their own special treatment during the renegotiation: a carve-out from climate rules for the Poles, say, or a more lenient fiscal regime for the periphery. So worried were the deal’s brokers that they explicitly warned some governments not to try any funny business during the talks. And by and large, apart from Catalonia’s chancer of a president (who mused that he could exploit the flexibility the EU showed with Britain in his bid for independence from Spain), they did not. Indeed, the most contentious elements of the Tusk deal seem designed to avoid such antics. Much of the package consists of clarifications of existing law designed to soothe British anxieties without upsetting the workings of the EU (or tampering with its treaties). A “red card” granting groups of national parliaments the right to block legislation, for example, gives Mr Cameron something to boast about. But the threshold of 55% of parliaments means it will rarely, if ever, be used. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Most strikingly, the legislation that will satisfy Mr Cameron’s obsessive demand to deny in-work benefits to migrants for four years will be crafted to limit its application beyond British shores. The European Commission, which will draft the law once the governments have struck their deal, has even stated that Britain satisfies the criteria for pulling the emergency brake before specifying what they are. Downing Street could not resist crowing about this concession before it was announced. Then everyone will want one Thus does the circle look squared. Mr Cameron will probably win a deal that he feels able to sell to British voters. Assuming there are no nasty accidents at referendum time, the rest of the EU reduces its list of crises by one without fatally damaging itself in the process. Could this turn out to be that rarest of beasts: a European diplomatic triumph? Not quite. Mr Cameron says other countries can enjoy the fruits of his renegotiation, but few will. Apart from a rule allowing governments to pay lower child benefits to parents with children abroad (which migrant-worker magnets such as Germany may exploit), most EU countries do not care about the provisions Mr Cameron negotiated. This is a deal to satisfy British concerns. Alas, that may be the problem. A package designed as an improvement for the whole machine might be presented as a one-off. But special treatment for the British sets a precedent. The Italians might cite it to pursue their vendetta against the fiscal limitations of the Stability and Growth Pact. Easterners could call for exemptions from refugee-sharing schemes. Previous special deals (such as the Danish opt-outs of the Maastricht Treaty of 1992) did not have this effect, but they were struck in happier times. Today the EU is under siege from populists looking to bring the edifice down, and joint projects like the passport-free Schengen zone are in grave danger. Still, before all that British voters will have to be seduced by their prime minister’s diplomatic dance. So far, despite the EU showing Britain that it wants it inside the club, many Britons still seem distinctly unimpressed. Mr Cameron, hoisting his renegotiation prize triumphantly, does not want to follow Groucho’s example. But there is no guarantee that the electorate will agree.GEORGE OSBORNE sees himself as a reformer. The chancellor promised that, unlike his Labour predecessors, he would take tough decisions to improve the economy, whether this was liberalising planning to boost housebuilding, promoting competition between energy firms, or cutting red tape for businesses. When in opposition, Mr Osborne also set his sights on the tax code. In 2008 he proclaimed (with some hyperbole) that Britain’s code was “the longest [and] probably the most complex in the world”, promising “long-term thinking on simplification” if he got into power. He even mulled the idea of a flat income tax, where everyone pays the same rate regardless of their earnings. Yet eight years on, the tax system looks as fiddly as ever. In 2010 Mr Osborne set up an Office of Tax Simplification (OTS) to hold the government to account, rather as the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) acts as a watchdog over fiscal policy. The OTS identified 1,042 tax reliefs in Britain. Plenty were ripe for reform. People could even get relief for the first 15p of “luncheon vouchers”, an idea dating from a time of rationing in 1946. Relief on luncheon vouchers is no more, but other wheezes have proliferated. In 2012 oil firms charged with decommissioning old rigs were given relief on corporation tax. A year later Mr Osborne allowed workers to cede employment rights, such as the ability to claim unfair dismissal, in exchange for tax-free shares in their firms. From March children under 16 will not have to pay air-passenger duty (only in economy class, mind). By March 2015, the OTS found, the number of reliefs had risen to 1,156. From 2009 to 2015 the number of pages in the tax code grew by about a third. Not all tax reliefs are foolish or damaging. The largest, costing roughly £80 billion ($115 billion) a year, is the personal allowance for income tax, a simple and progressive policy whereby people pay no tax at all on the first £10,600 of their earnings. So Adam Corlett of the Resolution Foundation, a think-tank, tries to capture the underlying complexity by adopting a restrictive definition of tax reliefs, which covers measures designed to “promote economic and social objectives”. Such reliefs resemble public spending. The state could, for example, give selected small firms either a grant or a tax break; the effect on the recipient (and on taxpayers) is practically identical. By this measure, the cost of tax reliefs rose in 2010-15 from 5.5% to 6% of GDP. All this has made life no easier for business. A report on the coalition government’s tax policies from Oxford University’s Centre for Business Taxation found “little evidence of real simplification”. According to the World Bank, since 2010 the time taken by the average firm to pay corporate, value-added and labour taxes has remained unchanged, at 110 hours a year (though, happily, this remains relatively low by international standards). On top of this, a failure to eliminate or simplify tax reliefs also hits the public finances. They encourage tax avoidance, which official estimates put at around £3 billion a year. And in a world of tight budgets, with spending by departments under ruthless scrutiny, many seem to offer poor value for money. Tax reliefs for film-makers, for example, whereby a production company can claim a rebate of 25% of film-production spending, has boosted the number of British flicks (“Last year alone we saw eight British-made films nominated for an Oscar,” Mr Osborne enthused in 2015). But it is not clear that this is worth the £2 billion cost to the government over the period from 2007 to 2015. Meanwhile, relief on capital-gains tax for entrepreneurs costs £3 billion a year, three times more than official forecasts predicted. Yet a report commissioned by the tax office found “few cases where [it] appeared to have a major influence on the business behaviour and tax planning of claimants”. At £100 billion a year, according to Mr Corlett’s calculation, revenue forgone in tax reliefs is roughly equal to the NHS budget; but few have been assessed to see whether they are worth the cost. The first year of a new parliament is when big decisions on tax are best made. Mr Osborne will have to announce some in next month’s budget, not least because the fiscal outlook has deteriorated since his autumn statement in November. The Bank of England has cut its forecast of GDP growth in 2016 to 2.2%. The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), a think-tank, reckons that receipts from income tax and national insurance in 2020 may be £5 billion lower than expected in November. So Mr Osborne will be looking for ways to make up the shortfall. He could choose a 33% flat rate on pension tax relief, yielding about £5 billion a year, according to Capital Economics, a consultancy. A more modest possibility is cutting tax relief on claims for travel expenses, which would yield £300m. Such reforms could even make the tax system a mite simpler. But the direction of travel is, as ever, towards greater complexity. The Treasury has never published an overall strategy for the tax system, complains Paul Johnson of the IFS. Instead, chancellors pick tax policies for reasons of political expediency. In July Mr Osborne raised the threshold for inheritance tax from £650,000 for a couple to £1m. The increase applied only to housing wealth, not financial assets. The effect is perverse, encouraging people to funnel yet more cash into Britain’s bubbly housing market. The OTS might have acted as a check on such wheezes. But it has little power. Unlike the OBR, few people have heard of it. It has had a small budget and has not been sufficiently independent of government, argues Julian McCrae of the Institute for Government, a think-tank. The Treasury fiercely guards its tax prerogatives. So far the OTS has not even been involved in pre-budget discussions about new tax measures, says Tracey Bowler of the IFS. In an ideal world the Treasury would ditch its long-standing practice of keeping policies under wraps until the chancellor presents them in his annual budget, argues Mr McCrae. Consulting in advance would encourage officials to consider fully the impact of proposed changes, thus dissuading economically damaging political grandstanding. It is getting better at this, consulting on changes to corporate taxation, for instance. But that is tinkering around the edges. Unless Mr Osborne changes course and revives the idea of simplification, the unfortunate reality is that the tax system is likely only to become more byzantine.Hey small spender: Tusk and Cameron DAVID CAMERON is frantically working to secure agreement at next week’s European Union summit to proposals recently set out by Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, to satisfy British demands for reform of the EU. The prime minister hopes a deal will allow him to hold his planned referendum on Britain’s EU membership in late June. One striking contrast with past British rows over Europe is the lack of any fuss over money. In Harold Wilson’s renegotiation of 1975, and again when Margaret Thatcher asked for her money back in 1979, Britain’s budget contribution was the central issue. Its absence this time may seem surprising, since it is an article of faith among Eurosceptics that Britain pays too much for its membership: some £20 billion ($28 billion) a year gross, or about half that net of receipts (roughly 0.5% of GDP). There are three explanations. The first is that, contrary to myth, the EU budget is modest, less than 1% of GDP. And it has been shrinking, not growing. The budget is smaller as a share of GDP than in the 1990s, even though the club has taken in ten poor countries from eastern Europe. Thanks partly to British parsimony, the multiyear budget in 2014-20 will also cut spending. The second reason is that it is hard to assert that Britain now bears an unfair burden. In the 1980s, before the Thatcher rebate, Britain came next to West Germany as a net contributor; without some corrective action it would have become the biggest, despite being one of the poorest members of the club. Thanks to the rebate, which refunds some two-thirds of its net contribution, Britain ranks eighth out of the ten net payers per head (see chart). This is despite surrendering part of the rebate after 2005 to ensure that Britain paid a fair whack to new members from central and eastern Europe. As the chart suggests, indeed, several other countries have a stronger case than Britain for complaining about their EU budget contributions. It is partly because of this that no fewer than four—Germany, the Netherlands, Austria and Sweden—have secured special reductions in their share of the British rebate. That means the burden of repaying Britain falls most heavily on France and Italy. The third answer is that a post-Brexit Britain would almost certainly go on paying into the budget, even as it lost EU funds for farmers, universities and scientific research. This is because the EU exacts cash in exchange for access to its single market. Norway, which has access via the European Economic Area, pays roughly 90% of Britain’s net contribution per head. Switzerland, which is not in the EEA but has bilateral trade deals, pays around 50%. Both countries subsidise their farmers even more lavishly than the EU, so the idea that Brexit would save taxpayers from supporting British farmers is also questionable. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Eurosceptics insist that Britain could get a better deal than Norway and Switzerland. Or it might forgo full access to the single market and do a free-trade deal like Canada’s, ending budgetary payments. Yet the first seems unlikely in a bitter post-Brexit atmosphere: a country that walks out of the EU can hardly expect better terms than ones that might join one day. As for a Canadian deal, not only would it be hard to negotiate but it would exclude most services, including financial services, a key component of British exports. The EU budget has many faults: too much goes on agriculture, plenty of spending in Mediterranean and east European countries is wasted, Eurocrats’ pay is excessive, and fraud and misappropriation are distressingly common. But the dream that Brexit would yield a pot of gold by saving the Treasury a huge and unfair contribution to Brussels is mostly just that.“SUPINE” and “deferential” have been some of the adjectives applied to the Intelligence and Security Committee, the nine-member body of MPs and peers which oversees Britain’s spy agencies. Unlike its counterparts in America’s Congress, it has a small staff, and it has failed to make much impact on issues such as the alleged participation of British officials in torture or rendition of suspected terrorists. Not any more. The committee’s report this week on the government’s draft bill on investigatory powers—termed the “Snoopers’ Charter” by critics—adopted a tone of blistering disdain. It accused the government of hurrying the bill through, said its language was in places “incomprehensible” and that the powers it authorised were far too sweeping. It bemoaned the lack of explicit protection for journalists’ sources and lawmakers. In particular, it said that the protection of individual privacy, not the promotion of spookdom, should be the centrepiece of the bill. The report echoes strong criticism from another parliamentary committee, dealing with science and technology, which complained that the bill did not explicitly rule out forcing companies to create back doors in the encryption they provide for customers. That, and the new burdens placed on internet companies to collect and, if required, hand over records of their customers’ activity online, risked damaging Britain’s competitiveness, it argued. A third joint committee, created to scrutinise the central measure in the bill—a new system of judicial oversight, under which warrants will be issued not by the home secretary alone, but by new commissioners—reported on February 11th. It broadly welcomed the new measures but said the government had “further work to do” in allaying worries about the necessity and cost of collecting internet records, and in justifying so-called “bulk powers” (bugging and snooping en masse). The criticism is directed chiefly at the government, not at spooks. Britain’s spymasters insist that they are happy to work within any legislative framework, and note that nobody has shown any evidence that they abuse their snooping powers under the existing one. None of the committees disputes the idea that the intelligence and security agencies should have the right, in some circumstances, to get hold of people’s private data, bug their phones and trawl databases in search of patterns and connections. The question is under what authority this happens, on what grounds, with which exemptions in case of urgency, and with what retrospective scrutiny. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union The government is now in difficulty. It needs to pass the new bill: the existing laws are barnacled, vague and out of date, and are liable to fall foul of judges in Luxembourg (at the European Court of Justice) and in Strasbourg (at the Court of Human Rights). Both are due to rule this year on cases which could rattle Britain’s intelligence agencies, particularly GCHQ, which deals with electronic surveillance and code-cracking. The new system of judicial authorisation for warrants should help reassure outsiders that Britain’s spooks are under control. Moreover, a stopgap law, which gives them temporary authority to bug and snoop, expires this year. But it is hard to see how, given the withering criticism it has received, the draft bill can proceed in its current form. A hurried rewrite risks running into the same difficulties as the current version. The fundamental problem is that the government has not been able to define the meaning of vital terms such as “necessary”, “proportionate” or “urgent” in a way that even sympathetic lawmakers find convincing. Despite the government’s pickle, the bigger point is a positive one, about Britain’s system of intelligence oversight. The same privacy advocates who once derided the Intelligence and Security Committee as a poodle are now cheering its resolve.Small print, big bill IN JANUARY the “big six” energy companies, which dominate the retail markets in gas and electricity, began their winter ritual of lowering prices. E.ON kicked off, cutting its standard gas tariff by 5.1%; Npower, SSE and Scottish Power then made similar reductions. On February 11th British Gas, owned by Centrica, and EDF followed suit. Rejoicing all round, surely, especially for anxious consumers awaiting their winter heating bills. Not a bit of it. Instead the reductions were met by angry complaints. It was “too little, too late”, said many; after all, the wholesale price of gas plunged by one-third last year. And only gas prices have been cut; electricity is not coming down. So, as usual, the big six are in the doghouse. The high price of energy was an election issue last year. Now energy firms have to worry about the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA). Responding to the continuing public outcry over high prices, the CMA launched an inquiry into the energy market two years ago; its final report is due at the end of March. As the CMA has already stated that too many customers are paying too much, it is expected to recommend some intervention in the market, maybe even a price cap in the short term. Unsurprisingly, the big six are against this, and insist that the market is competitive.   Many customers are caught out by the high price of the standard variable tariff (SVT) relative to those of the fixed one-year or two-year deals that are available if they shop around. The SVT is the default option, rolled over unless a customer actively switches to another tariff. And whereas the fixed deals have fallen in line with the wholesale price of gas, the average SVT has not (see chart). Switching has got easier, but still about 70% of the big six’s customers cling on to their SVTs, thereby forking out about £160 ($230) a year more than if they switched to a cheaper deal, even within the same company, according to the CMA. Why so few customers switch when it is clearly in their interest to do so is the matter of greatest controversy, and the focus of the CMA investigation. Critics argue that switching remains too difficult, and that firms still do not do enough to alert their customers to the lower fixed-rate tariffs. Edmund Reid, an analyst at Lazarus, a consultancy, says that the big six have “generally focused on maximising the profitability of their disengaged customers”, as they make much less money on the other tariffs. This is a risky strategy politically, as these non-switching customers also tend to be those who are least able to afford the higher prices. The big six say that they are caught in a squeeze. There is now an unprecedented number of suppliers—about 30—and the market share of smaller companies has risen rapidly, from about 2% in 2012 to over 10% today. The big six are thus haemorrhaging customers, while their fixed costs, of transmission and regulation, will rise this year from April 1st when a new round of so-called Renewable Obligations comes into effect. Companies such as SSE argue that, according to the CMA’s own surveys, most customers know they can switch, but many prefer to avoid the hassle. Nigel Cornwall, an energy consultant, suggests that the CMA should scrap the limit on the number of tariffs that companies can offer, now four, to introduce more price differentiation. But whether that would induce the big six to reduce their SVTs is an open question.IN A speech on February 8th David Cameron set out what he claimed was “the biggest shake-up of prisons since the Victorian era”. The package included more freedom for governors, league tables for jails and measures to improve ex-cons’ job prospects. But Mr Cameron also announced a proposal which could reduce the number of people who end up behind bars in the first place: the introduction of “problem-solving courts”. Such courts were established in Miami in 1989 to deal with drug offenders. First- and second-timers were sent to treatment programmes, rather than prison, and their progress was overseen by a judge who could send them to jail if they relapsed. Other states soon began to copy the idea, which was cheap (or at least cheaper than prison) and added a hint of tough justice to rehabilitation. By 2012 there were 1,122 problem-solving courts in America, dealing with everything from school truancy and gambling addiction to gun crime and domestic abuse. Mr Cameron is not the first British politician to be inspired by the model. In 2005 the Labour government set up a pilot court, the North Liverpool Community Justice Centre (NLCJC), which was billed as a one-stop shop for tackling crime. It was run by a single judge, bringing together justice agencies and services such as housing and domestic-violence support. Problem-solving meetings were often held after a guilty plea (someone steered towards crime by their homelessness might get help finding housing, for example). And some offenders could be dragged back to court to have their progress reviewed. The early signs were good. Visitors enthused and staff spoke of the innovation made possible by different services sharing a home. But in 2012 a report by the Ministry of Justice found that criminals who had been through the NLCJC were no less likely to reoffend, and were more likely to break court orders, than a control group. Partly as a result, the Ministry of Justice closed the NLCJC in 2014. Many still defend the project. Some argue that the outcomes for the toughest cases were good, even if the average results were no better than regular courts; others say that it struggled because it was largely forgotten by central government, after strong support in the early stages. The family courts, which deal with disputes over divorce, custody of children and so on, have been more successful in introducing problem-solving. A study by Brunel University in 2014 found that 40% of mothers with drug or drink problems who went before the London Family Drug and Alcohol Court (which involves fortnightly meetings with the same judge, regular drug-testing and the threat of removing children) kicked their habit, compared with 25% of those going through the normal family courts. Specialist domestic-violence courts and Miami-esque drug courts have also proved effective, though to varying degrees. What lessons can be learnt from these mixed results? First, that regular meetings with a familiar judge who can review sentences in light of offenders’ behaviour are crucial (by contrast, the NLCJC only occasionally assessed progress). A wide range of services must be consulted on the best approach in each case: much of the success of the family drug courts is due to the work of social services, says Penelope Gibbs of Transform Justice, a charity. And costs must be kept low. The NLCJC was so expensive that it was unlikely ever to be copied. Michael Gove, the justice secretary, has worked hard to win over judges, some of whom are sceptical of an approach they see as infringing their independence. The potential of problem-solving courts makes such efforts wise. As well as reducing reoffending, says Andrew Neilson of the Howard League, another charity, they could bring about a valuable cultural shift. “The criminal-justice system currently makes sentencing decisions on very little evidence about what works,” he says. Regular contact between judges and the people they sentence might provide an incentive for that to change.THE drumbeat of war reverberates around the House of Commons. The enemy, deadlier than al-Qaeda or Islamic State, lurks in every home: sugar. In January the National Health Service announced plans for a “sugar tax” on sweet drinks and snacks in hospital canteens. The same month Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, introduced a levy of 10p ($0.15) on cans of drink sold in City Hall. Later this month the government will launch a strategy to combat childhood obesity, perhaps including a tax on soft drinks and sweets, as imposed in countries such as France and Mexico. Yet MPs decrying sugar’s impact on the nation’s health should first examine their own diets. A freedom of information request by The Economist to the House of Commons canteen shows that employees of Britain’s lower chamber have a sweet tooth of their own. In 2014-15 Commons caterers ordered confectionery and soft drinks containing 4.8 tonnes of sugar, equivalent to 1.2m sugar cubes, or 680 cubes per full-time equivalent staff member. (Sugar content was available for only three-quarters of the items ordered, so the real total will be higher.) During the last parliament, from 2010 to 2015, 625,464 cans and bottles of Coke were chugged, and 659,470 chocolate bars and packets of sweets guzzled. KitKats are Parliament’s choc of choice, accounting for one in six snacks. Each contains 26% of an adult’s recommended daily sugar intake. At least Commons staffers are tightening their belts. The number of chocolates and sweets ordered dropped from 150,572 in 2010 to 99,412 last year; staff have cut their soft-drink consumption by 10% and prefer Diet Coke to the full-fat variety. Their intake is much less than that of the average British child, who consumes 22kg of sugar per year. Still, the sugar gobbled by MPs and their aides during working hours is two-thirds their recommended daily intake (and they may not eat only salad at home). That, says Jennifer Rosborough of Action on Sugar, a lobby group, is too high. She suggests fruit, unsalted nuts and water. One item in the saccharine census stands out. Perhaps unsurprisingly given the amount of time MPs spend shouting at each other over the dispatch box, 480 packets of throat lozenges were ordered last year. Sugar tax or no, some sweets are likely to remain popular.ONCE, Britain’s asylum-seekers could live where they pleased, but since 1999 they have been sent to a few places, mostly on Britain’s margins. These districts tend to be poor: Middlesbrough, which has the country’s highest number of asylum-seekers per person, also has its largest proportion of deprived neighbourhoods. Since most of Britain takes almost no asylum-seekers, officials in “dispersal areas” often complain this is unfair. Simon Danzuck, MP for Rochdale, which has Britain’s second-highest concentration of asylum-seekers, recently grumbled that his constituency is being used "as a dumping ground". In some ways the policy is a good one. It sends asylum-seekers to places where housing is cheap and plentiful (houses in Middlesbrough sold for less than half Britain’s average in December 2015; many of the houses asylum-seekers now live in were previously boarded up). And the habit of concentrating refugees in the same places over many years may actually help integration. One theory goes that fellow ex-countrymen have a protective effect on new migrants; and, although tensions remain, locals tend to become more welcoming after years of new arrivals, says Heather Petch of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, a think-tank. This can be seen in Stockton, in north-east England, which has Britain’s fourth-highest number of asylum-seekers per person. Teatime drop-ins have grown into dedicated asylum-support groups; charity workers reminisce proudly about refugee children who are now at university. Growing groups of migrants have created demand for particular food and clothing: some refugees have set themselves up in the catering businesses. Bini Arai, who arrived in Middlesbrough from Eritrea 15 years ago and now runs a basement drop-in centre for asylum-seekers, says the community has become more supportive. The main problem is that these areas have higher-than-average unemployment rates, and that people tend to stay there once granted asylum, rather than finding work elsewhere. According to Kath Sainsbury, who works for a refugee charity in Stockton, it is almost impossible to move on unless you already have a job lined up. Local authorities are obliged to provide refugees with welfare only if they have already been living in the area. There is also often a gap between the end of asylum assistance and the start of state benefits, meaning that people cannot afford to travel and must fall back on local shelters to avoid homelessness. Few have jobs lined up. And although local businesses have learned to value industrious new refugees, says Ms Petch, it is hard to make connections with employers elsewhere if you don’t speak much English. English teaching is both patchy and in the wrong patches. One refugee charity in Bolton says it is the district’s only service offering formal English lessons, and the waiting list is around six months. Asylum claims also take a long time to be processed, which means that claimants get rooted in a place. Gulwali Passarlay, an Afghan refugee originally placed in Kent, says it took a friend 15 years to gain refugee status from a dispersal area near Birmingham, and by that time he had seven young children in a local school. Alexander Betts of Oxford University believes the Home Office could start placing asylum-seekers according to skills shortages in local areas. This might not be enough. Britain’s history of refugees includes stories of great success, such as the Ugandan Asians and the Vietnamese boat people. But these involve free movement and have city backdrops. The IMF found that Europe’s current crop of refugees could raise economic growth if integrated well into the job market. Britain’s restrictive policy may mean it loses out.ALMOST a decade ago a new, ruddy-faced Conservative Party leader urged his comrades to stop “banging on about Europe”. David Cameron was right: his party’s neurosis was making it look clammy and xenophobic. He tried to kill the subject by marginalising it and, whenever his MPs became restless, flashing some Eurosceptic ankle. Hence in 2009 he pulled his party out of the European People’s Party (the EPP, the continent’s main centre-right grouping); in 2011 he tried to block a pact to save the euro zone; and in 2013 he pledged to renegotiate Britain’s membership and put the result to a referendum within four years. Thanks to this last gambit, Mr Cameron must now switch positions: having long played footsie with Eurosceptics and confronted his continental partners, today he must take on the former and flirt with the latter, especially in the build-up to the summit on February 18th at which the 27 other members of the European Council will discuss the draft renegotiation published on February 2nd. This all amounts to a morality play about the risks of short-termism. Take the domestic picture. Though once mocked as a Tory replica of Tony Blair, Mr Cameron ditched his predecessor’s quest to put Britain at the “heart of Europe”, redefining the EU as a necessary evil. That was risky. As Ken Clarke, a pro-EU former chancellor, warned: “If you want to go feeding crocodiles then you’d better not run out of buns.” Today the prime minister’s bun store looks sparse, his talks having extracted some decent but, to many, paltry concessions. Perhaps 150 of 330 Conservative MPs remain undecided on EU membership, the merits of which were once party orthodoxy. “The mood is hardening,” reports one eminently pro-leadership Conservative MP surprised to find himself contemplating an Out vote, despite the angry civil war raging between different would-be Brexit campaigns. Meanwhile commentators are debating whether Margaret Thatcher would have backed an In vote, none of them having had the common decency to pay for a séance. Questions swirl about the cabinet. So far five members have come out for Brexit. A larger number, including George Osborne, the chancellor, seem committed to membership. But three especially big Tory names are awaiting Mr Cameron’s deal. Theresa May, the home secretary, has indicated but not confirmed that she will back In. Michael Gove, the justice secretary and a quietly snappy crocodile, is torn between his ideals and his loyalty to the prime minister. Meanwhile Boris Johnson, the pro-EU mayor of London, is torn between his ideals and his loyalty to his own ambitions. He will back membership only at the last possible moment, as this will mean doing his three least favourite things: hitching his lurching wagon to someone else’s steady train, admitting that Mr Cameron is right and revealing his cards in any future leadership contest. All of which has forced Mr Cameron and his allies at last to come out with a hearty case for the EU. In a speech hailing the draft deal the prime minister asserted: “Britain is better off, more secure, more prosperous…inside the European Union.” The following day, to some grumbling, he invited his MPs to make up their own minds rather than bow to their local associations. Meanwhile Ms May boasts of her close links with her French and German counterparts and Nick Herbert, the Eurosceptic now running the Conservative pro-EU campaign, phones MPs stressing the case for membership. In a similar fashion, Mr Cameron’s dealings with his European partners have evolved from tactical raids into relationship-building (see article). By quitting the EPP he cut himself off from the EU’s most powerful information-sharing network. His veto in 2011, for example, was not a bold heresy but a misreading of the European mood (the prime minister had expected to trade it away for a change in voting rules). Likewise, in 2014 he alienated partners by ignoring diplomatic advice and mooting a cap on the number of migrants from the EU to Britain. In bilateral meetings last year he even threatened to lead the Out campaign. But in the past months he has backed out of these positions, partly at Angela Merkel’s behest. Both he and Mr Osborne have toured Europe wooing their counterparts. One adviser claims the prime minister now gets on better with some—especially Mrs Merkel and Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister—than with many in his own party. “He got diplomacy pretty late in the day, but better late than never,” agrees Charles Grant of the Centre for European Reform. This has not gone unnoticed in Brussels. “He has rediscovered the art of building relationships with people,” says a European Commission insider, crediting the moderating influence of Tom Scholar and Ivan Rogers, Mr Cameron’s two top advisers on European matters. Vanitas vanitatum, omnia vanitas What does this say about Britain’s prime minister? It is clichéd (and worse, unfair) to claim Mr Cameron is just a breezy toff, an “essay crisis” incumbent. In fact he has strong views about how society should look, works at a rate that would exhaust most and is well aware of his political mortality. He is a versatile and astute chancer. His renegotiation is the product of these traits—and two fundamentals in particular. First, of the many things Mr Cameron has long known and cared a lot about, the EU is not one. Second, his faith in his ability to devise and execute canny manoeuvres exceeds the (albeit impressive) reality. So on matters continental, the PM is a powerful car with a wobbly steering wheel. The result is tactical short-termism from a prime minister otherwise capable of being long-termist—but endowed with the wit and charm to extricate himself from the ensuing scrapes and to keep the show, albeit chaotically, on the road. Expect the coming months to bring theatre, brinkmanship, clever-clever flourishes and ultimately, in all likelihood, an In vote. Whether this circus will have merited the drama and risk is another matter. Economist.com/blogs/bagehot
