More fish to fry THE waters off the Hawaiian island of Oahu are visited each winter by migrating marine mammals such as humpback whales. All year round they are home to much smaller animals that form vast reefs: corals. Intricate pink structures stand out amid contortions of vegetable-green ones; dark-striped fish flit among them and turtles hover above. Corals lay down limestone skeletons of different shapes and sizes: branching types like small trees; ground-huggers spreading squat. The colours that lure snorkelling and scuba-driving tourists are produced bysingle-celled algae that grow symbiotically in corals’ tissue. These use carbon dioxide respired by their host to make oxygen and carbohydrates through photosynthesis, giving corals most of the energy they need to form their skeletons. But this delicate balance is threatened by humans, both in the short term and over the coming years. Overfishing, tourism and pollution are the most immediate perils, disrupting reefs’ ecosystems and the ability of corals’ algae to photosynthesise. In the longer term, rising levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will hit reefs in two ways. Oceans absorb about 30% of carbon dioxide emitted into the atmosphere, which makes them more acidic; as concentrations of carbon dioxide in the water rise, it will be harder for coral skeletons to calcify. And as oceans warm, corals will lose their colourful algae, which can only cope within a narrow range of temperatures. Reefs will be reduced to bleached-looking skeletons, vulnerable to disease. Only twice before has such bleaching occurred worldwide. The first time coincided with El Niño in 1997-98, the world’s largest climatic phenomenon, which causes surface temperatures to soar in the Pacific Ocean. The second was in 2010. A third is now under way. About 16% of corals died in the 1997-98 disaster. The current bleaching event, once more occurring alongside a Niño, may have affected 38% of the world’s corals. Conditions now may offer a foretaste of the damage climate change could wreak on these already vulnerable ecosystems. The harm before the storm Coral reefs are found from the Middle East to Australia and America. They cover less than 0.1% of the ocean floor. But their importance is far greater than that figure suggests. They protect 150,000km (93,000 miles) of shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories by acting as coastal buffers, enduring the brunt of high waves and rough weather. They also support perhaps a quarter of all marine species, and act as nurseries for many others. In South-East Asian waters, the richest reefs are in the “coral triangle” (see map). This area of 86,500 square km holds two-thirds of the world’s coral species and more than 3,000 species of reef fish—twice as many as are found anywhere else. More fish to fry In the past half-century, though, these beautiful, biodiverse structures have been put under pressure by human activity. About a quarter of all coral cover has died. The reefs that are in worst shape are those off the most crowded beaches. “People don’t leave enough time for their sun cream to soak in, so it gets in the water,” says one deckhand with Eo Wai’anae Tours, which organises boat trips off Oahu. More damage is caused by fertiliser-rich run-off from farms, leading to algal blooms which block light the corals need. Fishing near reefs cuts the number of herbivorous fish, allowing vegetation to grow out of control. Some fishing methods are particularly harmful: for example, blast fishermen in Colombia, Tanzania and elsewhere use dynamite to stun and kill fish without regard to the harm done to nearby reefs. Crown-of-thorns starfish, coral-chompers that have proliferated in some areas, including Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, add to the stress. In the South China Seaisland-building and fishing for giant clams are crushing some reefs beyond the possibility of recovery (see article). The World Resources Institute, a think-tank, estimates that about 60% of reefs face such immediate threats. The bounty that reefs provide accrues to those living near them, and in the short term. Without strong property rights, the result is an unfolding tragedy of the commons, in which fishermen and tour operators destroy the resources they rely on. Tourism generated by the Great Barrier Reef is worth about $4.6 billion annually to nearby Queensland alone. Australian bigwigs bent over backwards last year to keep the UN from listing the reef, a World Heritage Site, as “in danger”. Estimates suggest that the economic value of Martinique and Saint Lucia’s corals comes to $50,000 per square km each year, thanks largely to tourism. But overdevelopment threatens the reefs the visitors come to gawp at. Sediment from construction clouds waters, burying corals and blocking the light they need. Hotels close to the shore may be convenient for tourists, but the process of building them can kill the reefs that snorkellers like to swim over. The mix of problems varies from place to place, meaning policies must be locally tailored to tackle them. But even when governments and environmentalists focus on the long term, the need to limit fishing means they often struggle to craft policies that do not cause immediate harm to poor people. The three countries with the largest numbers of people who fish on reefs are all in the coral-triangle region: Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and the Philippines. In Indonesia and in the Philippines, up to 1m people’s livelihoods depend on reefs. Averting a tragedy of the commons means agreeing which activities should be restricted and enforcing the rules. For coral reefs—and other biodiverse marine environments—the usual approach is to give ecologically sensitive areas special status under local or regional laws. In such “marine protected areas” (MPAs), activities that are deemed harmful, such as fishing, drilling and mining, can then be restricted or banned, with penalties for rule-breakers. Command and conquer The Aichi targets, agreed in 2010 under the UN Convention on Biological Diversity, seek to reduce “anthropogenic pressures” on coral reefs to “maintain their integrity and function”. The aim is to have at least 17% of inland water and 10% of coastal and marine areas under conservation by 2020. Most countries have signed up. But the targets are far from being met. Less than 3% of the ocean’s surface is within an MPA. The most urgent action is needed close to shore. The nearer humans are to reefs, the worse their effect on the fragile ecosystems. A global register of fishing vessels, long under discussion, would also help identify wrongdoers. And beefing up the UN law of the sea could inspire further action. Decades old, it has little to say about biodiversity. But simply declaring an area protected does not make it so. In 2009 George Bush junior, then president of America, established three national marine monuments in the Pacific, including nearly 518,000 square km of coral islands and surrounding areas. Their remoteness makes it hard to stop vessels entering illegally; Hawaii’s coastguard is already stretched. Satellites are sometimes used to police MPAs, but they pass over infrequently. In the future, sailing robots could play a larger role. America’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has been working with a private firm, Saildrone, on hardy models equipped with carbon-fibre fins. They cost less than $500,000 each and can roam remote ocean regions for months, making them far cheaper than manned boats. Such drones could photograph rogue fishing vessels, obtaining hard-to-gather evidence for any criminal proceedings. And they could carry out other useful work at the same time, such as monitoring ocean temperature and acidity or tracking tagged members of endangered species. Saildrone plans to provide its robots as a service, so that universities and other cash-strapped organisations do not have to buy one outright. Richer countries are better able both to administer and to enforce MPAs. Three-quarters of coral reefs in Australian waters are in MPAs, but only 16% of those within the coral triangle. “It is difficult to ensure systematic monitoring,” says Rusty Brainard of NOAA, who has advised marine scientists in the region. Indonesia has more than 17,500 islands, he points out. In poor parts of the world, low-tech methods of surveillance are needed. Just 0.09% of Malaysia’s territorial waters, and those within its exclusive economic zone, are protected by an MPA. But a national programme requires fishermen to paint their vessels according to how far out they have permission to fish within the nearshore area. Other fishermen can then spot when a rogue vessel has strayed, even if they cannot read. And as boats require regular painting anyway, little extra cost falls on their owners. Public-private partnerships could also help. A pilot project in Barbados, supported in part by local hoteliers and tourism organisations, will charge visitors to enter a coastal MPA managed by Blue Finance, an alternative-investment outfit with support from the UN Environment Programme (UNEP). About $1m was needed to set up the area; its upkeep will require half that each year. “We find private investors who don’t mind if their returns are a little below market rates because they are benefiting Barbados,” says Nicolas Pascal, an environmental economist who directs the company. Other pilots are under way in Colombia and Martinique. But more backers are needed. According to research conducted under the Convention on Biological Diversity, investment will need to quintuple for the Aichi targets and other conservation goals to be met. The effectiveness of marine reserves is hard to measure. Reefs are complex, ancient systems, and the effects of better policies will become known only gradually. “You can’t manage ecosystems: you can only manage the impact of humans upon them,” says Jerker Tamelander, the head of the reef unit at UNEP. Even if the right policies are adopted to keep corals healthy in the immediate future, longer-term threats loom. Neither oceanic warming nor acidification can be kept out by an MPA. And both may be happening too fast for corals to adapt, especially as recent global climate deals will not slow them much. Back slaps and handshakes accompanied the inclusion of an aim to limit global warming to just 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels in the Paris Agreement last year. But only an incorrigible optimist would bet on that aim being achieved. And even if it is, that much warming could breach the environmental limits within which most reefs can thrive. Nurture, not nature So researchers are turning their attention to ways to help corals cope. Their global diversity, scientists hope, may hold the key. The same coral will grow differently under different conditions: corals of the western Pacific near Indonesia, for example, can withstand higher temperatures than the same species in the eastern Pacific near Hawaii. Such disparities can be found even quite locally. In Kane’ohe Bay, where the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology lies, 70% of some reef patches has been bleached in the current event. Others, less than 200 metres away, suffered bleaching to just 40% of their corals. The characteristics that help some reefs survive unusual conditions could allow others to endure climate change. But tough corals from one place cannot simply be transplanted to another. So a team at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology is in the early stages of engineering reef ecosystems, with $4m from the Paul G. Allen Foundation, a charity set up by Bill Gates’s former business partner. Organisms respond to environmental changes through both genetic processes (adaptation) and non-genetic ones (acclimatisation). With corals, the nature of their symbiotic relationships can also alter. So selectively breeding and conditioning them, and investigating whether certain types of algae confer resistance to heat or acidity, could create hardier varieties faster than they would develop naturally. These could then be used to repopulate ravaged reefs—once more is known about how and where to transplant them. “We’re assisting evolution,” explains Ruth Gates, who leads the research. Her team aims to help corals withstand changing ocean temperature and chemistry. Despite all her effort, she says: “if the tools we develop are never used, I would be the happiest person in the world.” CORRECTION: In an earlier version of the map accompanying this article, some of the marine protected areas displayed were incorrect. This has now been rectified.Illicit cargo: a clam-laden Chinese fishing vessel THE giant clams that lurk in the coral reefs of the South China Sea can live for more than a century and grow more than a metre wide. Their shells are coveted by China’s rich as swanky furnishings or cut into trinkets, such as jewellery. Large specimens can sell for thousands of dollars. The trade is damaging some of the world’s most important ecosystems. China’s giant-clam industry operates from the port of Tanmen on the southern Chinese island of Hainan. There skippers load rickety wooden fishing vessels with provisions for a month. Barrels of water are lashed down at the stern and pigs led to pens at the bow. On the sidedecks sit crude open boats with single-cylinder engines and long propeller shafts. Once the mother ship reaches distant reefs, these are lowered and the propellers used to chew up submerged coral. When the murk clears divers bring up any giant clams that are revealed. The plunder is illegal in China, and trade in giant-clam shells is banned under international treaties. But in Tanmen it operates in broad daylight. Recently the fleets have pushed deeper into the South China Sea and into waters claimed by neighbouring countries, including Vietnam and the Philippines. Satellite photos collated by Victor Robert Lee, an analyst, show that tell-tale scarring from clam-harvesting is now visible on more than two dozen reefs. Enforcement has become laxer since China stepped up its claim to all the islands, reefs and rocky outcrops contained within a “nine-dash line” that encompasses most of the South China Sea. In some places the build-up of Chinese naval and coastguard vessels has made it less likely that clam-harvesters will be chased off by foreigners. Many Chinese feel that fishermen help to project sovereignty, and should be allowed to secure for China a bounty which “poachers” from abroad might otherwise seize. Three years ago President Xi Jinping even visited fishing boats on Tanmen’s quay, though the offending shells were hidden from photographers.   If this were not enough, reefs are also suffering from efforts to build new islands in the sea, mainly but not only by China. Seeking a stable base for runways, weather stations and other installations which might help promote territorial claims, dredgers have been sucking debris from the sea bed and spraying it over reefs which sit just beneath the surface. Such muck-spreading not only kills many square kilometres of coral, but obliterates any chance that it will regrow. Ecologists fret that the tense security situation prevents them from measuring the extent of the vandalism. Chinese authorities are not entirely deaf to their complaints; since last year they seem to have tightened restrictions on clam-harvesting somewhat (and an anti-corruption drive led by Mr Xi may be lowering demand for the showiest shells). But China’s stance on island-building is uncompromising. In January one Chinese bigwig promised that any damage being done to reefs was “recoverable”. Almost no one outside China agrees.DURING the crisis of 2008-09, Warren Buffett made two big bets in the midst of the panic. He bought a slug of preferred stock in Goldman Sachs. And he took over BNSF, a huge railway. Goldman’s 32,500 bankers and BSNF’s 32,000 miles of tracks, stretching from the Pacific to Texas, had nothing in common, except that it was impossible to imagine American capitalism without them. “It’s an all-in wager on the economic future of the United States,” declared Mr Buffett when he bought the railway company, which, naturally, was advised by bankers working for a certain “vampire squid”. How right Mr Buffett was. The last decade has been a golden one for shipping goods around the world’s biggest economy (each citizen’s consumption of goods and power requires the movement of 36 tonnes of freight a year). American railways have been a rare example of capitalism working well, with a virtuous cycle of demand, giant profits and vast investment in rolling stock and tracks. Foreigners who snipe at America’s late-Brezhnev-era airports, smelly subways and rutted roads should, as the Proclaimers sang, take a look up the rail tracks from Miami to Canada. Fixed assets at North America’s six biggest freight-rail firms rose by 58% between 2004 and 2014, to $250 billion (see chart). Private firms have been spending almost as much each year on modernising American locomotives and tracks as the federal government has on roads. The infrastructure splurge has helped the environment, too, since trains are about four times as fuel-efficient as lorries. America’s freight railways are more efficient and far busier than their counterparts in Europe. But now this privately fuelled locomotive has been derailed. In the last quarter of 2015 the combined earnings of the big American and Canadian freight-rail firms fell by a fifth, compared with a year earlier, mainly because of the commodity-price crash. The industry has tried to shrug this off as a temporary blip. But if the downturn persists, the investment extravaganza will be over. Tougher times also raise the spectre of rail mergers, a phenomenon that has vexed America ever since the first transcontinental line was hammered together in the Utah desert in 1869. Dealmaking is already in the air, with Canadian Pacific (CP) pursuing a reluctant Norfolk Southern. This week CP said it would propose a shareholder resolution calling on Norfolk’s board to negotiate a merger. The deal is backed by Bill Ackman, an activist investor. It has thrilled Wall Street, peeved rival firms and put regulators on red alert. Before asking how the industry’s fortunes could go wrong, however, how did it all go right? Since being deregulated in 1980, American railways have gradually got their acts together. Plenty of tailwinds are behind them. Freight volumes typically grow with GDP. And rail, with a market share of about 40%, should take business from road haulage, now with over 50% of traffic, which faces tightening emissions rules and a struggle to recruit drivers. Greasing the tracks in the past decade was the commodity bubble. Newly drilled shale oil needed to be shipped from remote basins, and coal moved to power stations and ports—American coal exports doubled between 2005 and 2011, thanks to demand from East Asia and Europe. Intermodal transport (containers moved from ship to rail to lorry) rose rapidly, too, and now accounts for a fifth of sales. Rail managers discovered their inner rottweilers. Hunter Harrison, who runs CP (and before that was at CN, Canadian National), is eulogised by investors for his ruthless scheduling—he is said to monitor individual trains as they chug across the continent. Most important of all, after declining steadily since the 1980s, freight prices were jacked up stealthily, rising by 42% in real terms since 2004. Railroads could be accused of gouging their customers: pre-tax return on capital for the big six firms rose from 10% in 2004 to 19% in 2014. But that misses the bigger point. For every dollar of gross cashflow in 2014, 67 cents was reinvested. The industry’s appetite for capital spending is all but unique in America, where most firms spend bumper profits on share buy-backs to boost their stock price. Rail firms’ resistance to this corporate crack cocaine is hard to explain, but may reflect the lingering presence in their boardrooms of gnarled railmen with a love of horn blocks and glad-hand connectors, rather than earnings-per-share enhancement. What is clear is that the investment spree is now under threat from slumping profits. The shale industry is reeling. Coal volumes have fallen, as domestic power generators switch to dirt-cheap natural gas and the strong dollar hurts coal exports. The industry has solid enough balance-sheets to weather a storm, with net debt of 1.8 times gross operating profit. But an age of austerity beckons. Capital investment fell by 15% in the last quarter of 2015 compared with a year earlier. In 2016 it could drop by 20%. The industry’s unspoken plan is probably to keep raising prices while investing less and returning more cash to shareholders to keep them happy. This approach is likely to enrage everyone else. Customers such as carmakers, energy utilities and shipping firms will complain of being squeezed. Regulators will fret that the pace of modernisation has slowed. Despite a decade of huge investments there are still pressing congestion problems, particularly in Chicago, a bottleneck through which much of America’s freight is rammed. So how can the industry continue to satisfy both investors and society if demand and profits are lower and the need for capital spending is just as high? Perhaps by turning the big six railways into four, or even two. How big the rewards would be from mergers is fiercely contested. Mr Harrison says he could cut $1.8 billion a year from Norfolk’s costs (equivalent to a quarter of the total), although most of those gains would come from running it better, not from synergies through bolting it onto CP. Norfolk says he is exaggerating. Take your hands off my train set Train mergers have been an explosive subject for over a century, with a dread of isolation or exploitation at the hands of railway robber-barons lodged deep in America’s subconscious. The last round of deals was permitted in the 1990s, when the number of big train firms fell by half. The antitrust apparatus today is clunky. The federal Surface Transportation Board (STB) has had broad powers to block rail mergers on public-interest grounds since 2001. But it struggles to articulate a logic for assessing what it thinks makes a system better—does it want choice, modest returns on capital, lots of operators, lots of route combinations, or low prices? The industry already consists of three geographical duopolies—the West (where BNSF and Union Pacific dominate), the east (Norfolk and CSX) and Canada and its links to the United States’ industrial north (CP and CN). It is not obvious why linking two non-overlapping rail networks would make any area less competitive. But even saying that is taboo, and a giant head of steam is building up across the country against the CP-Norfolk deal. The Alabama State Port Authority is sceptical, Ohio’s soyabean farmers are livid, western Kentucky’s coal miners are perturbed, and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen foresees a “death spiral”. Most are worried about services and jobs being slashed. Both Union Pacific and CSX have said they oppose a deal. On February 4th nine members of Congress from Indiana asked the STB to be vigilant. The regulator itself is likely to be worried about the short-term disruption dealmaking could create. Consolidation in the 1990s caused chaotic delays. So Mr Harrison’s proposed deal looks likely to struggle. Yet the near-universal hostility to consolidation reflects a complacency born of the golden years. Now that cash is no longer raining down it will be harder to satisfy investors, customers and the long-term national interest all at once. Perhaps a rationalised rail system will ultimately be seen as the best solution for congestion. It may, however, take someone with Mr Buffett’s legendary patience to witness it.Kocher and Mestrallet: a double act from now on LETTING go is hard, especially for a French boss. Consider Gérard Mestrallet, who for 15 years has run Engie, a giant energy utility formerly known as GDF Suez. Under him the firm has prospered: it gathers annual revenues of around €75 billion ($84 billion) from 70 countries. At 66 the wily baron no doubt believes he has the vim to keep building his empire. In fact he will be replaced as CEO in May by his deputy, Isabelle Kocher, letting Engie celebrate something rarer than a badly dressed Frenchman: a female leader of a company in the CAC 40 index, which has only happened once before. (Continental Europe lags on corporate sexual equality: none of Germany’s DAX 30 firms has a female CEO or chairman.) However, a report in the French press on February 4th, citing a senior official, suggests that Ms Kocher will not have the run of the place. Her predecessor may hang on for two more years as chairman. Engie’s board meets this month and may confirm the news then. Since the government owns over one-third of the firm, it is said to be a done deal. But Ms Kocher will be able to put a positive spin on her situation. Assuming she remains just CEO, and does not in time become chairman too, Engie is joining a growing club of French firms that split their main leadership roles. That is something shareholders increasingly demand, arguing that having two leaders reduces risks in times of crisis, complexity and increasing regulation. The CEO runs the company while the chairman leads the board’s oversight of the management. In Britain it is the norm, and in Germany a legal obligation, to split the two roles. European Union rules force banks to do so, to reduce financial risk, so French banks are among the splitters. A big institutional investor reckons that shares in firms which have yet to split the roles suffer discounts of perhaps 5-10% as a result. Yet firms resist, mostly for cultural reasons. Since the Vichy government in the second world war, corporate France has concentrated clout in an over-mighty Président Directeur Général, “le PDG”, just as in politics power has been centralised in the president’s hands. “We have a cultural bias, we love having one person at the top, we love to personify power,” admits the chairman of a large French firm. “The PDG was God,” adds the chairman of another, who says conservative corporate culture makes quick change impossible. “People need to get used to the idea that becoming chairman and CEO is not the only goal in life, which will take a lot of maturing,” he says. Guy Sorman, a rare liberal commentator on French business, says shareholders have long lacked influence over such matters, but may be gaining ground now. Engineering a split One model is Safran, a big aerospace firm, which appointed a separate CEO and chairman after its last PDG, Jean-Paul Herteman, retired just over a year ago. Things have gone peacefully since, with shareholders, the board and managers content. The government, a big shareholder, favoured the split. Emmanuel Macron, the reformist economy minister, appears influential in pressing for change at firms in which the state has a stake. Other big firms to have done the splits include Valeo (car parts), Michelin (tyres), Unibail-Rodamco (property) and Danone (food). However, there have been examples of backsliding. AXA, a big insurer, split the two top jobs for a while until Henri de Castries, who had become chairman, also grabbed the CEO’s job in 2010. Total, an energy firm, divided the roles after its boss died in an accident in 2014; but in December his successor as chief executive, Patrick Pouyanné, also became chairman. Firms with a globalised share register—foreigners hold roughly half of the stock traded in CAC 40 companies—may change sooner than others. “When I talk with my colleagues, this is the kind of discussion we have,” says the boss of a big French firm, noting that Medef, the main business chamber, has been weighing up whether to recommend that companies divide up the top jobs. One chief executive, who has experienced having both a unified and a split role, says it is “much, much better if there is a dual structure”, as long as the chairman and CEO co-operate, especially in public, and exchange advice without meddling. Most importantly, he says, boards are getting used to the idea, so more firms are destined to become splitters. If so, whatever happens at Engie, the days of “le PDG” look numbered.The trials of St Jack FAITHFUL followers of Twitter believe that Jack Dorsey, one of the social network’s founders, is the only person capable of turning around the struggling firm. Mr Dorsey (pictured, during a recent Old Testament beard experiment) returned as its boss last year, taking over from Dick Costolo, who had led the company during a chaotic round of executive departures and strategic changes. True believers hope Mr Dorsey will be a reincarnation of the late Steve Jobs, who returned from exile to restore Apple to greatness. So far, however, Mr Dorsey has yet to perform miracles. On February 10th Twitter reported lacklustre earnings for the first full quarter that he has been back in charge. It now has 320m monthly users, no more than it had in the previous quarter, and it is unlikely to turn a profit until 2019. When Twitter went public in 2013, some believed it could become larger than Facebook, an older rival. Mr Costolo promised to build the “largest daily audience in the world”. Its prospects looked bright. Unlike Facebook, which began as a service on desktop computers, Twitter has always been popular on mobile devices, so it did not have to cope with a difficult transition. However, it has become clear that Twitter will never become the giant it was supposed to be. The pace at which it is adding users has slowed far sooner than it did at Facebook (see chart). Mark Zuckerberg’s outfit, which now has 1.6 billion monthly users, has grown swiftly by buying potential competitors such as Instagram, a photo-sharing site. One sign of Twitter’s ill health is that its number of users in America has stayed flat, at around 70m, for a full year, suggesting that it is approaching a ceiling in the world’s most important advertising market. Three problems have been hampering Twitter’s growth. First, there has been too much turnover of executives. At least 20 have left in the past two years. This has made it impossible to decide and act on a consistent strategy. Second, the reports about management turmoil have heightened an impression among some potential advertisers that the platform is not as mature as Facebook or Google, and thus is not worth taking as seriously. Third, new users find Twitter too fiddly compared with the alternatives (including Instagram and messaging services such as WhatsApp), which discourages them from continuing to use it. That said, many users and advertisers do still value Twitter. It is one of the best ways to reach people who influence the public’s conversations about brands, says Laura Desmond of Publicis Groupe, a giant advertising firm. However, to expand its audience, Twitter is in the difficult position of needing to keep long-time users happy while it makes changes that will increase its appeal to new ones. Mr Dorsey’s changes so far include “moments”, a new function which offers users a selection of the day’s top stories; and giving more prominence to tweets that Twitter’s algorithm judges more relevant. But more radical steps will be needed. Twitter is not the only tech firm with which investors, concerned by rich valuations and a gloomy economic outlook, are losing patience. In this volatile market, being a listed company with slowing growth is as bruising an experience as being attacked by trolls on social media. Yahoo and Yelp, two other struggling internet firms, have also been battered by the market. On February 4th LinkedIn, a professional networking site, beat analysts’ expectations for its quarterly earnings but forecast that its growth rate would slow significantly. This sent its shares down 44% the next day, wiping nearly $11 billion off LinkedIn’s stockmarket valuation. The sagging share prices of Twitter and other fallen internet stars have inevitably prompted takeover speculation. Twitter’s market capitalisation is now around $10 billion, less than a third of what it was a year ago. That makes it affordable for quite a number of firms. News Corporation, whose boss, Rupert Murdoch, is an active tweeter, recently denied rumours it might bid. Mr Dorsey is unlikely to want to sell up yet: he wants his flock to keep the faith, and still hopes to pull off a miracle.IT IS surely a promising sign for Terry Gou, the boss of Foxconn, that Japan’s largest business newspaper, the Nikkei, is reporting unflatteringly on his efforts to buy Sharp, a near-bankrupt electronics firm. At first the Innovation Network Corporation of Japan (INCJ), a government-backed fund, had seemed certain to snap up the company, and the Nikkei said little. But now the paper is calling Mr Gou a domineering, wilful “warlord of business” with close ties to China who it says has antagonised Sharp’s management with its tactics. So he must be getting somewhere. Mr Gou scored a coup on February 5th when he appeared to secure Sharp’s agreement to favour Foxconn’s bid of ¥660 billion ($5.6 billion) for the firm, rather than that of the INCJ, which is offering about half as much. Mr Gou says the two firms are set to strike a deal this month. If so, it would be one of the biggest foreign takeovers of a Japanese firm (see article). Sharp says it is still talking to the INCJ. Many foreign buyers have failed before. Japan Inc effectively slammed the door shut to overseas takeovers in 2007 when, backed by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Bull-Dog Sauce, a venerated condiment brand, cooked up a poison-pill defence to rebuff the advances of Steel Partners, an American hedge fund. Four years ago the INCJ, which has ¥2 trillion to invest, prevailed over KKR, an American private-equity fund, in buying Renesas Electronics, a chipmaker. An all-Japanese deal for Sharp would be awkward for Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, given his flagship policy of seeking to revive the economy via reforms. One element of his programme is to attract more foreign investment. Mr Abe’s advisers may even have had a say in Sharp’s abrupt change in attitude to Foxconn. Last year Mr Abe brought in a corporate-governance code that emphasises shareholder rights and the duty of outside board directors to promote them. Sharp’s external directors are said to have feared being sued by shareholders if they opted for the INCJ’s much lower bid. It was also difficult for Sharp’s two main banks, Mizuho Financial Group and Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, to shun Foxconn’s offer to assume some of Sharp’s debts. Losing Sharp to Foxconn would be a singular humiliation for the INCJ and METI. The INCJ had aimed to merge Sharp’s LCD-panel business with that of Japan Display, a firm whose creation it oversaw in 2012 and which is now Japan’s main maker of smartphone screens. Another scheme was to meld Sharp’s domestic-appliances business with those of other Japanese firms, including Toshiba, another troubled industrial group. The INCJ’s leaders are incensed at, and baffled by, the way the Taiwanese firm inched ahead. They argue that their plan is far tougher on Sharp and its banks. (As well as relieving the banks of much of Sharp’s debts, Mr Gou has hinted that he will keep the firm’s management and says he will not fire employees under 40.) “The biggest difference between the two bids is that we are asking Sharp’s Japanese main banks to cancel some of the firm’s debts and take a loss on them, since they are responsible for the company’s difficulty,” says Tetsuya Hamabe, chief strategy officer of the INCJ. That argument should go down well with reformers, who criticise the banks for propping up failing firms, if not with the banks’ own shareholders. The INCJ may fight to the last, but a deal with Foxconn would show that Japan is changing its attitude to outsiders. One reason it may come off is that as a failing firm, Sharp matters less for national pride. A foreign takeover of a more successful firm would be different. If, say, Tata Steel of India were allowed to buy Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corporation, imagines a government adviser, that would really signal that Japan is open to foreign buyers.AT FACE value, there is little sense in the $5.6 billion proposal by Foxconn, the world’s largest contract electronics manufacturer, owned by Hon Hai of Taiwan, to buy Sharp of Japan. It seems an extravagant price for a debt-laden firm that is bleeding red ink and squandered two previous bail-outs. Terry Gou, Hon Hai’s frugal boss, had the sense to walk away from a previous deal for his firm to invest $800m in Sharp in 2012, after the target’s finances deteriorated sharply. Why is he now so keen to spend lavishly on something that may prove a millstone around his neck? Mr Gou is not saying, but there are several possible explanations. Hon Hai surely wants to gain bargaining power over Apple, which provides around half its revenues. Foxconn, which has more than 1m workers on the Chinese mainland, has long been the biggest assembler of iPhones and other devices for the Californian firm. Since Sharp, which makes display panels, is also a big supplier to Apple, the combination would have more clout in negotiations over margins—which, at barely 3%, are now meagre at Hon Hai. Another factor might be Mr Gou’s desire to diversify Foxconn away from the grinding business of making devices for other firms, which profit nicely from owning the brands. About two-fifths of Foxconn’s revenues come from making networking equipment and servers for just a handful of Western firms, such as Cisco and HP. Foxconn assembles handsets for many firms, including Xiaomi, an ambitious Chinese company (although the mainland’s market for smartphones is reaching saturation). The rise of handheld devices has severely dented sales of desktop and laptop computers, which Foxconn also assembles. If Foxconn could design and sell its own devices under Sharp’s globally recognised name, it could at least keep the brand owner’s margin for itself. The desire for a low-margin assembler to move up the value chain is understandable. Foxconn has been making great efforts to become more inventive. A study in 2014 by the United Nations’ World Intellectual Property Organisation rated it as one of the most prominent filers of high-quality patents among firms officially resident on the Chinese mainland (as the company is, despite its Taiwanese parent). Foxconn also files its patents in America, whose standards are more demanding than China’s, and files lots of full “invention” patents as opposed to less important “utility” patents. Sharp has a proud history of technological advances, so perhaps that is why Mr Gou is ready to pay top dollar—especially if, having made a personal investment in one of Sharp’s display divisions a few years ago, he believes it has an important breakthrough in the works. If so, buying Sharp may help Mr Gou with his grand “eleven screens” strategy, by which he hopes his firm will become the dominant maker of displays for all sorts of devices, from computers to cars to smart watches. All this may explain his willingness to pay dearly for Sharp. But it will not make it any easier to turn around a broke and battered firm, should he end up owning it.Subrata Roy smiles on through adversity FOR businessmen scrambling to raise money in a bid to stave off bankruptcy, conference rooms can feel like little more than gilded prison cells. Few will feel this more acutely than Subrata Roy, the boss of Sahara, an Indian conglomerate: over the past 23 months he has worked out of a conference suite in a suburban Delhi jail. Held on charges of contempt of court relating to the sale of dodgy small-deposit plans to the masses—which the Supreme Court has ordered to be repaid, and whose proceeds he invested in property and other trophy assets—he has struggled to raise 100 billion rupees ($1.5 billion) in bail despite claiming his business is worth several times that. The ignominy of having to sell assets—Sahara is reportedly trying to flog the Grosvenor House hotel in London, four aircraft and a stake in a Formula One team, among other things—was once unthinkable for a “promoter”, the Indian term for founders and majority owners of businesses. A class unto themselves, the most flamboyant feature on the same glossy pages as Bollywood stars and cricketers in the national team (which Sahara once sponsored). Not all promoters are rogues, but the term is often used somewhat as “oligarch” is in Russia. Though life can hardly be described as tough for these plutocrats, they no longer enjoy impunity. Many thrived in industries where political connections mattered. They have found the new climate parching. At the top levels of Narendra Modi’s government, in power since May 2014, there are no longer the chummy relations that helped promoters secure precious permits, concessions and tax breaks. “Planes from Mumbai to Delhi used to be full of these guys heading to see ministers, you don’t see that any more,” says an investment banker. Political connections also meant access to credit. India’s public-sector banks, which make up 70% of the banking system, have made enough dud loans in recent years to prompt some to worry about financial stability. Most of the soured loans were made by state-bank officials to crony-infested industries such as infrastructure, metals and mining. In most countries, the banks would clear up the mess by seizing a defaulting company’s assets. India’s overburdened legal system and antiquated business legislation make that impractical. Promoters can credibly threaten to scupper a company before the creditors can get their hands on it, perhaps a decade down the line. With no fear of loans being foreclosed, the bigwigs have been able to flaunt their wealth even as their creditors fume. Worse, bureaucrat-bankers keen to avoid embarrassment have kept throwing good money after bad to avoid fessing up to earlier mistakes. However, all this looks likely to end. Raghuram Rajan, India’s central-bank chief since 2013, is on a mission to clear the banks of their non-performing loans: at the very least, the flow of money to some promoters will be stemmed. A bankruptcy law is snaking its way through the legislature, which would make it easier to remove over-indebted promoters from their businesses. Mr Rajan has spoken out against “connected wrongdoers” abusing the system. Throwing subtlety to the wind, he recently railed against promoters who “flaunt [their] birthday bashes even while owing the system a lot of money,” as guests were still recovering from the lavish 60th birthday bash thrown by Vijay Mallya, a drinks baron behind the Kingfisher brand (and a partner of Sahara’s in the Formula One team). Lenders to his group have been warning since 2012 that they are facing multi-billion dollar losses. In part thanks to the new regime, cracks are starting to appear in the promoters’ finances. Ever more are having to put up their personal assets (not just their shares in the companies they control, but also houses and the like) as collateral to raise fresh financing. Such pledges reached a seven-year high in 2015: 46% of promoters’ equity is tied up in this way, estimates Prime Database, a data provider, up from 27% in 2009. Whether Mr Roy gets to leave his prison conference room soon is in doubt. The reported value of the assets Sahara is flogging is well below the amount he needs to post bail, and they seem to be heavily borrowed-against anyway. The Indian securities regulator has rejected Sahara’s claim that it has made whole the vast majority of its small-scale creditors; it is after 400 billion rupees. On February 1st Mr Roy brought out a book detailing his life philosophy as seen from prison. A further two tomes are planned, suggesting he may have doubts over his judicial prospects.Grapes of governmental wrath THE region around Diyarbakir, in Turkey’s conservative south-east, has a long but faded tradition of wine production. “Suleiman”, an amateur oenologist from the city, dreams of reviving it. His biggest obstacle is not the renewed clashes between security forces and Kurdish insurgents, which are battering the region’s economy; nor even the conservatism of its Muslim majority. It is red tape. “The bureaucracy and the laws are the hardest to live with,” he says, preferring not to give his real name for fear of being denied his alcohol licence. Turkey, a secular but mainly Muslim country of 75m people, is not a nation of big drinkers. At an average of 1.6 litres a year, consumption per head (excluding bootleg booze) is the second-lowest among the 40 member and partner countries of the OECD. Among these, the only drier place is Indonesia, another secular but Muslim-majority country. In keeping with its Islamist roots, Turkey’s ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has been doing its best to keep it that way. The party’s leader, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, urges Turks to stop drinking or at least do so only at home. Yesilay (Green Crescent), a temperance movement founded in 1920, cheers him on. Big tax rises since 2004 have more than trebled in real terms the price of raki, an anise-flavoured spirit that was the preferred tipple of Kemal Ataturk, the nation’s founding father. Sales of bootleg alcohol, some of it deadly, are rising. According to the OECD, perhaps 29% of the booze consumed in Turkey is sold illegally. The tax rises on wine have not been so drastic, but winemakers are suffering from the same strong curbs on marketing as other producers of alcohol. A law pushed through by the AKP in 2013 prohibits any sort of promotion of alcohol, including ads, sponsorship deals, product placement or even wine tastings. “If someone comes to your vineyard, you can’t offer him a glass, because it’s against the law,” says Selim Zafer Ellialti, the boss of Suvla, a winery in the Gallipoli peninsula. “For new wines, it’s almost impossible to create an awareness around your brand.” As a result, a wine industry that had seemed on the verge of a breakthrough is now plateauing. Production, having more than doubled between 2006 and 2010 to 58m litres, has since stalled, as has domestic consumption. Some firms have given up on winemaking, turning instead to grape juice. Turkey is the world’s sixth-biggest producer of grapes, ahead of Chile and Argentina. Only about 3% of them are used to make wine. The good news for Turkish wines is that quality has improved markedly in the past decade. Producers, having invested in new technology and outside consultants, have begun to win awards in international competitions. Upstarts have prised a share of the market from the country’s five leading winemakers. “The new boutique companies have pushed the big ones to make better wine,” says Sabiha Apaydin, a sommelier at one of Istanbul’s leading restaurants. Reined in at home, wine companies are seeking a bigger share of foreign markets. About 30 of them have locked arms as Wines of Turkey, a group that promotes exports. Having slipped from about 3m litres in 2004 to 2.2m litres in 2010, the country’s wine exports revived to 2.6m litres in 2014. Although the government has banned all marketing to domestic customers, it subsidises the promotion of wine to foreigners. The top destinations for Turkish wine include Belgium, Germany and Britain, each of which has sizeable Turkish minorities and numerous Turkish restaurants. Gozdem Gurbuzatik of Kayra, another wine producer, sees big opportunities in America and China too. Yet for the likes of Suleiman, who has spent years accumulating the paperwork needed to get an alcohol licence, the prospect of running a legitimate, profitable wine business in Turkey remains bleak. “What’s the point of investing if you can’t advertise?” he asks. “It’s a big risk. No wonder people are reluctant to get into this.”SOME sports, such as wrestling and sprinting, claim long histories. They were portrayed in cave paintings thousands of years ago. Others are just lifting off. The racing of drones is, thus far, a niche activity, but several firms are betting on it. “Every person under the age of 13 either has a drone or wants one,” says Nick Horbaczewski of the Drone Racing League (DRL), a startup. “We are going to raise a generation of pilots.” The DRL has gathered in $8m from investors, including Stephen Ross, the owner of the Miami Dolphins, an American-football team, and CAA, a big agency that represents film and sports stars. Drone-racing began as an amateur sport in Australia only a couple of years ago, and spread with the aid of social media as pilots shared videos of their contests. Racers navigate at speeds of up to 100mph (160kph) through a course of illuminated checkpoints, getting a drone’s-eye view of their aircraft’s position through video goggles. The sport has had to work out some technological kinks, such as eliminating the “latency” that delays the live video feed to the pilot, which could cause a drone to miss a turn and crash. Races require special drones that are swifter than those mass-produced for consumer use by firms like DJI of China. DRL makes its own.   As drones have become more affordable, the sport has gained enthusiasts. This year perhaps 3m drones will be sold in America, generating around $950m in revenue, according to the Consumer Technology Association, an industry group. Once people buy one they want something more exciting to do than just hovering it over their houses, says Scot Refsland of RotorSports, which organises drone races and is in talks with a broadcast network to air a championship race later this year. Drone races, sometimes called “rodeos”, are becoming more frequent: in January events were staged in Las Vegas and Ontario. The big money will come in once people get into the habit of watching rodeos on television or over the internet. Optimists believe that drone-racing could follow the trajectory of e-sports, in which increasing numbers of people watch other people play video games. However unlikely it may sound, e-sports have turned into a large business, earning $194m in revenues worldwide in 2014, according to Newzoo, a research firm. Amazon validated the sport’s financial prospects in 2014 when it bought Twitch, a startup that streams people playing video games, for $1.1 billion. If it succeeds, the DRL will be a prime example of how the money to be made in drones may largely come not from manufacturing them but from services associated with them. It is also possible that drone-racing fails to capture the imagination of enough punters—and ends up like robot combat, which was briefly popular in the 1990s and 2000s on television. Drones may be in the ascendant, but not every sport flies.
