RONALD REAGAN once said that “The nine most terrifying words in the English language are, ‘I’m from the government and I’m here to help’.” Today they are run a close second by 12 words: “I’m from human resources and I’m here to organise a diversity workshop.” Most people pay lip service to diversity in public. But what they think in private can be very different. Some HR consultants have even started to worry about “diversity fatigue”. The arguments in favour of diversity are powerful. The most obvious is that diversity is simply a fact about the modern world. Women have entered the workforce in huge numbers. Mass immigration has transformed Western societies: even in once-homogeneous countries such as Sweden, foreign-born people make up 14% of the population. Gay men and women increasingly feel no need to stay closeted, in or out of the workplace. Companies that ignore this may starve themselves of talent, as well as be out of touch with their customers. Adding to the evidence for diversity’s benefits, a study published this week by the Peterson Institute for International Economics found that the more female executives firms have, the more profitable they seem to be. There is also evidence to support the commonsense idea that encountering people with different ideas and different perspectives can boost creativity. Ronald Burt, a sociologist at the University of Chicago, has produced several studies which suggest that people with more diverse sources of information consistently generate better ideas. Sara Ellison of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has shown that mixed-sex teams can produce more creative solutions than those dominated by either men or women. And internal surveys at Google have found that diverse teams are often the most innovative. Given all these benefits, why the talk of diversity fatigue? David Livermore provides some interesting thoughts on this question in his new book, “Driven by Difference: How Great Companies Fuel Innovation through Diversity”. As president of the Cultural Intelligence Centre, a consulting firm, Mr Livermore is a card-carrying member of the diversity industry. But over the years he has been struck by how many companies complain that they are not getting much return for their investment in diversity. “Tomorrow I have to go to a diversity-training workshop,” he heard one man say to another in the gym. “Oh God!” came the reply. “That’s right up there with getting a root canal.” Mr Livermore says that one reason for this is that talk of diversity often comes accompanied with a faint air of menace. Managers are dragooned into sitting through lengthy seminars on equal opportunities. They are fearful of saying anything that departs from the “correct” line on any diversity-related matter. And they feel under pressure to hit their recruitment quotas. The more important reason, however, is that proponents of diversity often fail to acknowledge that there can be a trade-off: to get the benefits, employers must be prepared for, and deal with, some problems. Diversity does not produce better results automatically, through a sort of multicultural magic. It does so only if it is managed well. The biggest challenge is to do with trust. Employees need to trust each other if they are to produce their best work. This is particularly true if that work involves tackling creative projects that have a high risk of failure and a circuitous path to success. But it is easier to establish trust with those you have a lot in common with. Mr Livermore notes that diverse teams have a higher degree of variance in their performance than homogeneous teams. They are more likely to produce truly innovative ideas, but they are also more likely to fail completely. He suggests that managers of diverse teams need to work hard at establishing bonds of trust. They need to set lots of short-term goals so that teams can see the benefits of working together. They also need to recognise that different groups forge trust in different ways. Westerners tend to think that getting straight down to the task at hand is the best way to do this, whereas South Asians believe in establishing rapport over cups of tea first. A second challenge is to do with culture. Too many companies fail to rethink their management styles as they open their doors to new groups. They issue ambiguous instructions which presume that everyone comes from the same background. For example, one Western company urged its employees to “act like an owner” without realising that, in some cultures, acting like an owner means playing golf all day. They evaluate people on their willingness to speak up without realising that some people—women especially, in many countries—are brought up to hold their tongues and defer to authority. Mr Livermore argues that managers need to work harder at getting members of silent minorities to speak up and, failing that, give them other ways of contributing to the collective effort. Beyond box-ticking Your columnist would add a third challenge: distinguishing between genuine cultural diversity and the box-ticking sort. It is easy for companies to think that they have embraced diversity if they appoint the right number of people with the right biological characteristics. That can be hollow if they all come from the same backgrounds—if, say, all the black people a firm promotes to management are Harvard-educated sons of diplomats. The growing diversity of the workforce should be a cause for celebration. Getting rid of discrimination against minorities represents a triumph for natural justice as well as a chance to make society as a whole stronger. But the celebration needs to be mixed with hard work and clear thinking. Companies will find it hard to make a success of diversity if they refuse to recognise that it brings challenges as well as opportunities. And they will find it impossible to confront these challenges if they dismiss any reasonable question that is raised about diversity policies as if it were a plea to go back to the age when white men ruled the roost.IF THE start of the year has been desperate for the world’s stockmarkets, it has been downright disastrous for shares in banks. Financial stocks are down by 19% in America. The declines have been even steeper elsewhere. Japanese banks’ shares have plunged by 36% since January 1st; Italian banks’ by 31% and Greek banks’ by a horrifying 60% (see chart). The fall in the overall European banking index of 24% has brought it close to the lows it plumbed in the summer of 2012, when the euro zone seemed on the verge of disintegration until Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank (ECB), promised to do “whatever it takes” to save it. The distress in Europe encompasses big banks as well as smaller ones. It has affected behemoths within the euro area such as Société Générale and Deutsche Bank (see article)—both of which saw their shares fall by 10% in hours this week—as well as giants outside it such as Barclays (based in Britain) and Credit Suisse (Switzerland). The apparent frailty of European banks is especially disappointing given the efforts made in recent years to make them more robust, both through capital-raising and tougher regulation. Euro-zone banks issued over €250 billion ($280 billion) of new equity between 2007, when the global financial crisis began, and 2014, when the ECB took charge of supervising them. Before taking on the job, it combed through the books of 130 of the euro zone’s most important banks and found only modest shortfalls in capital. Some of the recent weakness in European banking shares arises from wider worries about the world economy that have also driven down financial stocks elsewhere. A slowdown in global growth is one threat. Another is that the negative interest rates being pursued by central banks to try to prod more life into economies will further sap banks’ profits. A retreat in Japanese bank shares turned into a rout following such a decision in late January. Investors in European banks fret not just about lacklustre growth but also a possible move deeper into negative territory by the ECB in March. On February 11th Sweden’s central bank cut its benchmark rate from -0.35% to -0.5%, prompting shares in Swedish banks to tumble. But the malaise of European banking stocks has deeper roots. The fundamental problem is both that there are too many banks in Europe and that many are not profitable enough because they have clung to flawed business models. European investment banks lack the deep domestic capital markets that give their American competitors an edge. Deutsche, for instance, has only just resolved to hack back its investment bank in the face of a less hospitable regulatory environment following the financial crisis. And there are still too many poorly performing smaller banks within national markets. Although this year’s share-price declines have been steepest in Greece, these largely reflect renewed political tensions over implementing the country’s third bail-out. The banks arousing fresh concern are those in Italy, whose troubles go beyond an excess of them. One specific worry is the dire state of the country’s third-biggest (and the world’s oldest) bank, Monte dei Paschi di Siena, which has long been in intensive care and whose share price has fallen by 56% this year. Its woes reflect poor governance, a problem that plagues Italian banks, many of which are part-owned by local, politically connected foundations. A more general worry is that Italy’s banking sector as a whole is weighed down with bad loans which have built up during recent years. Although Italian GDP has been expanding since the start of 2015, it is still around 9% lower than its pre-crisis peak in early 2008. This has hurt Italian firms—and their pain has been transferred to the banks that lent to them. Gross non-performing loans amount to €360 billion (18% of the total), of which €200 billion are especially troubled. There is nothing new about Italy’s high level of non-performing loans; if the recovery can be sustained they should eventually start to come down. Moreover, over half of the sourest loans are covered by provisions, which means that the potential bill is more manageable, at around €90 billion rather than €200 billion. What has changed this year is a new European approach to tackling troubled banks, which shifts the burden for bail-outs from taxpayers to creditors who are “bailed in” when big losses arise. These rules, which have come fully into force this year (a few countries applied them in 2015), mean that senior bondholders and depositors with balances above €100,000 can be stung when banks are resolved. Bank bonds are generally held by institutional investors who can look after themselves, but in Italy around €200 billion are in the hands of retail customers who were lured to invest in them until 2011 by favourable tax treatment. These retail bonds would be vulnerable if banks run short of capital after big write-downs. This danger was highlighted late last year when four small banks were rescued in a rush to avoid this year’s more stringent bail-in provisions. That process ensnared retail bondholders holding junior debt, who could already be bailed in under the previous rules. One committed suicide. The furore has unnerved Italians. Ignazio Visco, governor of the central bank, has said that a less abrupt transition to the new bail-in regime would have been better. The strict rules have also curtailed the ability of the Italian government, led by Matteo Renzi, to calm nerves by excising the bad loans from the banking system. Instead of setting up a state-backed “bad bank” to remove them, Mr Renzi has had to adopt a feebler approach in which the government will guarantee the senior tranches of securitised bundles of the bad loans. Investors plainly doubt this scheme will help much, to judge by the performance of Italian bank shares. Frustration with European constraints on Italy’s attempt to sort out its banks is one reason why Mr Renzi has been making barbed attacks on the German way of running the euro area. Such political tension is adding to jitters about Italian banks. Portuguese banking shares have also tumbled, in part because a new left-of-centre coalition government alarmed international investors by its decision to impose heavy losses on some senior bank bonds late last year. In seeking to transfer the risk of failing banks away from taxpayers to creditors, European policymakers may have thought they were depoliticising the banks. In the euro-zone periphery, however, politics is never peripheral.CENTRAL banks are supposed to target inflation and in some cases, economic growth or full employment. As the “lender of last resort”, they also have responsibility for safeguarding the financial system. But do they in fact target asset prices as well? That has been the suspicion from the late 1980s onwards, when the Federal Reserve began cutting interest rates when equity markets wobbled. This approach became known as the “Greenspan put” (Alan Greenspan was the chairman of the Fed from 1987 to 2006, and the put option is a form of insurance against falling prices). The implicit guarantee from central banks became a bit more explicit in the era of quantitative easing (QE)—the creation of new money to buy assets. Central banks hoped that QE would have a “portfolio rebalancing effect”, with investors being forced out of low-yielding government bonds and into corporate debt and equities. However, the relationship between market movements and central banks may have an even longer history. That is the implication of new research by Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh and Mike Staunton of the London Business School for the latest Global Investment Returns Yearbook, published by Credit Suisse. They looked at the historical relationship between movements in interest rates and in financial markets, with particular reference to America and Britain. Unsurprisingly, they found that markets performed much better when rates were falling than when they were rising. Since 1913 (when the Fed was founded) American equities have returned an average of 9.3% a year in real terms during easing cycles, defined as the period between the first cut and the first increase. In contast, real returns during tightening cycles were just 2.3% a year. Government bonds returned 3.6% during easing cycles and 0.3% in tightening ones. This rule applied in most of the 21 countries covered by the trio’s data, going back to 1900. On average, equities earned 8.4 percentage points more in real terms in the year after a rate cut than in one following an increase. Alternative assets such as houses, art and gold also did better when rates were falling. That is how the markets reacted to central banks. Perhaps the more interesting finding is how central banks have responded to the markets. The chart shows the changes in volatility for equity and bond markets before and at the time of rate increases and rate cuts. Although stockmarkets (and the British bond market) were a lot more volatile after a rate rise, there was little sign of increased volatility before a rise. In contrast, both the British and American stockmarkets were almost as volatile before a rate cut as after one. The academics suggest central banks are following a rough rule of thumb. They postpone rate increases when volatility is high, for fear of causing further upset, but respond to high volatility with rate reductions. Investors may thus have learned that if they throw the equivalent of a toddler’s tantrum, central banks will eventually come to their rescue. Over the long run this might have encouraged risky behaviour of the kind that was common in the run-up to the crisis of 2007-08. The power of tantrums may still apply. In September the Fed postponed a rate increase in part because markets seemed to point to a slowdown in the global economy. The latest turmoil—the Vix measure of stockmarket volatility has risen from 15 to 26.5 over the past three months—may have induced another bout of caution. Before the start of the year the markets expected several rate increases in 2016; now there is a marginal consensus in favour of unchanged rates. This week’s comments by Janet Yellen, the Fed’s current chairman, to Congress about less supportive financial conditions will bolster that view. Whether central banks should be so sensitive to the whims of financial markets is another matter. There are wealth effects that reverberate in the broader economy when asset prices fall, although housing (where prices are still rising on both sides of the Atlantic) has more impact than equities. And market turmoil may be an indicator of trouble in the global economy: figures out this week showed sharp falls in British, French, German and Italian industrial production in December. Then again, central banks ought to be able to work out the economic outlook on their own.Fuelled by economic uncertainty THE Valentine Day’s special at Sharps Pixley, London’s first high-street bullion showroom, is a £115 ($166) rose dipped in gold. But what that special someone would really want is the £27,000 “kilobar”, smaller than a slab of chocolate but reassuringly weighty in this time of turmoil in financial markets. Both have sold well since the shop opened last month, says Ross Norman, the boss. Yet he is struck by how “apologetic” his British clients are about buying gold. It suggests many are novices, gingerly placing their first bets against the global economy. They are not alone. From libertarians in America to Indian housewives, gold’s fans have helped push spot prices up sharply this year, defying the rout in global commodity markets (although gold also defied the prior boom in commodities—see chart). In early trading on February 11th gold surged above $1,200 an ounce, its highest level in more than eight months, amid a big sell-off in global stockmarkets. Mr Norman notes that January rallies in the past two years quickly petered out, partly for seasonal reasons: retail buying in the biggest markets, India and China, starts with the Hindu Diwali festival in late autumn and ends at this time of year with Chinese new year. He says the rally is still tentative, though this year “it has a bit more oomph.” Fear is one source of oomph. One Swiss-based bull likes to call gold “a hedge against ignorance”, noting the myriad question-marks hanging over the global economy. They include the strength of China’s economy, the impact of falling oil prices on emerging-market producers, the debt woes in America’s shale-oil industry and the fragility of global banks. What’s more, the dollar—which rivals gold as a haven—has also weakened recently. Other factors have been on gold’s side. Its recent rally has coincided with falling oil prices and renewed fears of deflation that have pushed down interest rates. Because gold offers no yield, the lower the returns offered by alternative investments such as bonds, the more attractive it looks. The move by big central banks to impose negative interest rates on commercial-bank deposits makes gold an even more attractive store of value—the shiny equivalent of cash under the mattress. Supply may also help the bulls’ case. The World Gold Council said on February 11th that the amount of gold mined in the fourth quarter of 2015 was down by 3%, its first quarterly drop since 2008. It expects the trend to continue as cash-strapped mining firms trim investment. The demand picture is more nuanced. Overall, global demand dipped slightly in 2015. But Indians vastly increased their holdings of gold jewellery in the second half of last year, befitting one of the world’s fastest-growing economies. In China, shoppers bought fewer gold trinkets but more gold coins and bars as investments, perhaps reflecting concerns about their falling currency and stockmarket. This year the latest data suggest there has been a net inflow of funds into gold-related exchange-traded funds, which are investment vehicles that account for about a tenth of global gold demand, says the World Gold Council’s Juan Carlos Artigas. He expects buying by central banks in the developing world, which surged in the fourth quarter, to continue as they diversify their assets. Sceptics—among them Goldman Sachs, an investment bank—nonetheless argue that gold will fall for a fourth straight year in 2016, largely because of higher interest rates in America. On February 10th Janet Yellen, chair of the Federal Reserve, offered a downbeat assessment of the American economy in testimony to Congress. Though she still left the door ajar to further rate rises, stockmarkets and the dollar reacted negatively, while gold rallied. The more pressing financial fears become, the higher it is likely to go.WHEN governments bailed out banks during the financial crisis, they tended to insist that shareholders suffer big losses. Most bondholders, however, got off scot-free. In theory, bondholders should have lost money too—but working out just how bankrupt the banks were, apportioning the losses and risking contagion among bondholders elsewhere seemed too risky to contemplate as the financial system was seizing up. Regulators have since pushed banks to fund their activities with less debt and more loss-absorbing capital. The simplest form of capital is equity—the money raised by selling shares or retaining profits. But trimming dividends or increasing the number of shares reduces the value of the existing ones. So bankers and regulators dreamt up a new financial instrument that would act like debt, thus sparing shareholders dilution, unless capital was urgently needed. These instruments are called contingent convertible bonds, or “cocos”, also known as additional Tier-1 securities. In exchange for annual interest of around 6-7%, investors take on the risk that, if the going gets tough, the bank may suspend interest payments, convert the bond into equity or write it off altogether. Cocos have proved popular, given how low most bond yields are: about €91 billion ($103 billion) of them have been issued since 2013. But this week analysts at CreditSights, a financial-research firm, questioned whether Deutsche Bank would have enough “available distributable items” (ADI, a subset of earnings from which interest on cocos must be paid) to cover the €350m due on its cocos next year. Their price promptly slumped to 70 cents on the euro (see chart). Other European banks’ cocos also suffered, although not quite as badly.   It is not unreasonable for investors to be nervous about Deutsche. It made a record loss last year. Its newish boss, John Cryan, has suspended the dividend for last year and this. Its big investment bank is a perennial underperformer. Many risks still lie ahead, from the costs of restructuring and regulatory infractions to potential losses on loans to energy firms. Explore our interactive guide to Europe's troubled economies If all this proves more expensive than imagined, it may exceed ADI, which has already been diminished by the bank’s recent losses. The problem is more acute at Deutsche than at other banks, both because it has performed especially poorly in recent years and because the German definition of ADI is narrower than in most other European countries. (Deutsche insists it will meet the payments with ease.) The hullabaloo at Deutsche, along with the poor performance of European banks more broadly, seems to have prompted a broader reassessment of the riskiness of cocos, argues James Chappell of Berenberg, a bank. “People have misunderstood them,” he says. On top of everything else, the market for them is relatively illiquid, which makes prices more susceptible to sudden jolts. The irony is that even those shunning Deutsche’s cocos accept that its cushion of capital is relatively thick, at 11%. The problem is its profits, or rather the lack of them. In other words, its cocos appear to have been poorly designed, at risk of taking money away from investors before the bank truly faces calamity. It would not be the first time a financial innovation did not work as advertised.LABOUR markets are hotbeds of inequality. For every dollar a white American man in full-time work earns, the average white woman earns 78 cents and the average Latina only 56 cents. Marriage is a boon for male earnings; motherhood drags female earnings down. Likewise, gay men earn about 5% less than heterosexual ones in Britain and France, and 12-16% less in Canada and America, even after controlling for things like education, skills and experience. Yet one minority appears immune to this scourge: lesbians. Marieka Klawitter of the University of Washington looked at 29 studies on wages and sexual orientation last year.* On average, they found a 9% earnings premium for lesbians over heterosexual women, compared with a penalty of 11% for gay men relative to straight men. This discrepancy has been borne out by research on America, Britain, Canada, Germany and the Netherlands. Even after adjusting for the fact that lesbians are on average more educated than straight women, and less likely to have children, the gap persists. Research on this topic should be taken with a pinch of salt. Some studies rely on direct questions about sexual orientation. But around half of the 29 studies surveyed by Ms Klawitter were based on surveys in which respondents were not asked directly whether they were gay. Instead, they were asked who they live with and what their relationship with them is. Both methods tend to find a wage premium. But they may both miss some gay women in a way that distorts the results. If getting good data is tough, pinning down why there might be a wage premium for lesbians and a penalty for gay men is even tougher. Perhaps lesbians who are “out” are more competitive than their heterosexual peers. After all, studies tend to find that men are more competitive than women, which could explain some of the wage gap between the sexes. But a working paper published last year found that whereas gay men behaved less competitively than straight men (accounting for roughly two-fifths of their earnings penalty), there was no such difference between lesbians and other women. Lesbians may not need to behave differently to be treated differently. They could face positive discrimination, if employers promote them on the assumption that they will not have children and so devote more time to work than straight colleagues. A study Ms Klawitter published in 2011 found that gay men working in the public sector suffered a smaller penalty than those in the private sector, whereas lesbians enjoyed a premium in the private sector but none in the public sector. One interpretation could be that discrimination of all sorts is more fiercely policed in government offices, dampening prejudice against gay men and in favour of gay women. Lesbians’ higher earnings could also be a function of the gender of their partner. Men earn more than women, straight or gay; lesbians, deprived of the extra earnings a male partner would bring, may work harder to compensate. At any rate, they work more hours per day and weeks per year than straight women, on average (see chart). Over time this could translate into more experience and better chances of promotion. There is a clue in a paper from Nasser Daneshvary, C. Jeffrey Waddoups and Bradley Wimmer of the University of Nevada, which finds that lesbians who have previously been married to men receive a smaller premium than those who have not. Finally, it could be that in same-sex couples women do not feel obliged to do as much childcare or housework, giving them more freedom to fulfil their potential in the workplace. Lesbian couples tend to work more equal hours, even when they have children, and several studies find that same-sex households share chores more evenly than heterosexual ones. Whatever the reason for lesbians’ wage premium, it does not make them a privileged group. There is evidence that they face discrimination in hiring relative to straight women, even though their pay is better. Poverty rates among lesbian couples are 7.9%, compared with 6.6% among heterosexual ones. And for boosting earnings, as in so many realms, nothing beats being a straight, white, married man.If only the budget were as finely balanced SRI LANKA ought to be sitting pretty. Its growth has averaged 6% a year over the past decade. Seven years after a protracted civil war ended, its economy is still reaping a peace dividend. It is also a beneficiary of the collapse in commodity prices, which has trimmed its hefty bill for imports of fuel. Yet last week, after long debate, its leaders requested a loan from the IMF. If so much is so rosy, why is Sri Lanka going cap in hand to the IMF? The immediate concern is the capital flight that has buffeted emerging markets around the world. Although Sri Lanka’s current-account deficit had been declining steadily over the past few years, the country suffered big capital outflows last year as foreign investors sold down their holdings of government bonds. The central bank fought against the tide for a while, using up some $2 billion, or more than a fifth, of its foreign-exchange reserves to defend the rupee. After it relented in September, the currency fell to a record low against the dollar and has since weakened further. To hear it from Ravi Karunanayake, Sri Lanka’s finance minister, the country is a victim of the woes that have beset other emerging markets: “If China devalues and India devalues, little Sri Lanka gets caught in between.” Yet the main source of Sri Lanka’s fragility is its own fiscal mistakes, not external turbulence. A combination of cumbersome debts and a rickety tax system has made it vulnerable to the withdrawal of foreign funding. At nearly three-quarters of GDP, its public debt is large for a developing country. It does not help that a chunk of that debt was borrowed from China under the previous president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, to pay for infrastructure built by Chinese firms, including several expensive but pointless vanity projects. The principal on these loans will not fall due until the early 2020s, but the interest on them is high, adding to Sri Lanka’s already weighty debt-servicing costs. That points to what many in Colombo see as the root cause of their headache: a threadbare tax system. Revenues amount to a paltry 13% of GDP. Countries with similar levels of income typically take in 20%. The new administration, in power for just over a year, has made things messier. It slashed corporate and income taxes, introducing flat rates of 15%, hoping to lure investors to Sri Lanka. To make up for some of the shortfall, it has relied largely on one-off measures such as an extra levy on a few dozen highly profitable companies. Anushka Wijesinha, chief economist of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, says businesses are not asking for tax breaks but rather for a more predictable tax regime. The government has also driven up its costs by awarding public servants a big pay rise to make good on an election promise. It had initially aimed to keep the fiscal deficit to 4.4% of GDP last year. Instead it hit 7.2%. Even so, calling on the IMF does not mean that Sri Lanka faces a crisis. Arjuna Mahendran, the governor of the central bank, is careful to point out that Sri Lanka has not missed a debt payment in years and is not about to do so. Instead, the government views the IMF loan as a buffer, which it thinks will help it gain credibility with foreign investors. Bringing in the IMF is not cost-free, however. It will want to see the government strengthen its fiscal system. That may be the point: a stern external force should help catalyse fiscal reforms. It could also pave the way for an additional loan from the World Bank. Sri Lanka still has much going for it. It is working to position itself as a trading hub for South Asia. Sitting about midway on shipping lanes between Singapore and Dubai, it offers deepwater ports, easy access to India and some of South Asia’s best highways. Sorting out the infrastructure of its tax system is far less glamorous but just as critical.DATING is a treacherous business. There may be plenty of fish in the sea, yet many are unhygienic, self-absorbed, disconcertingly attached to ex-fish, or fans of Donald Trump. Digital dating sites, including a growing array of matchmaking apps, are meant to help. Their design owes more to hard-nosed economics than it does to the mysteries of the heart. In a sense, searching for a mate is not so different from hunting for a job. Jobs, like prospective partners, have their strengths and weaknesses, which makes finding the right one a matter of complicated trade-offs. Such exchanges are different from other transactions, in that both parties must be enthusiastic about the match for it to happen. A supermarket, in contrast, does not particularly care whose wallet it is draining, nor does the power company agonise about whether a customer is worthy of its watts. Alvin Roth, who won a Nobel prize in economics for his work on market design, made a career of studying such “matching markets”, where supply and demand are not balanced by price. Instead, people transact based on information. An apple-seller can nudge down his prices until the whole cart is sold. Yet if Apple were looking to hire two workers, it would not set a salary so puny that only two people applied. The quality of new hires often matters at least as much as their salaries. Mr Roth, who won the prize jointly with Lloyd Shapley in 2012, found that the structure of matching markets made a significant difference in determining who wound up with whom. Systems designed to elicit people’s true preferences generated better matches between hospitals and doctors, for example. But the entire medical profession has an interest in improving matches, and so can set up a national clearing house to do just that. The lovelorn must instead rely on an array of digital matchmakers. Good matches depend on good information. Even without digital help, people usually have some inkling of how much they have in common. Cosmopolitan strivers move to New York, say, rather than sleepier cities, in part because they will meet other ambitious types with similar interests. Within New York, the places people choose to spend their time—whether Yankee Stadium or a yoga studio—determine which sorts of people they come into contact with. Because it is expensive to live in New York, and to spend time sweating in a yoga studio or swearing in the stands, people in such settings can be reasonably confident those around them are in some sense like-minded. But one critical bit of information is missing: whether there is mutual interest. The act of asking someone out is fraught. In the non-digital world, approaching a potential partner brings the risk of awkwardness or humiliation. Digital dating reduces this cost dramatically. Apps like Tinder and Happn, for example, reveal that a user likes another only when the feeling is mutual. The best matching markets are those that are “thick”, with lots of participants. The more people there are seeking digital dates, the greater the chance of finding a good match. Odds improve that another person in the crowd also enjoys Wagner, Thai food, or discussions about the economics of matching markets. INTERACTIVE: Compare romantic city-breaks across the globe with our "Cost of Loving" ranking The wealth of information many dating sites request may help to home in on the perfect match, but if the effort involved is enough to deter potential mates from joining in the first place, then it does more harm than good. When Tinder first launched, largely to facilitate casual sex, users assessed one another based only on looks, age and gender. Simplicity worked wonders; there are 26m matches made between Tinder users each day. The advantages of thick markets are lost, however, if they become too “congested”, with users overwhelmed by the number of participants and unable to locate a good match among them. One response is to specialise. JSwipe, for instance, caters to Jewish singles while Bumble, an app where women must initiate contact, is meant to attract feminists. But the most popular apps seek to help their users filter possible mates using clever technology. Tinder, for example, only provides users with profiles of fellow Tinderites who are nearby, to make it that much easier to meet in person. It has also introduced a “super like” feature, which can be deployed only once a day, to allow smitten users to signal heightened interest in someone. In addition, last year it started allowing people to list their jobs and education, to help users to sort through the crowds. Users get the benefits both of a big pool of potential partners and various tools to winnow them. Sext and the city The emergence of matching apps, for those seeking love or theatre tickets or a lift, has certainly made once-onerous tasks more convenient. They may also contribute to more profound economic change. Dating apps could strengthen the trend toward “assortative mating”, whereby people choose to couple with those of similar income and skills. By one estimate, the trend accounts for about 18% of the rise in income inequality in America between 1960 and 2005. A recent study of online dating in South Korea found that it boosted sorting among couples by education. Better matching may also mean bigger cities. Metropolitan goliaths have long been melting-pots, within which those early on in their adult lives link up with jobs, friends and mates. Matching apps, romantic or not, make it easier to navigate the urban sprawl and sample all it has to offer. That, in turn, should make the biggest cities relatively more attractive to young people. Apps cannot yet make break-ups less painful. And love remains mysterious enough that even the most refined algorithms cannot predict mutual attraction with confidence. But they clearly help, judging by their legions of users. After all, it is better to have super-liked and lost than never to have super-liked at all.TWO black holes circle one another. Both are about 100km across. One contains 36 times as much mass as the sun; the other, 29. They are locked in an orbital dance, a kilometre or so apart, that is accelerating rapidly to within a whisker of the speed of light. Their event horizons—the spheres defining their points-of-no-return—touch. There is a violent wobble as, for an instant, quintillions upon quintillions of kilograms redistribute themselves. Then there is calm. In under a second, a larger black hole has been born. It is, however, a hole that is less than the sum of its parts. Three suns’ worth of mass has been turned into energy, in the form of gravitational waves: travelling ripples that stretch and compress space, and thereby all in their path. During the merger’s final fifth of a second, envisaged in an artist’s impression above, the coalescing holes pumped 50 times more energy into space this way than the whole of the rest of the universe emitted in light, radio waves, X-rays and gamma rays combined. And then, 1.3 billion years later, in September 2015, on a small planet orbiting an unregarded yellow sun, at facilities known to the planet’s inhabitants as the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), the faintest slice of those waves was caught. That slice, called GW150914 by LIGO’s masters and announced to the world on February 11th, is the first gravitational wave to be detected directly by human scientists. It is a triumph that has been a century in the making, opening a new window onto the universe and giving researchers a means to peer at hitherto inaccessible happenings, perhaps as far back in time as the Big Bang. Finger on the pulsar The idea of gravitational waves emerged from the general theory of relativity, Albert Einstein’s fundamental exposition of gravity, unveiled almost exactly 100 years before GW150914’s discovery. Mass, Einstein realised, deforms the space and time around itself. Gravity is the effect of this, the behaviour of objects dutifully moving along the curves of mass-warped spacetime. It is a simple idea, but the equations that give it mathematical heft are damnably hard to solve. Only by making certain approximations can solutions be found. And one such approximation led Einstein to an odd prediction: any accelerating mass should make ripples in spacetime. Einstein was not happy with this idea. He would, himself, oscillate like a wave on the topic—rescinding and remaking his case, arguing for such waves and then, after redoing the sums, against them. But, while he and others stretched and squeezed the maths, experimentalists set about trying to catch the putative waves in the act of stretching and squeezing matter. Their problem was that the expected effect was a transient change in dimensions equivalent to perhaps a thousandth of the width of a proton in an apparatus several kilometres across. Indirect proof of gravitational waves’ existence has been found over the years, most notably by measuring radio emissions from pairs of dead stars called pulsars that are orbiting one another, and deducing from this how the distance between them is shrinking as they broadcast gravitational waves into the cosmos. But the waves themselves proved elusive until the construction of LIGO. As its name states, LIGO is an interferometer. It works by splitting a laser beam in two, sending the halves to and fro along paths identical in length but set at right angles to one another, and then looking for interference patterns when the halves are recombined (see diagram). If the half-beams’ paths are undisturbed, the waves will arrive at the detector in lock-step. But a passing gravitational wave will alternately stretch and compress the half-beams’ paths. Those half-beams, now out of step, will then interfere with each other at the detector in a way that tells of their experience. The shape of the resulting interference pattern contains all manner of information about the wave’s source, including what masses were involved and how far away it was. To make absolutely certain that what is seen really is a gravitational wave requires taking great care. First, LIGO is actually two facilities, one in Louisiana and the other in Washington state. Only something which is observed almost, but not quite, simultaneously by both could possibly be a gravitational wave. Secondly, nearly everything in the interferometers’ arms is delicately suspended to isolate it as far as possible from distant seismic rumblings and the vibrations of passing traffic. Moreover, in order to achieve the required sensitivity, each arm of each interferometer is 4km long and the half-beam in it is bounced 100 times between the mirrors at either end of the arm, to amplify any discrepancy when the half-beams are recombined. Even so, between 2002 when LIGO opened and 2010, when it was closed for upgrades, nary a wave was seen. Holey moly Those improvements, including doubling the bulk of the devices’ mirrors, suspending them yet more delicately, and increasing the laser power by a factor of 75, have made Advanced LIGO, as the revamped apparatus is known, four times as sensitive as the previous incarnation. That extra sensitivity paid off almost immediately. Indeed, the system’s operators were still kicking its metaphorical tyres and had yet to begin its official first run when GW150914 turned up, first at the Louisiana site, and about a hundredth of a second later in Washington—a difference which places the outburst somewhere in the sky’s southern hemisphere. Since then, the team have been checking their sums and counting their lucky stars. As they outline in Physical Review Letters, the likelihood that the signal was a fluke is infinitesimal. When one result comes so quickly, others seem sure to follow—particularly as the four months of data the experiment went on to gather as part of the first official run have yet to be analysed fully. A rough estimate suggests one or two other signals as striking as GW150914 may lie within them. For gravitational astronomy, this is just the beginning. Soon, LIGO will not be alone. By the end of the year VIRGO, a gravitational-wave observatory in Italy, should join it in its search. Another is under construction in Japan and talks are under way to create a fourth, in India. Most ambitiously, a fifth, orbiting, observatory, the Evolved Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, or e-LISA, is on the cards. The first pieces of apparatus designed to test the idea of e-LISA are already in space. Together, by jointly forming a telescope that will permit astronomers to pinpoint whence the waves come, these devices will open a new vista on the universe. As technology improves, waves of lower frequency—corresponding to events involving larger masses—will become detectable. Eventually, astronomers should be able to peer at the first 380,000 years after the Big Bang, an epoch of history that remains inaccessible to every other kind of telescope yet designed. The real prize, though, lies in proving Einstein wrong. For all its prescience, the theory of relativity is known to be incomplete because it is inconsistent with the other great 20th-century theory of physics, quantum mechanics. Many physicists suspect that it is in places where conditions are most extreme—the very places which launch gravitational waves—that the first chinks in relativity’s armour will be found, and with them a glimpse of a more all-embracing theory. Gravitational waves, of which Einstein remained so uncertain, have provided direct evidence for black holes, about which he was long uncomfortable, and may yet yield a peek at the Big Bang, an event he knew his theory was inadequate to describe. They may now lead to his theory’s unseating. If so, its epitaph will be that in predicting gravitational waves, it predicted the means of its own demise.UNLESS creatures such as yeti and Bigfoot turn out to be real, the only kind of human in the modern world is Homo sapiens. But that is only recently true. For most of Homo sapiens’s 200,000-year history, it shared the planet with several cousins. The most famous were the Neanderthals, who were larger and heavier and who lived in Europe and Central Asia. Neanderthals died out 40,000 years ago. Whether they were killed off directly by modern humans or were out-competed is a perennial topic of debate. But, either way, there was more to relations between the two species than just inter-hominid rivalry. In the past decade researchers have found that between 1% and 4% of the DNA of modern Europeans and their descendants on other continents is of Neanderthal origin. There must, in other words, have been a certain amount of interbreeding going on back in the day. What is less clear is the effect today of the DNA so acquired. Neanderthal DNA is not easy to come by (it must be garnered from fossils that have been particularly well preserved), and doing extensive genetic testing on large numbers of modern humans, which is necessary to untangle the influence of even a relatively small chunk of their genomes, is expensive. Nevertheless, as they report in Science, exactly such a comparison has just been made by a team lead by Corinne Simonti of the Vanderbilt Genetics Institute, in Tennessee. Rather than doing the genetic tests themselves, Dr Simonti and her colleagues used data from the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics Network. This gave them both the medical histories and the genotypes of thousands of people. They picked out 28,416 people of European descent and compared the genomes of these individuals with genetic information recovered from the toe-bone of a Neanderthal woman that was found in a cave in Russia, in 2010. They found 135,000 bits of modern human DNA which they thought were probably of Neanderthal origin. Previous research had found such Neanderthal DNA to be especially common near parts of the genome associated with illnesses like depression, heart disease and seborrheic keratosis, a complaint in which scaly lumps form on a sufferer’s skin. Because Dr Simonti’s data included people who actually suffer from such conditions, she was able to check those associations. When she did so, she found that particular chunks of Neanderthal DNA were indeed correlated with the presence of all three complaints. And the team found a clutch of other phenomena for which Neanderthal genes seemed to put their carriers at additional risk. These ranged from obesity and blood-clotting disorders to certain types of malnutrition, and even smoking. At first blush this seems to suggest Neanderthal DNA is a curse. But that is almost certainly not the case. Forty millennia is plenty of time for evolution to get to work. This means that unfavourable traits should have been weeded out, while beneficial ones spread. There is evidence of exactly this. Some parts of the human genome are unusually free from Neanderthal influence, suggesting natural selection has removed harmful genes. Other parts, where Neanderthal DNA presumably offers benefits, are full of the stuff. And just because something is bad for modern humans does not necessarily mean it was bad for their hunting-and-gathering ancestors. Some genes might put their bearers at risk of obesity in the modern world of fatty, sugary snacks. But in a world where food is scarce (as it presumably was in the northern latitudes where modern humans and Neanderthals mixed), those same genes might help their owners through lean periods. Neanderthal DNA seems to put modern humans at risk of a specific sort of malnutrition caused by a lack of thiamine, a B vitamin that is vital for carbohydrate metabolism. But, says Dr Simonti, that same genetic variant may also make it easier to digest fats. Millennia ago, when people obtained less of their energy from refined carbohydrates, the trade-off may have been worthwhile. In a world where grain crops have become a staple food, it may not be. Finally, and most prosaically, Dr Simonti and her colleagues were looking at medical records. These, by definition, will contain information only about diseases. Evolution is often a trade-off, and for Neanderthal DNA to have survived as long as it has, it must offer some advantages to those carrying it. For the time being, exactly what those advantages are is a mystery. But more research will surely illuminate them.
