WHEN Donald Trump announced that he was running for the White House, there was only one venue for his speech: Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue. The skyscraper has been central to Mr Trump’s business life. Built between 1979 and 1984, it was a triumph for a young property mogul whose father rented out mere apartments in Brooklyn. Nearby is the Plaza Hotel, which a middle-aged Mr Trump sold in 1995 after his casino operation folded. Today half his wealth is still tied up in buildings within a four-mile radius of this spot. The Tower’s bar exemplifies Mr Trump’s late-life pivot to the business of celebrity, with cocktails named after his TV show The Apprentice, which was filmed there. A gift shop stocks Trump aftershave that “captures the spirit of the driven man”. Mr Trump’s drive and ownership of Trump Tower are among the few clear and consistent features of his 40-year business life. Much else is opaque, volatile and contested. Mr Trump sees himself as a largely self-made man whose global career qualifies him to be president: “Nobody in the history of the presidency has been nearly as successful as I have,” he says. Rivals in the Manhattan property game think he has taken his eye off the ball. His enemies say he inherited a fortune and built upon it an empire of defaults and exaggeration. To others Mr Trump is a mere celebrity playing a dangerous political game: a cross between Mussolini and the Kardashian clan. Which version is right? A review of Mr Trump’s career, his filings with regulators and third-party estimates of his wealth, suggests four conclusions. First, his fortune is in the billions of dollars. Second, his attempt to shift away from debt-heavy property and to create a global brand has been a limited success. About 93% of his wealth sits in America and 80% is in real estate (including golf courses). Third, Mr Trump’s performance has been mediocre compared with the stockmarket and property in New York. Lastly, his clannish management style suggests he might be out of his depth if he ran a larger organisation. “I’ve been through cycles, I’ve been through a lot,” admits Mr Trump. His career can be split into three stages. The era of debt-fuelled expansion was in 1975-90. Mr Trump’s big break was the renovation of a site at Grand Central Station, which is now occupied by the Hyatt Hotel. He raised cash, found a tenant, secured permits and completed a complex building job, according to his biographer, Michael D’Antonio. Buoyed by success he went on a long spree, buying buildings in a depressed Manhattan (including the site of Trump Tower), expanding into casinos in Atlantic City and picking up a small airline. His investments over this period were worth perhaps $5 billion in today’s money, with four-fifths of that debt-financed. The era of humiliation came in the 1990s, as the casino business faltered and two of his gambling entities defaulted (two other related casino enterprises defaulted in 2004 and 2009). This destabilised the whole of Mr Trump’s operation, which may have had as much as $6 billion of debt in today’s prices. Through asset sales, defaults and forbearance from his creditors, Mr Trump clung on and avoided personal bankruptcy. As property prices in Manhattan rose he recovered his poise, and by the early 2000s he was doing small deals again, for example buying the Hotel Delmonico on New York’s Upper East Side. The final stage, of celebrity, came with his starring role in the The Apprentice in2004. The success of the TV show, which had 28m viewers at its peak and ran until 2015, led Mr Trump to create a flurry of ventures to cash in on his enhanced fame. He is now involved with 487 companies, up from 136 in 2004. They span hotel licensing in Azerbaijan and energy drinks in Israel. At face value Mr Trump has turned his name into a global brand that prints cash. The numbers of the beast Information about Mr Trump’s business is sketchy. He doesn’t run a publicly listed firm, and does not appear to have a holding company into which his assets are grouped. He releases a one-page, unaudited, estimate of his wealth. He has also made a filing on his finances with the Federal Election Commission (FEC), although this does not specify the value of assets worth over $50m and may not include all kinds of income. Estimates of his wealth have been made by Forbes magazine and Bloomberg, a financial-data provider. In the New York property world Mr Trump is perceived to have gone off the boil in the past decade—“He’s been distracted,” says one broker—with other developers doing bolder projects, such as the Fisher and Durst families, and Gary Barnett. But there is not too much disagreement about the value of Mr Trump’s existing buildings and golf-resorts. The contentious bit is his branding operation. According to his FEC filings, this generated about $68m of income in 2014. Valued on a multiple of ten to reflect the fact contracts are finite, this is worth $680m. Based on a composite of figures from the FEC, his estimates, real-estate brokers and Forbes, Mr Trump is worth $4.3 billion. Whether he has transcended the business of property to become a global brand is debatable. His appeal is strong in golf, where Trump-flagged resorts are well regarded. Mr Trump’s name carries less cachet in hotels or consumer goods, and does not travel well beyond the country he says he wants to make great again. Of his wealth, only an estimated 7% is outside America and 66% is made in New York. Only about 22% of his worth is derived from assets that he actively created after 2004, when he became a reality TV star. Some 64% is from conventional property and a further 17% from resorts and golf clubs. His biggest recent deal has been in real estate: buying the Doral hotel in 2012 out of bankruptcy. Only 11 of the licensing and branding companies created since 2004 make more than $1m of income. Mr Trump says there are 38 more deals in the pipeline but it is hard to know their worth. Mr Trump’s performance is tricky to gauge, too, because early estimates of his wealth may have been overstated. We take three starting points and use Forbes’s data (see chart 2). The best long-term starting point is 1985, when Mr Trump first appeared in the rankings without his father. The most generous starting point is 1996, when Mr Trump had just clawed his way back from the abyss. The final starting point is a decade ago. Judged from the low point in 1996, he has outperformed the S&P 500 index of big firms and the New York property market. Judged by his long-term record, he has done poorly. And over the past decade Mr Trump has lagged both benchmarks. His ranking among American billionaires has fallen from a peak of 26 to 121—by the standards of the country’s oligarchy, he is small beer. His property empire is a seventh the size of America’s biggest real-estate firm. Mr Trump was sensible enough to get out of casinos in Atlantic City. But he missed out on the industry boom in Macau that propelled erstwhile rivals such as Sheldon Adelson of Las Vegas Sands into a different league. Mr Adelson is worth $26 billion, according to Forbes. When considering Mr Trump’s performance, one should also spare a thought for outside investors in his projects. Many have made money. But roughly $5 billion of equity and debt (at current prices) from outsiders sat in Trump vehicles that went bust. What of Mr Trump’s management style? His attributes are charisma, spontaneity, frequent communication and quick decision-making. He is a fine negotiator, grinding down the other side with charm and relentless tweaks of the fine print. “He is incredibly charming and deeply frustrating,” says someone who has acted for him. A former top executive at the Trump organisation says, “People think he is running everything from 30,000 feet, but it is the opposite. He knows if the carpets were cleaned and every clause in the contract.” The flip side of Mr Trump’s personality is volatility, with explosive outbursts and unpredictable behaviour. “He’s not stable. He has a nuclear temper,” says the same source, who recalls spittle flying and desks being swept empty. Throughout his life Mr Trump has pursued energy-sapping feuds. Just as his campaign machine is improvised, he appears to have a puny apparatus to support his business. The Trump organisation has a dozen key executives, including Mr Trump’s three eldest children, Donald, Ivanka and Eric. Based on the FEC documents, the structure of the Trump organisation is crude, with most of the legal vehicles owned directly by Mr Trump, rather than being grouped together. Put your hair up pretty He thus has a healthy dislike of bureaucracy but no real experience of a big, complex organisation. “Every company is small compared to the United States,” argues Mr Trump, who says he will appoint business figures to run his administration. He is a veteran of publicity but not of scrutiny. He was in charge of a publicly listed company in 1995-2004. It defaulted. If Mr Trump becomes president he insists that he will “have zero to do with” his business, which he will put in a trust. Mitt Romney, who ran in 2012, and Ross Perot, who ran in 1992 and 1996, took similar approaches. Mr Trump’s children would run the show. They are well thought of, but might struggle to make a leap forward. The organisation has only $200m-300m of cash in hand, and it would be hard to sell the buildings without his consent. If Mr Trump fails to become president, he will go back to his business, although he admits, “it will be much less exciting than what I’m doing now”. Perhaps a bonanza will beckon as he launches another flurry of branding efforts, similar to the push after 2004. The election would have been the ultimate marketing campaign. Heir, tycoon, apprentice, candidate Yet his initiatives over the past decade have not been a wild financial success. Mr Trump says his candidacy is boosting his brand. But he has lost some business, for example a deal with Univision, a media firm, to broadcast the Miss USA pageant, which he owned. The room rates charged by Trump hotels are on average 10% below other luxury hotels (taking figures from Expedia for eight Trump-branded hotels on March 1st and comparing them with other five-star hotels in the same cities). Being, to use his phrase, a “loser”, might hurt his appeal. Bob Dole resorted to advertising Viagra after missing out on the White House. With Mr Trump’s 70th birthday approaching in June, the jury is still out on his business career. He has great wealth, much of it made well over a decade ago from a few buildings he has retained in Manhattan, including his favourite on Fifth Avenue. But he has not yet created a great company, raised permanent capital on public markets, gone global or diversified very successfully. Something to think about when you are sipping an $18 “You’re Fired” Bloody Mary at the Trump Tower—or voting in a presidential election.LEXINGTON once asked America’s most successful centrist to explain the strength of the two-party system, in a country that views those same parties with scorn. The problem is tribal loyalties, replied Michael Bloomberg, then in his final days as mayor of New York, in late 2013. Running for national office as an independent is “just not practical”, explained Mr Bloomberg, a technocratic billionaire who looked into, then decided against, a non-party presidential run in 2008. Such a big share of the population “will vote the party line no matter what your policies are”, he sighed. “That may not be good, but that is true.” Now the Michael Bloomberg of early 2016 hears calls to think again. For the main parties may be about to pick presidential nominees who repel all but the most tribal voters. The chances are rising that Republicans will choose either Donald Trump, a snarling demagogue, or Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a glib and calculating tribune of the hard-right. The presumed Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton, is struggling to hold off her leftist rival Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, whose plans would by his own admission require a political revolution. Bloomberg-boosters see a chance to remake national politics. In a true three-way race, they reason, winning the White House does not require a majority of voters: about 38% of the electorate in the right states would do. Mr Bloomberg, who is 74, does not have long to decide: he must launch a campaign by early to mid-March to get his name on the presidential ballot in all 50 states. Allies see a path ahead for him if Republicans pick Mr Trump or Mr Cruz and Democrats choose Mr Sanders. They also see a way to win if Mrs Clinton looks like prevailing, but has been weakened and driven to the left (or if she faces the real danger of an indictment for mishandling government e-mails as President Barack Obama’s first secretary of state). The din and fury of this year’s presidential primary season actively encourages Bloomberg-backers. They argue that most Americans abstain from such party contests. Studying polls, they spy a “new silent majority” that is fed-up with the status quo, but is not ready to burn it down. Mr Bloomberg certainly breaks the two-party mould. He served at first as the Republican mayor of a mostly Democratic city, then became an independent. A Republican could not be elected president with Mr Bloomberg’s record. Raised Jewish in a blue-collar suburb near Boston, he is a secular big-city liberal on social issues, backing gay marriage and abortion rights. He tried to ban the sale of large sugary drinks and backed government action to curb climate change. The right loathes him for funding gun-control campaigns across the country. But Mr Bloomberg would also struggle to run as a Democrat. He clashed with teachers’ unions over school reforms. He angered the left by defending “stop-and-frisk” police searches which often involve non-whites. Such searches cut crime, he argued as mayor, in part by “scaring the kids to not carry guns”. When he defended the ultra-rich as valuable taxpayers those livid about inequality fumed. Mr Bloomberg can be cranky. Asked by pollsters if they would want to spend Thanksgiving dinner with their then-mayor, nearly 60% of New Yorkers said no. Supporters say that Mr Bloomberg need not be loved: he just needs to be an acceptable third option for voters facing an otherwise appalling choice. The idea of Mr Bloomberg in a presidential television debate fills fans with nerdish joy. The self-made founder of a financial-data empire, he is worth an estimated $40 billion, or nine times more than Mr Trump, a rich man’s son—indeed, as a philanthropist, Mr Bloomberg has given away almost as much money as Mr Trump is thought to possess. Most of all, supporters say, he would stand out for knowing how the global economy actually works. Frank Luntz, a Republican messaging guru (who is not working for any presidential candidate), says Mr Bloomberg offers voters a unique combination. He funds all his political campaigns from his own pocket, unlike Mr Cruz, Mr Sanders and Mrs Clinton. Unlike Mr Trump, he has a governing record. Lastly, he can appeal to both Democrats and Republicans, unlike any of his rivals. A poll taken by Mr Luntz in January saw Mr Bloomberg drawing more than a quarter of all votes in hypothetical matchups against Mr Trump, Mr Cruz and Mrs Clinton—though it is true that Democrats view him more favourably than Republicans do. Steve Schmidt, a senior adviser to Senator John McCain’s Republican presidential campaign in 2008 (but unaffiliated this time) describes the two traditional parties as in a “state of collapse”. He sees in that a chance for innovation, as Mr Bloomberg would have the funds to invest in high-tech targeting of voters, driving tactical voting in his favour, including in the 30-odd states that usually have no impact on White House races. Still a long shot Alas for Bloomberg-boosters, there are reasons to be sceptical, too. The ex-mayor is a defender of free trade and immigration in a time of haul-up-the-drawbridge populism. Moreover, America’s established parties will fight hard to defend their duopoly. Democratic leaders have already urged Mr Bloomberg to stay out, fearing that he will mostly hurt their party. Republicans gleefully agree, and are urging him to run. Even the electoral rule-book helps traditional parties. Presidential contenders win by securing 270 or more electoral-college votes. If no candidate reaches 270, then the president is chosen by the House of Representatives. The next House will almost certainly be Republican-held. Especially with a Supreme Court vacancy at stake after the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, it can be expected to vote on party lines. Mr Bloomberg may run anyway, drawing the support of millions of reasonable people. Yet if after some months it becomes clear that he will lose and help elect a President Trump, hope that he drops out. Being a true moderate is a responsibility, as well as an opportunity.EVO MORALES, an avid footballer in his spare time, enjoys scoring goals and breaking records. As Bolivia’s president, he has recently broken a couple. In October he overtook Andrés de Santa Cruz, a founding father who governed from 1829 to 1839, as the country’s longest-serving leader. In January Mr Morales, the country’s first president of indigenous origin, marked ten years in power—with a speech nearly six hours long extolling his own achievements. This is merely half-time, he hopes. On February 21st Bolivians are to vote in a referendum on whether to allow Mr Morales to run for re-election in 2019. If they vote yes, and then elect him to a fourth term in office, he will serve until 2025, by which time most Bolivians would remember no other president. If the people vote no, Mr Morales’s grip on power will begin to loosen. The vote is expected to be close. He needs the extra time, say his supporters, to complete a “democratic and cultural revolution” whose goal is to give more power and better lives to the country’s indigenous majority. The vote is being closely watched outside Bolivia as a sign of whether Latin America’s “pink tide” will continue to recede after recent election defeats for leftist governments in Venezuela and Argentina. A victory for “yes” would hearten depressed left-wingers. Mr Morales has scored some successes. The extreme-poverty rate has fallen from 38% to 17% during his tenure. The proportion of voting-age Bolivians who are registered to vote has risen from about half in the 1990s to 86%, says Soledad Valdivia of Leiden University in the Netherlands. Unlike other some other Latin American leftists, Mr Morales did not trash the economy to achieve his social goals. Helped by exports of natural gas, GDP grew at an average rate of 5.1% in 2006-14, among the highest in Latin America. Foreign-exchange reserves of $13 billion are the largest in the region as a share of GDP. Mr Morales’s “patriotic agenda” for 2025, the 200th anniversary of independence, promises still lower poverty and a public-works programme that will cost $49 billion over ten years, about 15% of GDP. O tempora! O Morales! That sales pitch is proving less convincing than he thought it would be. The electorate is evenly split between the “yes” and “no” camps, though polls may underestimate the president’s rural support. Scandals have shaken voters’ faith in Mr Morales and the movement he leads. Several indigenous leaders have recently been charged with stealing money from a fund that is supposed to finance development in rural areas. People blame the government for failing to monitor the fund, says Carlos Cordero, a political scientist at Universidad Mayor de San Andrés in La Paz. Bolivians are digesting revelations that Mr Morales, who is unmarried, had a secret relationship with a law student, Gabriela Zapata, who gave birth to a son in 2007. Mr Morales claims that the child died and that the relationship ended soon after, but many people do not believe him. Ms Zapata is now a manager in a Chinese firm that has won government contracts worth more than $500m, fanning suspicions that something improper is going on. The gossip seems to be hurting the “yes” campaign, at least in the cities. Some voters have deeper misgivings. Mr Morales both extended democracy and constricted it. Bolivia’s constitution, adopted in 2009, gives indigenous and other grassroots groups a bigger role in electoral politics and decision making, especially at the local level, alongside political parties. It is a “real attempt to combine universal values and democracy with more indigenous traditions”, says Ms Valdivia. But conventional democracy has not prospered under Mr Morales. Political parties have atrophied. The president’s Movement to Socialism (MAS) is a fractious coalition of groups ranging from coca growers to miners, united mainly by their loyalty to the president; anyone who criticises him is branded a libre pensante (free thinker), and ostracised. The opposition is led by a discredited old guard. The government has undermined the independence of the judiciary and the central bank. Much of the media has been tamed by its dependence on government advertising. Mr Morales owes his longevity as president to the constitutional court, which conveniently ruled in 2013 that, because his first term started before the enactment of the new constitution, he could run for a third. The prospect of a fourth frightens Bolivians who think democracy demands alternation of power. The government will “clamp down even harder on its critics and independent news media”, warns Ricardo Paz of Xtrategia Política, a consultancy that advises political campaigns. Even if the “yes” camp wins, Mr Morales’s luck may be running out. The global slump in energy prices is pulling down exports and economic growth. After years of budget surpluses, the government has run deficits for the past two years, which makes Mr Morales’s ambitious spending plans look unaffordable. His fan base may shrink by the next election. A “no” would speed up the erosion. It would damage Mr Morales’s aura of invincibility and shift voters’ attention to the MAS, which suffered humiliating defeats in local and regional elections last year. Its search for a new leader “could lead the party to unravel”, believes Mr Paz. Mr Morales would limp on, but his goal-scoring and record-setting days might be over. WHENEVER someone questions Venezuela’s creditworthiness, the country’s president, Nicolás Maduro, retorts that his government has never missed a debt payment and never will. His predecessor and mentor, the late Hugo Chávez, said the same thing. Creditors are demanding a handsome reward for their trust in that promise. The yield on Venezeula’s dollar bond that matures in 2020 is 37%. Bondholders’ faith will soon be tested. On February 26th Venezuela is due to pay $2.3 billion, mainly to hedge funds and investors that specialise in emerging-market debt. There is little doubt that it will make the payment. After that, the risk of a default on Venezuela’s remaining $64 billion of foreign-currency denominated bonds will rise sharply. In the second half of 2016 the government of Venezuela and PDVSA, the state-owned oil company, are due to pay $6 billion to creditors (see chart). With Venezuela’s heavy oil, virtually its only export, selling for as little as $25 a barrel, the country’s main source of foreign currency is drying up. “It now is a question of when they default, not if,” says Russ Dallen of Latinvest, an investment bank. At the recent low price for its oil, Venezuela would earn $22 billion from exports this year, a drop of 77% from 2012. The government has so far responded by restricting imports to half of what they were that year. That, combined with price controls and a bizarre system of multiple exchange rates, has led to shortages of such necessities as rice and toilet paper. It is hard to see how imports could be further squeezed without provoking a social explosion. Even with imports at rock-bottom levels, Venezuela is expected to have a financing gap of more than $30 billion this year. Its $52 billion-worth of sellable assets are shrinking fast. A hefty chunk of its reserves is in the form of gold held in the vaults of the central bank, a cumbersome means of payment. Chávez, in a nationalistic gesture, brought 160 tonnes to Venezuela from storage abroad. Now at least 27 tonnes are thought to have been shipped back to service debt. About half of Venezuela’s foreign debt is explicitly owed by the sovereign; the rest is owed by PDVSA. There are important differences. Most of the sovereign-debt contracts have collective-action clauses (CACs), under which a restructuring, if accepted by holders of an agreed proportion of debt, can be imposed on all of them. PDVSA, Venezuela’s main source of foreign exchange, would have a harder time restructuring its debt. Its bond contracts do not have CACs; if all bondholders are not satisfied by a restructuring offer, a few could hold PDVSA to ransom. But a default would be messy. Unlike Venezuela itself, the oil monopoly owns big assets outside the country, including Citgo, an oil company in the United States. The risk that creditors might seize these is one of the main reasons that Venezuela is so eager to avoid a default. PDVSA may seek to delay payments due later this year, but that will require the agreement of all creditors. In graphics: A political and economic guide to Venezuela Mr Maduro now admits that Venezuela faces an economic catastrophe; he may be inching towards realism about how to confront it. On February 15th the far-left economics tsar, Luis Salas, was dismissed after just six weeks in the newly created job. His replacement is Miguel Pérez Abad, a leftist businessman who holds more moderate views. Mr Maduro followed that up by raising the price of petrol 60-fold and tinkering with exchange rates: he reduced the number of official rates from three to two and allowed one to float. The strongest rate for the bolívar has been set at ten to the dollar rather than 6.3. That still leaves Venezuela’s petrol the cheapest in the world, and the strongest exchange rate wildly at variance with the black-market rate of around 1,000 bolívares to the dollar. And it leaves Venezuela without a plan to pay its debt, apart from praying for a recovery in the oil price. In 2007 Venezuela stopped co-operating with the IMF, one possible source of assistance. It could turn to China, which has already lent it more than $50 billion and accepts repayment in oil. There is speculation that Venezuela will seek to delay the oil payments. China might agree, in return for access to Venezuela’s oil and minerals on favourable terms. With Chinese help, and a more benign oil market, it is just possible that Venezuela will avoid defaulting on its bonds. But that help may come at a high price.IN THE heart of Montego Bay, his country’s tourist capital, on the night of February 7th Andrew Holness, the leader of the opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP), was outlining his election plan to a throng of supporters when a burst of gunfire left three people dead. He and his supporters scurried for safety. Two days later, a bystander was killed and three were injured when a JLP motorcade drove through Flanker, a poor area of the town close to the airport. The police were quick to blame the killings on feuding between local criminal gangs, rather than on party rivalries. “We asked specifically that no motorcade should come through Flanker,” said the chief of the local police. Nevertheless, the gunshots were an unpleasant echo of Jamaica’s 1980 election, when gang warfare linked to cold-war ideology and a crumbling economy pitted a Cuban-influenced People’s National Party (PNP) against a pro-American JLP. The last whiffs of ideology have long since evaporated. Both of the main parties competing in the election, to be held on February 25th, are pragmatic, but the economy remains stagnant. Jamaica was once a regional powerhouse. Its income per head is now the lowest among Britain’s former Caribbean island colonies. Gang-linked gun crime continues unabated. Last year Jamaica suffered 1,207 murders, giving the island a murder rate almost ten times that of the United States. The debt-ridden economy has been in the IMF’s care for years. Under Portia Simpson Miller, the prime minister since 2012, the PNP government has doggedly stuck to an austerity programme. Peter Phillips, the finance minister, has won praise for that. The fall in the price of oil, which Jamaica imports, has given him a little wriggle room. But next month’s budget is expected to contain another round of cuts in public-sector jobs, which may be why Mrs Simpson Miller called the election for 14 months before the deadline. She is 70 but looks younger and radiates infectious energy on the stump. In the previous election, in 2011, she took 95% of the poll in the inner-city seat she first won almost 40 years ago. Mr Holness, who was briefly prime minister before losing the 2011 election, is almost 30 years younger (she once called him her “son”). He is a Seventh-Day Adventist, as are one in eight Jamaicans. His Ten-Point Plan is generous: he would exempt from income tax three-quarters of those who pay it and promises 250,000 new jobs in a country where only 188,000 are unemployed. He plays to Jamaicans’ homophobia: he wants a referendum to sustain the buggery laws. The prime minister calls Mr Holness’s plan “a Ten-Point Con”. It would certainly mean forfeiting the IMF’s support. He counters that she welshed on promises to end the tax on electricity bills and to make Jamaicans prosperous enough to eat ox tail and curried goat. That prompted a peevish Mrs Simpson Miller to threaten to sue, and to pull out of three planned debates. The PNP has been in office, with only one four-year break, since 1989. Pollsters and pundits give it a slight edge this time, too. But a big slice of voters remain undecided, or say they will not vote. Mrs Simpson Miller still has work to do.A COUPLE of years ago Julio Guzmán decided he wanted to run for president of Peru. On the face of things, that was implausible. He had never been a candidate for political office before. His experience of government was confined to two short stints as a deputy minister in the administration of the current president, Ollanta Humala. An economist, he had spent much of his working life abroad as an official at the Inter-American Development Bank. A small and dormant political party called Everyone for Peru (TPP in Spanish) agreed to field him as its candidate. For months he made no perceptible impact on the campaign for the election due on April 10th. But by street leafleting and through social media he gained support, especially among young people. This year he has surged in the opinion polls to 17%, behind only the long-standing front-runner, Keiko Fujimori (35%). In a run-off ballot, which would take place in June, he is the only candidate who might come close to beating Ms Fujimori. So it matters greatly that on February 16th the electoral court in effect stalled Mr Guzmán’s campaign. By three votes to two, it refused his appeal against an administrative ruling that TPP had broken its own statutes in the way that it organised the meeting in October that chose him as its candidate. Confusingly, the court’s decision does not in itself annul his candidacy: a separate tribunal must now decide on that. But in practice the court has disabled it. Unless the court quickly reverses itself, weeks of legal argument may lie ahead. “It’s the political system [uniting] against a new option,” declared Mr Guzmán, though he insisted he would carry on campaigning. It is part of his pitch that he represents a middle-class insurgency against an entrenched reactionary “establishment”, a word he uses a lot. The court’s majority deployed pettifogging legalism, giving more value to secondary regulation than to Mr Guzmán’s constitutional right to run and the right of the people to choose whomever they please—the essence of democracy. Even in narrow terms, the decision is questionable: the dissenting two pointed out that TPP later held a congress which endorsed the choice of Mr Guzmán and that no party member had complained. The underlying problem is that Peru is a democracy in which hardly any of the 25 registered political parties is worthy of the name. “They are shells,” says Fernando Tuesta, a political scientist and former electoral official. “No party conducts an internal election as it should be done.” César Acuña, the owner of three private universities who is accused of serial plagiarism and vote-buying (which he denies), remains in the race. The absence of parties is both a cause and an effect of the general contempt in which Peruvians hold their politicians. It injects unpredictability into elections and explains why Mr Guzmán could come from nowhere. Aged 45, he is slim, short, articulate and relaxed. He presents himself as a post-ideological candidate situated firmly in the political centre. “What’s demanded today is accountability, authenticity and effectiveness,” he told Bello earlier this month. He reeled off his priorities for government: pre-school education, promoting innovation and a higher-tech economy, reform of the state and so on. He stresses policies to help the middle class. Many of these are sensible but not especially novel, as he admits. He gives the sense of making some things up as he goes along, and sometimes contradicts himself. That hasn’t halted his surge. For it is Mr Guzmán himself, as a fresh face and political outsider, who provides the novelty that Peruvians crave. Peru has fared well for most of the past 15 years, as faster economic growth has slashed poverty and paid for social progress. But growth has slowed, crime has risen and corruption scandals have proliferated. Peruvian democracy has been held together not so much by parties as by economic success and a consensus that the government should be run by technocrats (such as Mr Guzmán). But are these still enough? It is ironic that the only semi-serious party is that of Ms Fujimori, whose father spurned political parties when he ruled the country as an autocrat in the 1990s. To her credit, she has been firmer than other rivals in defending Mr Guzmán’s right to run. In the short term, she may be the main beneficiary if he is disqualified: she might then win without a run-off. But it is in no one’s interest that the electoral court has disrupted Peru’s election and potentially undermined the legitimacy of its eventual winner.THE job of “returning happiness” to Thailand has put Prayuth Chan-ocha (pictured) in a foul mood. In January the irascible leader of the junta that seized power in May 2014 said he had resolved to “talk less, be less emotional and quarrel less with reporters.” Yet this month he was again apologising, through a spokesman, for flashes of anger at two press events. The cause of his ire was impertinent questioning about a proposed new constitution. His temper may only get worse. Mr Prayuth, a former general, this week reassured President Barack Obama at a summit for South-East Asian leaders in California that he is preparing the country for fresh elections. But first the junta wants to pass a new constitution which would keep the hands of elected politicians firmly tied. Mr Prayuth’s coup suspended the previous constitution, itself drawn up during another period of military rule following an earlier coup that also unseated a democratic government, in 2006. A draft for a new constitution that was presented last year proved too illiberal even for lackeys who sit in the army’s rubber-stamp councils. The generals ordered a rewrite. Their latest blueprint looks nearly as bad. True, it abandons much-derided plans for an army-led “crisis panel”, empowered to topple elected governments at will. But otherwise it reflects the army’s view that popular politics is a form of corruption, and that bickering politicians are the source rather than a symptom of Thailand’s deep social divisions. (The biggest one is between a wealthy, royalist establishment in Bangkok, the capital, and poorer, less deferential classes in the north and north-east.) The new draft would produce weak coalition governments, presumably in order to erode the dominance of Thailand’s most successful party, Pheu Thai, versions of which the army has twice kicked from power. The prime minister need not be an MP, a loophole that could allow soldiers to keep bossing elected politicians around. New power will also flow to watchdogs such as the electoral commission, anti-corruption outfit and courts. On the face of it, that looks good. But these bodies have traditionally reflected the interests of Thailand’s monied elites. It is progress that the draft makes the constitutional court the final arbiter in times of crisis—that role had previously fallen to King Bhumibol Adulyadej, now old and frail. But the change probably reflects fears among the Bangkok establishment that the next monarch, the crown prince, may go too easy on Pheu Thai and other perceived enemies. All this has dismayed Thais of many stripes. Politicians note that Mr Prayuth will retain his authority until the moment the next government is sworn in, perhaps allowing him to influence their election campaigns. They fret that more surprises may be stuffed into subsections which the drafters have yet to scribble (a process that may delay an election promised for mid-2017). Sensing revolt, the junta has started warning that critics of the draft will be hauled away for “attitude adjustment”. The government insists that the constitution will be put to a national referendum at the end of July. The election commission says it is already preparing plans for that ballot, an operation it has considered calling the “65m Blooming Flowers” (forgetting, presumably, that a similarly named campaign in Mao Zedong’s China ended in bloody repression). It wants penalties for people who misrepresent the draft in the media. Meanwhile, a general says cadets will be sent to polling stations to help people vote for the right outcome. It may be in vain: the few opinion polls suggest that Thais will throw the new draft out. The attitude adjusters What would happen then is anyone’s guess. Mr Prayuth insists that a general election will take place in 2017 no matter what—though the junta’s timetable for a return to elected government has shown a tendency to slip. Perhaps he will seek to resurrect a constitution from Thailand’s past (he has 19 to choose from). Perhaps he will impose an electoral system of his own making. Meechai Ruchuphan, a lawyer who led the latest drafting panel, has warned that Thais who vote to abandon his council’s creation might end up with rules they like even less. In graphics: Explaining Thailand’s volatile politics Some wonder whether the draft is designed to fail, so that the junta can remain in power. The generals are presumed to want to be around to manage King Bhumibol’s succession (he is 88). Noxious censorship laws even prevent the matter of the succession from being openly discussed—though it will be the most significant moment for the national polity in decades and seems likely to inflame the country’s smouldering class wars. Yet the longer the generals hang around, the more problems they will have to contend with. On February 12th Yingluck Shinawatra, pushed out as prime minister just before the coup, invited foreign journalists to tour her vegetable garden—an outing seemingly designed to skirt the ban on overt politicking. She is probably hoping that foreign pressure on the junta will lessen her chances of a long jail term at the end of her show trial for corruption. Perhaps more pressingly, the junta also finds itself caught up in a bitter dispute inside Thailand’s powerful religious establishment over who should succeed the late patriarch of the Buddhist faith. Thousands of monks gathered near Bangkok on February 15th, urging the government to endorse their faction’s favourite. There were scuffles with soldiers. It is a febrile mood, and no end of conspiracy theories posit what a scheming junta intends to do next. Yet the debacle surrounding the constitution may hint at something more worrying still: that Thailand’s self-chosen leaders have no real strategy at all. Nasheed and Clooney charmed Number Ten THE low-lying Maldives may be inundated by a political storm. At the centre stands the archipelago’s president, Abdulla Yameen, scion of a powerful clan. The jailing this week of a former ally, and questions about missing money, are bringing the crisis to a head. One agent of Mr Yameen’s troubles is Mohamed Nasheed, the first democratically elected president, who was ousted in what was in effect a coup in 2012. He then contested (and eventually lost) the last election, before facing overblown charges of terrorism. But foreign pressure recently secured his passage to London for medical treatment. There he has loudly highlighted his country’s democratic shortcomings. He is supported by a high-profile lawyer, Amal Clooney, who has helped strengthen the backing of Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, for the cause of Maldivian democracy. The islands’ government is furious with Mr Nasheed. Ministers have come to London to prevent the Commonwealth from suspending the Maldives’ membership and to fight off European calls for targeted sanctions unless political prisoners are freed and a deal reached with the opposition. But the 12-year sentence handed down on February 17th to Imran Abdulla, head of an Islamist party, has undone their work. He also was charged with terrorism for a speech at a rally last May in support of Mr Nasheed—even though he used it to call for calm. Officials more readily rail against Mr Nasheed than explain how $79m disappeared from the state tourism body. Mr Yameen’s former vice-president, Ahmed Adeeb, has been arrested for that, as well as for an explosion on the president’s yacht. But questions remain. It seems improbable, as ministers with a taste for flash watches insist is the case, that Mr Adeeb is the only senior politician to have benefited. The opposition alleges that Mr Yameen is implicated in the tourism scandal, as well as in an alleged money-laundering scheme involving the central bank. With outside pressure growing, the president, who denies any wrongdoing, has shrinking room for manoeuvre.
