Blind faith needed IN LUCKNOW they call it “evening medicine”. In Bangalore the slang is “oil”. Among Tamils it is “water”. The Indian government is less poetic. It classes the stuff as IFL, IMFL or IML, terms that stand for imported foreign liquor, Indian-made foreign liquor and Indian-made liquor. But in all its many layers the Indian government remains just as addicted to, and sometimes just as confused by, the demon alcohol as any wine-drenched Urdu bard. Most Indians do not drink at all, and per person Indians are far more abstemious than others elsewhere (see chart). Yet those who do drink show a preference for the strong stuff. By fast-growing volume India is the world’s third-biggest consumer of alcohol, and far and away the biggest consumer of whisky. Such IMFL brands as Royal Stag and Officer’s Choice, unknown in other markets, rank among the world’s top ten best-selling whiskies. Even in beer Indians exhibit a taste for the bracing. Draught beers high in alcohol make up four-fifths of the local market. Governments everywhere tax booze and control its sale, but few do so as heavily or as capriciously as India’s. It is not just that the federal government imposes a tariff of 150% on imported spirits. Local licensing fees and taxes, along with a range of gouging state controls on the alcohol trade, stick consumers with end prices that are often five or six times those at the distillery gate. Granted, cheaper, less palatable alternatives exist to real whisky. In Delhi a plastic 0.6-litre bottle of brown liquid whose wonky label proclaims “Star Deluxe 80 Proof” retails for just 140 rupees, or $2. Unlicensed hooch, widely available in India, costs a fraction of that. Sadly it sometimes also kills or blinds. In 2014, 1,700 Indians died after imbibing toxic home brew—mainly as a result of lethal methanol unwittingly being manufactured rather than ethanol. India’s 29 states and seven union territories have adopted wildly different approaches to alcohol. In the west prim Gujarat has banned it entirely since 1961. By contrast the little territory of Puducherry on the Coromandel coast earns two-fifths of its revenue from an excise tax on booze. Some states auction wholesale and retail licences, or apportion them to friends of the party in power. Others operate their own monopolies. Tamil Nadu’s state monopoly employs 30,000 people and runs more than 6,000 outlets. Officially tipplers in Mumbai need a licence to consume alcohol. A lifetime pass costs 1,000 rupees and a day ticket five rupees. In theory failing to have one can incur a five-year jail sentence. In Delhi the minimum legal age is a silly 25. Recently police, at the behest of the national government, raided a municipal official’s home to embarrass the local government with the shock discovery that he owned two bottles more than the 12 allowed by local law. In a bow to Gandhian austerity, India’s constitution lays down the aim of reducing alcohol consumption. Like America in the 1920s, many Indian states have tried prohibition before abandoning it. The odd thing is that some keep trying. Kerala imposed stiff controls last year, and Bihar plans to do so in April. But Manipur and Mizoram, hill states in the north-east, are giving up their bans. They cite rising criminality, the danger of poisonous hooch, loss of state revenues and an inability to control the flow. A continent masquerading as a country: Explore India in our interactive map Meanwhile other states are simply seeking better ways to milk India’s passion for drink. Andhra Pradesh, whose 51m people already hand over nearly $2 billion a year in alcohol taxes, recently lowered duties on the cheapest Indian-made alcohol and raised them on higher-end potions. It was a carefully calculated bid to earn more from bigger volumes. Revenues have indeed soared, not only from higher local consumption but also because of a surge of smuggling into neighbouring states. Karnataka, dependent on alcohol for nearly a quarter of state revenue and already struggling to plug smuggling from cheaper Goa, has stiffened border checks to stem this new tide. To the north, the state of Punjab actually slaps higher taxes on alcohol “imports” from the rest of India to protect its own distillers. Taken together, it is an ungainly mix of prudishness and excess, of tangled laws and hefty profits. It says much about the state of India today. In some sectors of the alcohol industry, order is beginning to prevail. For instance, after years of trying to slash a way through thickets of bureaucracy and vested interests, big multinational firms now manage the bulk of the beer industry. Yet despite promoting the idea of a unified national goods and service tax to replace India’s current plethora of federal and state taxes as a key objective of its reform programme, the government of the prime minister, Narendra Modi, has explicitly stated that alcohol will still be taxed the old way. It is too rich a brew for state governments to give up.FOR a decade, millions of Japanese have tuned in to watch Ichiro Furutachi, the salty presenter of a popular evening news show, TV Asahi’s “Hodo Station”. But next month Mr Furutachi will be gone. He is one of three heavyweight presenters leaving prime-time shows on relatively liberal channels. It is no coincidence that all are, by Japanese standards, robust critics of the government. Last year another anchor, Shigetada Kishii, used his news slot on TBS, a rival channel, to question the legality of bills passed to expand the nation’s military role overseas. The questioning was nothing less than what most constitutional scholars were also doing—and in private senior officials themselves acknowledge the unconstitutionality of the legislation, even as they justify it on the ground that Japan is in a risky neighbourhood and needs better security. But Mr Kishii’s on-air fulminations prompted a group of conservatives to take out newspaper advertisements accusing him of violating broadcasters’ mandated impartiality. TBS now says he will quit. The company denies this has anything to do with the adverts, but few believe that. The third case is at NHK, the country’s giant public-service broadcaster. It has yanked one of its more popular anchors off the air. Hiroko Kuniya has helmed an investigative programme, “Close-up Gendai”, for two decades. NHK has not said why she is leaving, but colleagues blame her departure on an interview last year with Yoshihide Suga, the government’s top spokesman and closest adviser to Shinzo Abe, the prime minister. Mr Suga is known for running a tight ship and for demanding advance notice of questions from journalists. In the interview Ms Kuniya had the temerity to probe him on the possibility that the new security legislation might embroil Japan in other countries’ wars. By the standards of spittle-flecked clashes with politicians on British or American television, the encounter was tame. But Japanese television journalists rarely play hardball with politicians. Mr Suga’s handlers were incensed. It all shows how little tolerance the government has for criticism, says Makoto Sataka, a commentator and colleague of Mr Kishii’s. He points out that one of Mr Abe’s first moves after he returned to power in 2012 was to appoint conservative allies to NHK’s board. Katsuto Momii, the broadcaster’s new president, wasted little time in asserting that NHK’s role was to reflect government policy. What is unprecedented today, says Shigeaki Koga, a former bureaucrat turned talking head, is the growing public intimidation of journalists. On February 9th the communications minister, Sanae Takaichi, threatened to close television stations that flouted rules on political impartiality. Ms Takaichi was responding to a question about the departure of the three anchors. Political pressure on the press is not new. The mainstream media (the five main newspapers are affiliated with the principal private television stations) are rarely analytical or adversarial, being temperamentally and commercially inclined to reflect the establishment view. Indeed the chumminess is extreme. In January Mr Abe again dined with the country’s top media executives at the offices of the Yomiuri Shimbun, the world’s biggest-circulation newspaper. Nine years ago, when Mr Abe resigned from his first term as prime minister, the paper’s kingpin, Tsuneo Watanabe, brokered the appointment of his successor, Yasuo Fukuda. Mr Watanabe then attempted to forge a coalition between ruling party and opposition. Oh, but his paper forgot to alert readers to all these goings-on. The media today, says Michael Cucek of Temple University in Tokyo, has “no concept of conflict of interest.” It has all contributed to an alarming slide since 2011 in Japan’s standing in world rankings of media freedom. Mr Koga expects a further fall this year. He ran afoul of the government during his stint as a caustic anti-Abe commentator on “Hodo Station”. On air last year he claimed that his contract was being terminated because of pressure from the prime minister’s office. His aim, Mr Koga insists, was to rally the media against government interference. Yet TV Asahi apologised and promised tighter controls over guests. Now Mr Furutachi is quitting too. The government is playing chicken with the media, Mr Furutachi says, and winning.Last orders WHEN, in a hissy fit, North Korea shut down the Kaesong industrial zone almost three years ago, pulling out its workers and expelling their South Korean managers, many were puzzled as to why the conservative administration of Park Geun-hye, South Korea’s president, would work so hard to restart it. A product of the “sunshine policy” of her left-leaning predecessors, the factories just north of the border kept alive a few of South Korea’s twilight industries, producing low-grade shoes and clothes with subsidies from the South and cheap labour from the North. The joint zone opened again five months later, after seven rounds of talks. But on February 10th it was South Korea’s turn to pull the plug on the complex, for the first time since it opened in 2004. Ms Park announced a complete suspension of operations. Few expect it to reopen during her presidency, which ends in December 2017. The North swiftly cut hotlines, expelled businesses and put its army in charge of the area. The last real point of contact between the two Koreas is no more. If earlier efforts to save Kaesong tried to show Ms Park’s “trustpolitik” at work—a mixture of carrot and stick to try to get North Korea to engage with South Korea—the zone’s closure suggests that this policy has been ditched. Those dismayed by the move point out that the deal in 2013 involved a pledge to shield Kaesong from lurches in inter-Korean relations. But Ms Park is no longer in the mood for appeasement. In a notable speech to the National Assembly in Seoul, she did not mince words: it had become “indisputably clear”, she said, “that the existing approach and good intentions” would “only lead to the enhancement of the North’s nuclear capabilities” under Kim Jong Un. The tests of a nuclear bomb on January 6th and a long-range missile a month later were the last straw. Since Kaesong opened, the North has conducted four nuclear tests and five long-range rocket launches. The hard currency that flowed into Kaesong from the South went straight to the state, which returned as little as a fifth to the 54,000 North Korean workers there. The flow amounted to about $130m a year—not much by South Korean standards, but a fortune for the North and enough to help underwrite its nuclear dabbling. A harder line towards the North is only one change in Ms Park’s foreign-policy outlook. Another is disappointment with China, North Korea’s only friend, largest trading partner and principal donor. It is just possible that China is now getting tougher on the North. In a recent editorial, China Daily, a state-controlled newspaper, said that new UN sanctions, currently being drafted, “must truly bite”. Yet China is unlikely to want to do anything to rock Mr Kim’s regime, for fear of the instability that might ensue. It has responded to the tests with studious restraint. That is a blow for Ms Park, who had worked hard to woo Xi Jinping, China’s president. The two have met half a dozen times. Ms Park attended a Chinese military parade in September, the only leader of an Asian democracy to do so (much to America’s irritation). Yet Mr Xi did not take a call from Ms Park for over a month after the North detonated its bomb. Downplaying the North’s tests, says Evan Medeiros, formerly a member of Barack Obama’s National Security Council, has been Mr Xi’s weakest foreign-policy step. Among other things, it has hastened South Korea’s rapprochement with Japan after a protracted spat over history. And now Ms Park has agreed to adopt an American advanced missile-defence system that China has long agitated against. So shutting Kaesong was probably also a show of determination put on for the United States. Military drills that take place annually in the spring between the two countries are planned to be among the biggest yet. And South Korea, America and Japan are likely to become more public about their three-way co-ordination against the North Korean threat. South Korea is recalibrating its foreign policy: unambiguously hugging its American ally and mending ties with Japan as those with China fray. Ms Park’s legacy may yet be made in the dusk of her presidency.ON A stage decorated with tinsel and fairy lights, Liu Changsheng is singing “The East is Red” into a microphone, wearing a yellow and grey tracksuit. For Mr Liu, the Maoist anthem of the 1960s may arouse memories more vivid than those he has of his immediate past. Now in his seventies, he has dementia, an incurable brain disease that is often revealed by a loss of short-term memory. For two years Mr Liu has lived at the Qianhe Nursing Home in northern Beijing in a facility for around 75 dementia patients. They are among the few sufferers of this condition in China who receive specialist care. Dementia has mostly been a rich-world sickness, because it becomes more common as people live longer. China is fast catching up. Life expectancy increased from 45 in 1960 to 77 now, and the population is ageing rapidly: one person in six is over 60 now; by 2025 nearly one in four will be. Factors that increase the (age-adjusted) risk of developing dementia are also on the rise, including obesity, smoking, lack of exercise and diabetes. Already about 9m people in China have some form of dementia. In absolute terms, that is more than twice as many as in America. It is also more than double the number in India, a country with a population similar in size to China’s but a much younger one. Nearly two-thirds of China’s sufferers have the form known as Alzheimer’s, cases of which have tripled since 1990. The number of Alzheimer’s patients may increase another fourfold between now and 2050. China’s government is woefully unprepared for this crisis, with a severe lack of health-care provision for sufferers. So too is the public. Despite recent public-information campaigns, many Chinese regard dementia as a natural part of ageing, not as a disease, and do not know that it is fatal. Others see it as a psychological ailment rather than a degeneration of the brain itself. It carries a stigma of mental illness, making sufferers and their relatives reluctant to seek help. This compounds the suffering caused by dementia: active management can sometimes slow its progress. Even at the Qianhe Nursing Home, where Mr Liu lives, some aspects of the care appear crude. A shared “activity” space for dementia sufferers has no games or toys to entertain them; relatives are discouraged from visiting more than once a week for fear of “disturbing” their kin (in the West, care homes encourage visits, which can be stimulating and provide a sense of warmth and familiarity). Some dementia patients end up in psychiatric wards, which cannot deal effectively with their specific requirements. There is an acute shortage of medical workers qualified to treat sufferers. One reason is that few are attracted to the work. Zhang Xiurong, 50, a care assistant at Qianhe, is paid less than 3,000 yuan ($450) a month, close to the average national migrant wage, to provide all patients’ basic needs 12 hours a day, with only four days off a month. “No Chinese parent wants their one daughter to work in a hospital cleaning bedpans,” says Michael Phillips of the Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine. In the West most patients go to a care home for the final brutal stages of the disease, which can last more than a year. In China families carry most of the burden from beginning to end. The government has long underinvested in social care, assuming that adult children will take responsibility. But this is unsustainable. Plunging birth rates since the 1970s, exacerbated by a one-child-per-couple policy, mean that the number of working-age adults per person over 65 will fall by 2050 from ten to 2.5. Migration into cities (see article) is leaving some elderly people in the countryside without family members to care for them. Need for new thinking The government has been slow to recognise the scale of the problem. It funds some dementia research, but the money goes to scientists looking for a cure, rather than to those trying to find ways of alleviating the suffering of patients who have no chance of one. “People don’t get Nobel prizes or grants for developing a strategy for community care,” says Dr Phillips. In any country care can be expensive, both for families and governments. In China the government will find itself having to spend much more as relatives prove unequal to the task. Because family members rarely understand the condition, more than 90% of dementia cases go undetected, according to a study led by Ruoling Chen of King’s College in London. Sufferers will benefit when the government at last realises it has to step in. A copse in need of cops YEUNG SIU YU points to where a large, old tree has been hacked with a blade. Villagers have erected a metal fence around the trunk to prevent further attacks, but they fear there will be more: low-hanging limbs are still exposed. “The thieves will come back for this piece,” says Mr Yeung, pointing to the stump of a branch just above his head. Mr Yeung forsook city life to keep bees on the carefree (and car-free) island of Lamma, a couple of miles from the main island of Hong Kong where the territory’s government and financial centre lie. Lamma’s tropical gardens and verdant jungle are magnets for nature-lovers like Mr Yeung. They worry, however, that one of the most cherished species, the incense tree (Aquilaria sinensis), faces a growing threat to its survival. The evergreen tree is endemic to southern China. Its lightly scented timber is used to make incense sticks. When damaged, the tree’s aromatic resin may develop into a dark, dense substance known as agarwood, which is prized for its supposed medicinal properties. Trade in the tree’s produce was once so important locally that a port handling such business was named “fragrant harbour”. The British later applied that name—“Hong Kong”—to the colony they founded around the port. The commercial harvesting of incense trees ended in the territory more than a century ago. Nowadays most specimens are growing in the wild, including in woodlands preserved by ancient villages. To protect incense trees, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora restricts trading in agarwood. But Hong Kong does not single out those who destroy or damage the trees for harsh treatment. If an incense tree is on government-managed land, the maximum sentence for cutting it down is the same as it is for felling any other kind of tree on such property: a fine of HK$25,000 ($3,210) and a year in prison. Such penalties do little to deter thieves from mainland China, who are encouraged by growing demand for exotic medicines among members of the mainland’s fast-growing middle class. Professor C.Y. Jim of the University of Hong Kong reckons that in 2013 high-grade agarwood was worth $1,600 a gram on the black market. That is more than gold. According to Mr Jim, Hong Kong may be the “last refuge” of the tree, so it has become a “honeypot” for tree-snatchers. Most of the thieves work for criminal gangs based across the border in mainland China. In recent years a relaxation of restrictions on travel from the mainland to Hong Kong has made their work easier. They often pretend to be hikers, sometimes camping out for weeks while gathering the timber. A local NGO has produced a map showing about 200 sites from which it says around 500 trees were stolen in the past year. Ho Pui Han, who runs the group, says there may be only 100 mature trees left in the territory. She is incensed. Very few incense trees form agarwood, so they are often destroyed indiscriminately. On Lamma, a plaque marks a spot where three young trees were uprooted. A short scramble up a steep slope reveals a gorier scene: splintered woodchips are all that remain of an aged tree. Mr Yeung, the beekeeper, says “hunters” felled and butchered it in situ. As supplies diminish, the gangs are becoming more desperate. Thieves are raiding private gardens; some residents have begun organising patrols to frighten the thieves away. Alarms and monitoring cameras are being installed. Ms Ho says the “sacred” relationship between villagers and woodlands is a vital part of Hong Kong tradition. “Their ancestors told them they must not cut down one single tree,” she says. Several thieves have been arrested recently (including on Lamma). But conservationists say the government has to try much harder.AROUND 270m people have left China’s countryside to work in urban areas, many of them entrusting their children to the care of a lone parent, grandparents, relatives or other guardians. By 2010 there were 61m of these “left-behind children”, according to the All-China Women’s Federation. In a directive released on February 14th, the government has at last shown that it recognises the problems caused by the splintering of so many families. The document acknowledges that there has been a “strong reaction” from the public to the plight of affected children. It describes improving their lot as “urgent”. That is clearly right. There have been numerous stories in recent years revealing the horrors some of these children endure. Last year four siblings left alone in the south-western province of Guizhou apparently committed suicide by drinking pesticide. Numerous sex-abuse cases involving left-behind children have come to light. The new proposals look sensible enough: minors may not be abandoned entirely; local institutions such as schools and hospitals must do more to notify the authorities of cases of abuse or neglect; social workers should monitor the welfare of left-behind children. Sadly, however, the government’s suggested remedies will achieve little. They largely replicate recent laws and policies designed to protect children (not just left-behind ones), which have been almost universally unenforced. It is already illegal to allow minors to live alone, for example. There is no indication that the new recommendations will be made law or implemented any more rigorously. The new scheme mentions the importance of giving migrants urban hukou, or household-registration certificates, which are needed to gain access to public services such as education and health care. Most migrants leave their children in the countryside because they do not have such papers. In December the government announced plans to make it easier for migrants to gain urban hukou privileges. But few casual labourers are likely to fulfil the still-onerous conditions that must be met to qualify. A study published last year by researchers at Stanford University found that among more than 140,000 children assessed in areas such as education, health and nutrition, left-behind ones performed as well as or better than those living in the countryside with both parents. But both kinds of children lagged far behind those who grow up in cities.IT WAS by some distance the year-to-date’s biggest television event. Some 690m people in China are estimated to have watched (or snoozed through) the four-and-a-half-hour extravaganza screened nationwide on state television on February 7th, the eve of the Chinese new year. It was a stultifying procession of patriotic songs (“Forge ahead, beautiful China”; “Iron and blood loyalty”), insipid skits and bald propaganda. “Without the Communist Party, there would be no new China” is a jolly enough tune, but hardly festive fare. The gala even included a parade of soldiers strutting about the stage in combat fatigues. On the same day, 112m Americans tuned in to the Super Bowl, a big American football game with more than its share of flag-waving, too. But at least that event was bone-crunchingly exciting, and its half-time show intriguingly subversive (Beyoncé appeared in a Black Panther outfit). By contrast, the live broadcast in China was politically correct to a mind-numbing extreme. The year of the monkey was ushered in by a show that many citizens decried as a turkey. Moaning about the chunwan, as the programme is commonly called, is as much a tradition as the entertainment itself, an annual event since 1983. This year was different, however: the show was seen as having plumbed new depths. Worse, even saying so was, in effect, banned. On the state broadcaster’s account on Weibo, a microblogging service, the comments section was temporarily shut down as viewers bombarded it with complaints. Since then censors have been busy deleting posts about the surfeit of political puffery. Peidong Yang, a sociologist at the National Technological University in Singapore, who has followed the shows closely, says this year’s was more than usually full of it. Many viewers joked that it was like watching the news. What passed for new-year entertainment on television this year formed part of a revival of another of the party’s traditions: the political campaign. This never died out entirely. But under Xi Jinping, the party’s leader since 2012, it has gathered new momentum. For over a year, the press has urged people to study his obscure doctrine of the “Four Comprehensives” (getting richer, reforming the economy, enforcing the law and cleaning up the party). This featured, inevitably, in the chunwan, and also in a cartoon by the official news agency, using rap, zippy animation, Mr Xi’s own voice and even Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy” to convey the message that the Four Comprehensives will bring China close to realising the “Chinese Dream” (another of Mr Xi’s slogans). The gala was graced by vast images of Mr Xi, the object of an inchoate personality cult. This year the fawning has acquired a new feature, with references to him as the hexin, or “core”, of China’s leadership. Local leaders have taken to professing their loyalty to Mr Xi, using this word. It recalls the campaign in the early 1990s to boost the party leader at the time, Jiang Zemin, through constant references to the “third generation of revolutionary leaders”, with Mr Jiang as their “core”—ie, as Mao Zedong had been to the first generation and Deng Xiaoping to the second. Back then, Mr Jiang seemed to need the help. Unexpectedly picked to lead the party after the turmoil of the Tiananmen protests and the killings that ended them in 1989, he was seen by some as a powerless cipher for a bunch of gerontocrats who still called the shots from their bath-chairs and bridge tables. When the party managed its first smooth leadership transition to the fourth generation in 2002, that feat was also hailed as a shift to a new style of collective leadership. It became taboo to use the word hexin to describe the status of Hu Jintao, Mr Xi’s predecessor; among his party colleagues, Mr Hu was always simply known as “general secretary”. Mr Xi, however, wants to be seen as more than a first among equals. Chinese media are playing along. One of their new fads is the use of the word “Xiconomics” to describe the president’s professed zeal for “supply-side” economic reforms. That the prime minister, Li Keqiang, is notionally in charge of running the economy is conveniently ignored. Mr Xi has already succeeded in ousting his most prominent rivals and instilling fear throughout the party with his anti-corruption campaign. Moreover, by strengthening the role of high-level party committees, led by himself, he has his hands on most of the levers of power. So it is not obvious why his status needs further enhancement. One possibility is that the revived usage of “core” is a product of feverish politicking in Beijing. Next year the party will hold a five-yearly congress. According to party rules, five of the seven members of its highest body, the Politburo Standing Committee, should stand down because of their ages. Only Mr Xi and Mr Li are due to stay. So intense jockeying is already under way for the vacancies. Officials may see expressions of loyalty to Mr Xi, and acknowledgment of his supreme power, as a way of improving their career prospects. It may also be that Mr Xi demands such homage as a way of stifling resistance to his policies, his accumulation of power and his purge of the corrupt. Economic growth is slowing, and markets are turbulent. Leaders may calculate that pre-emptive repression is safer than waiting to see if China’s myriad malcontents coalesce into something resembling an opposition. Confidence tricks Repression carries costs of its own. In one deleted post on the gala, for example, Ren Zhiqiang, a property tycoon with 37.5m Weibo followers, asked sarcastically whether stopping criticism showed self-confidence. In another, Wu Wei, a liberal former official, approvingly reposted a comment that the worst thing about the gala was not how lousy it was but how the right to say so was gradually vanishing. The censorship looks petty, silly and, worse, panicky. But the party has never been as concerned with how things look as with keeping an iron grip on power. If it were a corporation, that would be its core business.IT MIGHT have been a moment of hope: an internationally negotiated ceasefire that would lead to a political deal to end a war that has probably killed nearly half a million people and turned millions more into refugees. The accord was thrashed out by America and Russia on February 12th in the wings of the annual Munich Security Conference, endorsed by the 17-nation International Syria Support Group—a cruel misnomer if ever there was one. Its chances of success were never good. Humanitarian aid to besieged towns was supposed to be the first part of the deal, followed by a “cessation of hostilities” within a week. There are some signs of the former—the UN announced an agreement with the regime on February 16th for access to seven towns, perhaps including air-drops into Deir al-Zor, a city largely held by Islamic State (IS). On February 17th some aid convoys began to roll out of Damascus. But there remains virtually no prospect of a ceasefire. Nobody should be surprised, given the cheerful assertion by Sergei Lavrov, Russian’s foreign minister, that, despite signing the agreement, Russia would continue its air strikes against those it regards as “terrorists”. That is an elastic term. Jabhat al-Nusra (JAN), al-Qaeda’s powerful Syrian arm, fights alongside many other forces, both jihadist outfits and less extreme ones supported by the West, so Russia feels justified in bombing just about any rebels it chooses. Since Russia’s intervention at the end of September, supposedly to attack IS and JAN, the dynamics on the ground have been transformed. Once close to collapse, the regime of Bashar al-Assad is now confident of its survival and intent on regaining control of more territory. Pro-Assad forces are encircling the rebel-held parts of Aleppo, once Syria’s biggest city. Why should he and Mr Putin stop now? The only puzzle is what John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, thought he could achieve through his agreement with Mr Lavrov—except, perhaps, to expose Russian cynicism. As John McCain, the chairman of the Senate armed services committee, put it: “This is diplomacy in the service of military aggression. And it is working because we are letting it.” In the few days since the Munich agreement, the war has, if anything, widened and intensified. On February 15th nearly 50 civilians were killed when missiles hit rebel-held areas of Syria. At least 14 were killed in the northern town of Azaz when missiles hit two hospitals and a school where refugees were sheltering. Missiles also struck a hospital in Marat Numan, in Idlib province, south of Aleppo (see map). In all, five medical facilities were targeted. The UN condemned the attacks as a violation of international law. Turkey’s foreign ministry accused Russia of “an obvious war crime”. The animosity between Moscow and Ankara is further fuelled by the advance of the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), an alliance of Kurdish and Arab fighters under the umbrella of the PYD, the main Syrian Kurdish force. This had been America’s most reliable ally on the ground against IS. But now, aided by Russian planes and weapons deliveries, it is fighting in tacit alliance with Mr Assad’s regime. On February 2nd the SDF severed the corridor between Aleppo and the Turkish border that is critical for rebel supplies. On February 15th it seized control of Tel Rifaat, one of the first towns to rise up against Mr Assad, squeezing the “Azaz pocket”, a rebel bastion on the border with Turkey. The rush to Rojava The Kurds want to carve out a continuous autonomous area by linking up the two enclaves they control along Syria’s border with Turkey. In the recently opened PYD office in Moscow, there is a map of a future Syrian Kurdistan, called “Rojava”. It covers a lot of territory. Turkey is determined to stop the Kurds and has been shelling them for the past week. Its prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, says that Turkey “will not let Azaz fall” and threatens a “severe response” if the Kurdish-led forces try to take the town. Tens of thousands of refugees are flowing out of Aleppo, heading both north towards the Turkish border town, Kilis, and west into mainly rebel-held Idlib. The regime seems all too happy to let the city’s population flow out through its siege lines. Noah Bonsey of the International Crisis Group, a think-tank, believes that there is nothing indiscriminate about the bombing of civilian areas and infrastructure, including schools and hospitals. Both Aleppo’s main hospitals were systematically destroyed by Russian air strikes last week. The aim is twofold: to terrify civilians into leaving, so that even more ruthless tactics can be used against the fighters who remain; and to raise the price of resistance to the point at which communities will put pressure on fighters to accept whatever ceasefire terms the regime is prepared to offer, as happened in Homs two months ago. Western diplomats accuse Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, of “weaponising” refugees to threaten Europe and punish Turkey, which supports the rebels and in November shot down a Russian plane that had crossed into its airspace. Turkey is doing everything it can to hold back the exodus from Aleppo by building big refugee camps on the Syrian side of the border. It is not yet clear whether it is prepared to defend these new camps against Russian or regime attacks. If it is, it could be the prelude to establishing an informal safe zone along the border—something the Turks have long demanded, but which America has refused to do, even when it would have been a lot less dangerous than it is now. Shooting down stray regime helicopters is one thing; risking a direct military confrontation with Russia is quite another. Syrian opposition leaders see it only slightly differently. One says: “It looks like Turkey is trying to create a humanitarian crisis. They think that maybe it could make the West finally act.” In fact, there is little prospect of Western intervention. Even if Russia and Turkey come to blows in Syria it is not at all clear that NATO, of which Turkey is a member, would be obliged to come to its aid unless Turkey’s own territory were under attack. The desperate diplomatic floundering of Mr Kerry suggests that President Barack Obama, with only a year left in office, will not adopt a more hawkish approach unless events force him to. In the absence of direct Western military intervention, most military analysts doubt that much can be done to stave off further rebel defeats. The Saudis are thinking of supplying them with shoulder-fired anti-aircraft missiles. But America rejects this idea because of the danger that they would be used by terrorists to shoot down passenger airliners around the world. None of this means that Aleppo will fall quickly to regime forces. There are about 40,000 battle-hardened rebel fighters from more than 50 opposition groups still in the city. Most have remained relatively independent of JAN. As a recent analysis by the Institute for the Study of War, a think-tank in Washington, DC, argues, they are a resilient bunch. However, the think-tank warns that the pressure of the coming siege will be used by JAN and its Salafi-jihadist ally, Ahrar al-Sham, to get moderate groups, who feel betrayed by the West, to merge with them. That would play into the regime’s account of the opposition being composed only of “terrorists”. Without Russian air support the pro-regime forces ranged against them would look a lot less formidable. There are relatively few units of the Alawite-led Syrian army left. By the middle of last year it was on the brink of disintegration. It is now being retrained and rearmed by the Russians, but it is largely deployed close to the regime’s heartland in Damascus and Latakia. Most of the forces around Aleppo are Iranian-led Shia militias, from Lebanon and Iraq, with some fighters from Afghanistan and Pakistan. Western intelligence sources put their number at about 15,000, not including around 5,000 from Hizbullah, the powerful Lebanese Shia militia. Some Russian Spetsnaz special forces are working on the ground, co-ordinating air strikes. One rebel commander said: “We can beat them on the battlefield. Our men have been fighting them for five years and this is their terrain. But the Russian bombings make the difference.” The West agonises over its self-inflicted impotence, while Turkey and its Gulf allies flail and threaten. But Mr Putin has a clear strategy that appears to be succeeding on almost every level. A newly confident Mr Assad talks about retaking the country bit by ruined bit. Vlad the victor Mr Putin’s immediate aim is to return Aleppo to government hands, allow the Kurds to create at least a semi-autonomous region in the north and then to use the suspended UN-sponsored peace process to lock in these gains. Underpinning this plan is his belief that a European Union bickering about refugees is desperate for the war to end at almost any cost, while Mr Obama has already given up trying (not very hard) to get rid of Mr Assad. As a juicy carrot, Mr Putin will hold out the promise of a genuinely concerted attack on IS in eastern Syria to bolster the apparently feeble efforts of Mr Obama’s coalition. He may get a deal; he may even be prepared to offer up Mr Assad as well, as long as he is replaced by someone Russia finds acceptable. From a wider perspective, Mr Putin’s strategy is paying dividends. His overarching reason for sending bombers to Syria, so soon after annexing Crimea and stirring up a separatist war in east Ukraine, is to force the West to take Russia seriously as a great power. In both cases the Kremlin portrays its action merely as a response to the provocative behaviour of America and its allies. In Mr Putin’s mind the revolution in Kiev in February 2014 was the result of a Western plot to claw Ukraine away from Russia. Similarly, the war in Syria was fomented by the West with the aim of dislodging Mr Assad. It is now getting its comeuppance, he believes. The flow of refugees into Europe, increased by Russian air strikes, is another bonus. Mr Putin has for several years been giving material support to populist and nativist parties in Europe that oppose the EU. They have been boosted by the union’s floundering response to the migrant crisis. A weakened EU, Mr Putin calculates, should make it easier to keep the likes of Ukraine, Georgia and Belarus within Russia’s sphere of influence. Not least, the Syrian campaign is helping to maintain Mr Putin’s approval ratings at home, which remain steady at more than 80% despite a painful recession in Russia, caused by cheap oil, Western sanctions and Mr Putin’s own misgovernment. Russian television depicts the war as an action blockbuster to cheering viewers. After Russian bombs hit hospitals in Aleppo, it shifted the blame onto America by showing footage of US Air Force A-10s allegedly operating in the skies over the city. America’s weary denial only confirmed its guilt. According to the Levada Centre, a pollster, nearly 60% of Russians support the war in Syria. Yet however successful Mr Putin’s strategy appears now, it is fraught with risk. Saudi Arabia, as the leader of a newly formed Islamic coalition, is conducting large-scale exercises, possibly in preparation for a ground campaign against IS. Turkey, to which the Saudis have recently sent planes, could become a partner. If they were to go ahead (and it remains a very big “if”), matters would be unlikely to stop there: regime forces could also come under attack, directly or indirectly. Russia would then either have to insert substantial ground forces of its own or back down, while America might have little option other than to support its allies. At best Mr Putin will have to contend with an incomplete triumph. Even with the help of Russia, Iran and Shia mercenaries, Mr Assad can at most retake the populous western end of the country. He will continue to face a large, radicalised insurgency. Mr Putin may find it as difficult to withdraw from Syria as the West has from Afghanistan. Nor will his promise of working with America to defeat IS be honoured unless Sunni Arabs are prepared to take and hold IS’s stronghold in Raqqa and the surrounding area can be taken and held by Sunni Arabs—in other words, those Russia now describes as “terrorists”. Mr Putin and Mr Assad may feel like winners for now. But in Syria “winning” and “victory” are slippery terms. 
