THE fog of war frustrates statisticians: knowing for sure how many Syrians have died can seem as difficult as brokering a lasting peace. The last precise death toll published by the UN was 191,369 in August 2014, followed by an estimate of more than 250,000 in August 2015. But it then stopped updating the figure because of dwindling sources of good information. On February 11th the Syrian Centre for Policy Research (SCPR), a non-profit group, claimed that the true figure is now almost double that estimate at about 470,000. This number may seem large, but even the UN emphasised that its figures were conservative. It erred on the side of rigour rather than completeness, and only counted people whose names it knew and whose deaths were confirmed by more than one source. Extreme conditions have forced more approximate approaches. The SCPR divided Syria into 700 regions, and asked three local experts in each to give detailed information. If one gave an answer more than 10% apart from the others, they were replaced with two different “informants”. Rabie Nasser, an author of the report, says resampling happened in only about 10% of cases. The figure of 470,000, which comes with a 5% margin for error either side, is the sum of the average answers across regions. Relying on people to estimate the body count in large areas rent by civil war is bold. All sorts of biases could have crept in, not to mention the risk that the “informants” will have tweaked their figures to suit their own political agenda (though Mr Nasser says his team tried to find independent sources). Nonetheless, 470,000 could be close to the true figure. Since mid-2015 Russian bombs have added to the casualties. And whereas the UN figure only included deaths directly caused by fighting, the SCPR figure includes indirect deaths (about 15% of the total). The war has blasted hospitals and ruptured supplies of clean water, allowing disease to spread. Over time, Mr Nasser expects indirect deaths to climb as a proportion of the total. No one really knows how many have died in Syria; the 470,000 figure is only one estimate. The UN’s approach is that with such decay in the underlying data, it is better to be cautious than to risk losing credibility. Mr Nasser takes a different line. “If you’re in a conflict where people die, then you don’t give up.”THE Islamic Republic of Iran, as its name suggests, has been a curious amalgam of people-power and theocracy from the start. For most of its 37 years clerics have firmly dominated. But as its revolutionaries age and a new generation of leaders courts a warm relationship with the West, the theologians seem to be growing fearful about where the country’s elected politicians are leading it. In the run-up to parliamentary elections, scheduled for February 26th, they have clamped down more harshly than ever on candidates. Were the vote a straight test of Hassan Rohani’s popularity, his allies would surely win. The moderate president secured a deal with world powers last month that set aside the long crisis over his country’s nuclear programme. Crushing economic sanctions have been lifted. Iran has gained access to tens of billions of dollars of assets previously frozen overseas. Oil exports have resumed and a $27 billion contract with Airbus for 118 planes, signed when Mr Rohani visited the French president, François Hollande, at the Élysée Palace, has provided a glimpse of the potential riches on offer to a nation long isolated. Yet voters, and their representatives, also have to contend with the ruling clergy. The Council of Guardians, a constitutional watchdog of backers of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader, that vets contenders for their supposed loyalty, disqualified about 60% of the 12,000 people who came forward as parliamentary candidates, about twice the rate of previous elections. Roughly a quarter of those kicked off the list won appeals but, even so, half of those who had wanted to stand for office were prevented from doing so. Nor were the Guardians even-handed. Reformists were hit hardest. In the first cut only 30 of about 3,000 were approved, leaving large parts of the country without even a single reformist candidate. “They want an Islamic Re- without the public,” quipped one observer. The stacked vote means that Mr Rohani may have to stomach a parliament that will continue to resist his social and political programme. For almost three years he has contended with conservatives who have bridled at his outreach to the West, even impeaching one of his ministers, and have stymied his economic, political and cultural initiatives. That said, the popular Mr Rohani is not yet finished. Iran’s naysayers look more rudderless than its reformists. Pragmatic conservatives know that without finance from the West the Islamic republic could collapse. Iran aspires to be a bubbly BRIC economy, but growth was sluggish last year. The government is saddled with debt, and with a crashing oil price and weak production (down from 5.8m bpd in 1978 to 2.8m today), its budget deficit is around 2.2% of GDP and growing. Prominent conservatives, including Ali Larijani, the speaker of parliament, have promised to support some of Mr Rohani’s economic policies. “The parliament should legislate to remove obstacles to raising production and improve the business climate,” Mr Larijani told an economic conference in Qom, the country’s religious centre, on February 14th. A large number of independent candidates might sidle up to Mr Rohani, anxious to secure the funding his government dispenses. “While a pro-Rohani parliament looks in doubt, he should at least hope for one he can work with,” says a veteran Iran hand. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal That may not be enough to satisfy discontented Iranians to the left and the right. Many reformists remain bitter, not just about their electoral exclusion, but also at what they see as Mr Rohani’s failure to keep his promises. During his 2013 election campaign he held up a key, vowing to release political prisoners, including many arrested in protests that followed a disputed election in 2009. Yet they remain behind bars. Initiatives to open sports stadiums to women and execute fewer people have similarly fallen foul of conservatives. After repeated humiliations in parliament Mr Rohani has suspended political and cultural reform to focus on the economy. Also at stake in this election is the power to choose who will succeed Mr Khamenei, whose authority exceeds that of the president. On the same day that voters select MPs they will also choose members of the Assembly of Experts. This is a committee of clerics that will elect Mr Khamenei’s successor should he die during its eight-year tenure. Given that the 76-year-old is frequently said to be suffering from prostate cancer, the committee may indeed be called upon to do so. Although his succession was once a forbidden topic in Iran’s media, life after Mr Khamenei has been openly discussed in the run-up to the elections. All this has made the Guardians even more guarded than usual: they disqualified almost 80% of potential candidates vying for the 88 seats, including all the women who applied. The rejects included Hassan Khomeini, a reformist cleric who is the grandson of the founder of the revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The 43-year-old, who plays football, posts pictures on Instagram and has criticised the Revolutionary Guards for meddling in politics, was deemed unsuitable for the assembly by the conservative Guardians. Little effort has yet been made to court ordinary voters. With such a short campaign, there are as yet no billboards or signs of electioneering in Tehran. The only poster so far shows Mr Khamenei casting a ballot, signalling his desire for a strong turnout. Mr Rohani’s hopes rest in a single list called the Alliance of Reformists and Government Supporters. The group’s leader, Mohammad Reza Aref, a university professor whose withdrawal from elections in 2013 paved the way for Mr Rohani’s victory, is its main candidate in Tehran. Yet with so many candidates barred from running, voters may simply stay at home.FIRST they came for the statues. Last year students in Cape Town sparked national protests by calling on the University of Cape Town (UCT) to remove a statue of Cecil Rhodes, a Victorian imperialist who, like most Englishmen of his time, held racist views. The statue was removed but students were still angry. Many marched on South Africa’s parliament to complain about high college fees, among other things. That prompted a cash-strapped government not to raise fees after all. Protests about statues of dead racists soon spread around the world. Students demanded that Oriel College, Oxford take down its statue of Rhodes. (It refused.) The University of Texas at Austin has moved a bronze of Jefferson Davis, the Confederacy’s president, and will put it in a museum. Meanwhile, back in Cape Town, UCT students starting a new academic year after the long summer break were quick to resume protests, this time over gripes such as not having enough spaces in university dormitories. They stormed through the campus grabbing artworks and burning them. Most of the paintings they heaped on a bonfire were portraits of white historical figures. They were, declared one protester, “symbols of the coloniser”. Another protester proudly posted pictures of the bonfire on Twitter, showing flames licking at the edges of a plaque commemorating Jan Smuts, a British-educated general who was twice South Africa’s prime minister and helped write the preamble to the UN’s founding charter. The tweet accompanying it proclaimed: “Whiteness is burning”. Some of the art-burners might usefully have spent more time in the library studying South African history. Among the works they turned to ashes was a 1993 oil painting by a black anti-apartheid artist, Keresemose Richard Baholo. It was called “Extinguished Torch of Academic Freedom”, one of a series of paintings depicting protests at the university. Students defaced a statue of Smuts and a bust of Maria Fuller, one of the first four women to attend the university. She enrolled in 1886, when most courses were open only to men. She went on to play a role in opening a women’s hall of residence. She was, however, white. The protests are symptomatic of a resurgence of racial antagonism in South Africa, fanned by frustration over a slowing economy and high unemployment. More than two decades after apartheid ended black South Africans are still worse off than whites. Mostly, this is because they are less well educated, a result of apartheid’s legacy and the government’s failure to fix it. Bad education is a problem that starts long before students reach college. Among the protesters’ complaints at UCT was the implausible claim that whites were given preferential access to university accommodation. The protesters erected a corrugated tin shack on UCT’s stately grounds as a symbol of how rough life is in black townships. They added a portable loo and overturned milk crates as chairs. Some started a shisa nyama, grilling sausages and chops over charcoal. The flames spread. The small band of students refused to remove the shack, which university officials said was blocking traffic, and went on a rampage. They burned a car, a bus and the office of Max Price, the university’s vice-chancellor. “It is utterly regrettable that a movement that began with such promise and purport to be fighting for social justice matters has now deteriorated into a group that engages in criminality,” Mr Price said. Little seems left of the lofty aims that prompted students to take to the streets last October, when they garnered widespread support for their argument that high tuition fees put a university education out of reach for black students from poor families. The shortage of housing at UCT is partly due to the success of those protests: enrolment has increased thanks to lower fees and measures to reduce student debt. Also, some university rooms are still occupied by students whose exams were delayed by last year’s protests. Students arrested for damaging property at UCT included several who are not obviously poor, such as the son of the chief executive of Eskom, the state power utility. Other universities have seen violent protests, too, largely over fees and overcrowding. A student leader at Walter Sisulu University told the Daily Sun, a tabloid: “We’re going to destroy everything.”Mr Besigye, still in the back seat UGANDA’S president likes to keep people waiting. In a marquee in the grounds of a swanky hotel in Kampala, about 150 smartly dressed bigwigs were treated to a buffet breakfast. It helped pass the time until 12.30pm, when Yoweri Museveni finally turned up to launch a partly solar-powered electric bus. The Kayoola bus, designed by Kiira Motors, a state-owned firm, trundled around the hotel car park in front of a pack of cameras. Mr Museveni, clad in his trademark bright yellow shirt and wide-brimmed hat, then ambled back to the marquee to listen to tributes. The photo opportunity, two days before the country’s presidential election on February 18th, presented a contrast to events a few miles down the road the previous night. There police had fired tear gas and rubber bullets at supporters of Mr Museveni’s main electoral rival, Kizza Besigye (pictured riding pillion). One person was killed and Mr Besigye, who had been briefly detained earlier that day, was taken home before he could address a rally. Mr Museveni, who is running for a fifth term after 30 years in power, is facing what observers say is his most competitive election yet (voting was taking place as The Economist went to press). A poll released in January put Mr Museveni at 51% of the vote, exactly what he needs to avoid a run-off. Mr Besigye, the president’s doctor during the bush wars in the 1980s, was on 32%. Amama Mbabazi, a former prime minister who split with Mr Museveni over his succession plans, languished at 12%. Polls are unreliable, however, so Mr Museveni is taking no chances. Policemen are not the only ones disrupting opposition rallies: the government has recruited hundreds of thousands of unemployed young men as “crime preventers”. These militias have harassed opposition politicians and supporters, says Human Rights Watch, a watchdog. On February 13th police arrested a radio talk-show host mid-broadcast. He was charged with defacing posters of Mr Museveni. Mr Museveni and his National Resistance Movement (NRM) also have far more money to hand. The 27 billion Ugandan shillings ($7.9m) splurged on his campaign in November and December accounted for 91.6% of spending by all candidates in those months. The Alliance for Campaign Finance Monitoring, the local lobby group that collected the data, says the NRM has bribed voters with hoes, saucepans, seeds, sugar and salt. Meanwhile, Uganda’s press made much of people giving Mr Besigye cash, fruit and even cows, suggesting widespread support for his fourth campaign. Change was the watchword among the opposition leader’s blue-clad supporters on the last day of official campaigning, as his convoy inched through cheering crowds in eastern Kampala. More than one unemployed young man said he both expected Mr Besigye to win and would take to the streets to “fight” if the 71-year-old Mr Museveni triumphed. The Electoral Commission is widely viewed as subservient to Mr Museveni, along with the police, army and judiciary. It didn’t help matters by banning mobile phones from polling booths (limiting voters’ ability to document irregularities). Mr Besigye has urged his supporters to cast their votes before midday on Thursday and stay until voting closes to make sure “nobody steals your victory”. If, as is likely, Mr Museveni triumphs outright in the first round, his rivals’ supporters will probably take to the streets. If that were to happen, a heavy-handed response is likely. The police and army have not shown themselves gun-shy in dealing with protests in the past. Nor should Mr Museveni expect much criticism from Western governments, which have little leverage—Western aid has been suspended or cut in recent years after a corruption scandal and outrage over the treatment of Ugandan homosexuals. In any case Mr Museveni has new friends. He spoke admiringly of the Chinese and Soviet models of state-led development as he launched the costly state-funded Kayoola bus—which reportedly broke down shortly afterwards. A spokeswoman denied the report, saying the bus was towed away to avoid a traffic jam. Meanwhile, Uganda continues to putter along in the slow lane.AUGUSTO SANTOS SILVA, the foreign minister of Portugal’s three-month-old Socialist government, is a mild-mannered sociologist, not a firebrand. But this month he found himself swept up in the defiant anti-austerity mood that has been spreading across southern Europe. Portugal had just been chastised by the European Commission for submitting a budget that missed the 3% of GDP deficit limit the euro zone imposes on its members (the commission projected it would hit 3.4%). In an interview on Portuguese television, Mr Santos Silva struck back against northern Europe’s austerity preachers: “There are no professor-states or student-states in the EU.” In turn Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, warned Portugal to maintain “solid finances”. Portugal and the commission quickly compromised on a new budget with an extra €1 billion in tax increases and spending cuts. But the tussle showed that Europe’s war over austerity economics is back. Portugal’s prime minister, António Costa, was elected on a pledge to “turn the page on austerity”, and his government is backed by big-spending far-left parties. Meanwhile Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, has been challenging Brussels budget hawks at every opportunity. In Spain, where coalition talks have been deadlocked since elections in December, the Socialists are considering a Portuguese-style alliance with the populists of Podemos. In Greece the radical Syriza party remains in power, though its anti-austerity fire has dimmed. Even in Britain, the leader of the opposition, a leftist called Jeremy Corbyn, sees Mr Costa paving the way for a multinational “anti-austerity coalition”. The Portuguese leader’s supporters say he is the harbinger of an EU-wide shift. This turn is not one that anyone would have predicted a year ago. Under its previous centre-right government, Portugal was the prize pupil of the EU’s austerians. During the euro crisis, in exchange for a €78 billion ($87 billion) bail-out, the government slashed public-sector wages and benefits, raised taxes and liberalised the labour market. A sharp recession was followed by a modest recovery for the past two years. But after an inconclusive election in October, Mr Costa struck a deal with the radical Left Bloc and the Portuguese Communist Party to back a minority Socialist government. In return he promised to undo cuts to pensions and public-sector wages. That irked Brussels. On February 2nd the commission said the budget risked violating euro-zone rules. It was anxious to discourage other euro-zone members from seeking flexibility, too. If any country were to lead such a charge, it would be Italy. Mr Renzi’s 2016 budget forecasts a deficit of 2.4% of GDP, but that is too high for the commission. Italy’s public debt is an immense 130% of GDP; countries with debt over 60% of GDP are supposed to aim for surpluses. Yet Mr Renzi sees tight budgets as a drag on Italy’s economy, which grew just 0.1% in the last quarter of 2015. Mr Renzi says he is fed up. “Europe cannot just be a grey technical debate about constraints, but must again be a great dream,” he declared in January. Mr Renzi now faces an added danger from proposals floated in Germany. These would impose stiffer obligations on banks in the euro zone and shift to government bond holders part of the cost of any future bail-out. Critics fear that implementing the proposals could spark another debt crisis that would engulf the countries on the EU’s southern flank. Italy’s banks are already burdened with around €350 billion of non-performing loans. All of this encourages Mr Renzi’s vision of leading a southern European anti-austerity rebellion. In a post on his website on February 1st, he said Italy’s job was “to lead Europe, not to take orders in some palace in Brussels.” But Italy’s tremendous national debt leaves it little credibility to demand the freedom to spend more and tax less. And apart from Mr Renzi’s vague calls for a “more socially oriented Europe”, his alternative to the current EU remains frustratingly unclear. Portugal’s anti-austerity protests, too, may be more bark than bite. After the government announced its higher-deficit budget, its ten-year bond yields spiked scarily, from under 3% to 4.5%. Under pressure from the commission and markets, it backed off; besides the €1 billion in tax rises and spending cuts, it added further “Plan B” cuts in case of need. Pierre Moscovici, the commission’s economics chief, said Portugal had been persuaded that EU budget rules “must be complied with”. Mr Costa said the deal showed that governments can be fiscally responsible and still “follow their vision”. Yet the facts undercut both Mr Costa’s claim to have turned back the clock on austerity and the EU’s pretence of fiscal discipline. Several promised tax cuts have been scrapped. Without those boosts to domestic consumption, Portugal has cut its 2016 growth estimate from 2.1% to 1.8%. In 2015 Portugal promised the commission to cut its underlying structural deficit by 0.6 percentage points; the new budget realises only half that. Euro-zone finance ministers declared that the budget targets meant Portugal was not “in particularly serious non-compliance” with EU rules. The commission maintains that it has held the line on deficits, and Portugal claims to be the vanguard of an anti-austerity revolution. In fact, Europe is functioning as it always has: through compromises and fudge.   FRENCH politicians are better at avoiding retirement than avoiding the courtroom, or so it sometimes seems. The race is now on for the centre-right nomination in the country’s presidential elections next year. The front-runners are a 61-year-old former president, Nicolas Sarkozy, who first won elected office in 1977, and a 70-year-old who served as prime minister two decades ago, Alain Juppé. Mr Juppé was once convicted of political corruption and banned from public office for a year. Now it is Mr Sarkozy’s turn to be hauled before the judges. On February 16th Mr Sarkozy was formally placed under investigation for breaching campaign-finance limits during his failed 2012 re-election bid. These fix the maximum a candidate can spend at €22.5m ($25.1m). Investigators are looking into whether Mr Sarkozy was aware that a system of false invoices charged to the party were in fact used for his own campaign. (He denies any knowledge of the subterfuge.) Over a dozen party officials have already been placed under investigation in connection with the affair, including Jérôme Lavrilleux, Mr Sarkozy’s deputy campaign director, who first acknowledged the false invoices. Mr Sarkozy’s new brush with the law is plainly a set-back. He is already under formal investigation in a separate job-for-favours inquiry. An investigative judge must have good reason to believe that a suspect has breached the law before placing him under formal investigation. An inquiry can then take months, if not years, before a decision is taken as to whether the suspect is sent for trial. Yet investigative judges often enough pursue cases that end up being shelved. Mr Sarkozy, for instance, was put under formal investigation in 2013 for allegedly taking advantage of an elderly donor in connection with another campaign-finance case, linked to his successful bid for the presidency in 2007. The case against him was later dropped. French voters are mindful of this, even to the point of sympathy for those ensnared by the law. Mr Juppé, who was convicted in connection with a fake-jobs scandal under Jacques Chirac at the Paris town hall in the early 1990s, is a good example. A decade ago, after a year spent teaching in Canada while he was struck off the electoral register, he returned triumphantly to politics and served as Mr Sarkozy’s foreign minister. Voters have warmed to the patrician leader, whom they once regarded as unforgivably stiff and technocratic. In 2014 Mr Juppé was re-elected mayor of Bordeaux with an ample majority. Indeed, Mr Juppé is now favoured in the presidential primary which the Republicans, the centre-right opposition party, will hold in November. Among those who say they are certain to vote, he leads Mr Sarkozy by 44% to 32%, according to Ipsos, a pollster. Mr Juppé, who has moderate views on immigration and nationality, appeals more to the centre, and to those fatigued by the frenetic former president. Yet the pugnacious Mr Sarkozy, whose recent book about his mistakes in office shot to the top of the bestseller list, retains star appeal and support from the hard-core party faithful. Among Republican voters, he leads Mr Juppé by 42% to 37%. In short, the more people turn out to vote at the primary, which is open to anybody who professes to share centre-right “values”, the greater the chance that Mr Juppé will win. The contest promises to be tough and crowded, with a scattering of outsiders now piling in. Mr Sarkozy’s fresh legal troubles will reinforce pre-existing negative views of him, says Federico Vacas, an analyst at Ipsos. But, he adds, “it would be a mistake to think that these will prompt his candidacy to collapse.”I think they’re closed MUSCOVITES awoke last week to scenes of destruction. Shops and cafés lay in ruins. The perpetrators were not terrorists, but the city government, which dispatched excavators to destroy nearly 100 buildings that allegedly posed a danger to the public. For shopkeepers like Stanislav, who had manned a flower shop near a metro station in central Moscow, the demolition came as a shock: “Our owners called at lunch and said, ‘Gather your things, they’re coming tonight’.” Locals dubbed it the “Night of the Long Scoops”. A city government gazette, perhaps not spotting the Hitler reference, used the phrase in a headline. Moscow’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, wants to cleanse the city of street vendors. “One cannot hide behind property papers,” he says. He claims that the businesses had obtained their title documents illegally. The owners deny that; many had successfully appealed to Moscow’s courts to recognise their leases as legitimate. The city had even allowed them to hook up to utility grids. “For 25 years, nothing, then suddenly this,” says Marzhana Gadzhieva, a saleswoman at a bakery slated for demolition later this month. Delovaya Rossiya, a business lobby, estimates the damages at around 22 billion roubles ($290m). A timeline of Vladimir Putin’s unshakeable popularity Private merchants first cropped up in the 1990s on the plazas around metro stations and in Moscow’s ubiquitous underground passageways. Over the years, their makeshift kiosks evolved into more formal pavilions. The shops were ugly but convenient, offering everything from shawarma to mobile phones, often late into the night. Mr Sobyanin, who took office in 2010, quickly cleared out the informal street vendors; last December, the city council ordered a list of formalised pavilion owners to shut down, too. But few expected the demolition crews that arrived late on February 8th. Some shopkeepers hung up portraits of Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, hoping his image would keep the excavators at bay. Critics of the mayor, such as Alexei Navalny, an opposition leader, suggest the authorities wanted to clear space for bigger businesses that can pay fatter bribes. But they also sent a message to stubborn landowners: any challenge to the government can be crushed. Property rights can be “declared ‘a piece of paper’,” writes Andrei Kolesnikov of the Moscow Carnegie Centre—hardly a good incentive to invest in an economy already struggling with sanctions and low oil prices. Only last month Mr Putin told a business forum that small and medium-sized enterprises should be “the real foundation for our country’s economic development.” On paper, Russia’s business climate has improved recently. But when paper rights meet steel scoopers, the paper tends to tear.ALBERTO MUNNO, a judge in the southern Italian city of Taranto, believes he is being oppressed by his country’s justice system. He has a rather good case. “I produce 160 verdicts per year—and the European Convention on Human Rights bans slavery,” he complains. With a backlog of over 500 cases, the overworked judge recently postponed a civil hearing by three years. The owner of the firm involved, who filed a claim for €200,000 ($220,000) in 2014, will now have to wait until 2019 to have his case heard. It takes on average 1,210 days for Italy’s judges to resolve a typical commercial dispute. Though notorious for their lethargy, Italy’s courts are not Europe’s worst offenders. Slovenia’s take even longer. Cyprus’s can take over three years, more than thrice the wait in Germany and France. Italy’s government has at least accepted that it has a problem. Matteo Renzi, the country’s energetic prime minister, has made judicial reform a priority. The European Commission is anxious to speed up Europe’s courts. During the depths of the euro crisis, it introduced rules intended to harmonise the euro area’s economies. Those included a chapter on justice. Greece’s creditors even made changing the country’s court procedures a precondition of its most recent bail-out. Dealing with cases quickly is, of course, not the only measure of a good legal system. (If it were, Russia’s courts would outperform England’s; and Islamic State’s death-penalty jurisprudence would be a model for the world.) Nonetheless, the commission is right to worry. Long delays make it harder to do business; Italy estimates that legal sloth shrinks its GDP by 1%. Delays also damage the single market. Litigation in Europe often crosses borders. In the absence of a system of federal European courts, the judges from one member state must take the lead. The thicket of rules that decide which state will take a particular case are known as the Brussels regulation. For many years, this system held that the first court to receive a lawsuit should decide whether to hear it. That gave rise to a range of manoeuvres devised by clever lawyers. One, the so-called “Italian torpedo”, involves a plaintiff filing a claim in Italy in a bid to delay proceedings. (A manufacturer might file a frivolous patent infringement claim to fend off a real one.) Even deciding to pass the case to another country could take several years. The regulations were reformed last year, and courts are now supposed to respect contracts that specify which country has jurisdiction. But where the choice is ambiguous, the torpedo may still be armed. Several things slow down European civil justice, says Giuliana Palumbo, a researcher at Italy’s national bank and the author of a paper on the subject. First, procedure matters. Slow jurisdictions, like Italy, let lawyers adduce new evidence whenever they want, allowing them to prolong a case with new submissions. Quicker ones, like France, give judges the power to impose strict deadlines. Second, how judges get promoted is important. Some countries ignore judges’ managerial prowess when deciding whom to promote. That gives ambitious younger judges no incentive to clear their dockets. A third factor is how lawyers are paid. Some countries limit the hourly fee they can charge for a given service. That can make stretching out a case the only way to earn more. Most jurisdictions have some of these problems. Italy has all three, Ms Palumbo sighs. Some remedies are both obvious and cheap. Binning the fax machines and shifting to the internet can speed up cases. Estonia lets plaintiffs file a claim, submit evidence and even appeal a court decision online. Judges and clerks should also think like managers, Ms Palumbo says. Promoting judges based on their case-management skills, and getting them involved in budgeting, can help to focus their minds. Lawyers are also to blame, though. One problem is that southern Europe simply has too many of them. Greece and Italy have almost 400 lawyers per 100,000 residents. (That is about the same outlandish ratio that prevails in notoriously litigious America.) France makes do with only 85. Jean-Paul Jean, a French judge who chairs the Council of Europe’s justice committee, notes that there is a “strange overlap” between the countries where trials take a long time and those with lots of lawyers. (Luxembourg is a notable exception.) Numerous, eloquent and organised, they form a powerful lobby in most southern European countries. That makes reform difficult. Greek lawyers showed their political muscle last month, going on strike to protest against cuts to their pensions. Since Greek courts already take more than four years to enforce a contract, the striking lawyers’ clients may not notice the difference.ONE of Turkey’s more forlorn sights is tucked down an Ankara side street inside the EU affairs ministry. At the top of a small staircase lurks a poster depicting a sprawling tree, its lower branches bereft and leafless but its top half a lush burst of greenery. A caption explains the symbolism: “Let’s bring a dynamic industry, young workforce and unique cultural diversity to freshen and revive the European Union. By welcoming Turkey.” This relic speaks of a happier time, when Turkey was confident enough in its bid for EU membership to present itself as a tonic to a tired continent. Travel around the country today, as Charlemagne did last week on a trip organised by the European Council on Foreign Relations, a think-tank, and you encounter a different mood. For many Turks opposed to the ruling Justice and Development (AK) party, the EU’s name means betrayal. In Istanbul liberals lament that Europe turns a blind eye to the authoritarian habits of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, a president with a penchant for beating up journalists and tampering with the judiciary. Refugees in Gaziantep, near Syria, do not understand why Germany worries more about the migrants reaching rich Europe than the hundreds of thousands of Syrians facing death at the hands of Bashar al-Assad and his Russian enablers. Kurds in the south-east say that Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, ignores the plight of towns like Cizre, besieged by Turkish troops. Little wonder they feel let down. Turkey’s south-east is a simmering cauldron of violence. Since last summer Turkish forces and young rebels affiliated with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) have been locked in a spiral of violence that has left hundreds of civilians dead. Cities are in lockdown; in Diyarbakir the air is thick with tear gas and the crump of artillery. Locals warn of further escalation in the spring, when battle-hardened fighters of the PKK leave their winter redoubts in northern Iraq. Elsewhere Mr Erdogan continues his authoritarian march. Beset by allegations of corruption in AK and opposed by former allies, he is single-mindedly pursuing a constitutional change that would extend the powers of his presidency. Terrified journalists censor themselves before government goons do it for them. Public contracts reward friends; foes are fined for supposed tax violations. Turkey’s political and ethnic cleavages grow ever wider. Meanwhile the region is aflame. The fighting around Aleppo (see article), over the Syrian border, has created a fresh stream of refugees. Desperate to stop Syrian Kurds from expanding their territory along the border, Turkey has begun shelling their positions. Russia’s escalation, and its alliance of convenience with the Kurds, has weakened Turkey’s hand. Mr Erdogan’s war of words with Vladimir Putin is dangerously heated. Meanwhile America, a NATO ally, rejects Turkish demands that it disown the Syrian Kurds, who are useful in fighting Islamic State (IS). A car bomb which killed at least 28 people in Ankara on February 17th showed that the violence is spreading to Turkey’s heartland. It is easy to see why Europe’s refugee problem might not be at the top of Turkey’s in-tray. Europeans optimistically say that Turkey’s troubles present them with an opening, for Mr Erdogan needs friends. But that misreads the view from Ankara. In Syria Mr Erdogan wants to smash the Kurds and hold the line against Mr Assad; at home he seeks to consolidate his rule and squeeze the opposition. The EU is not able to help him achieve these goals. And so, while leaders like Mrs Merkel (rightly) praise Turkey for welcoming 2.5m Syrians onto its soil and express sympathy for its strategic predicament, Mr Erdogan responds with insults and threatens to bus millions of refugees to Greece and Bulgaria. The Europeans will have to accept such tough talk in their bid to secure Turkish help to reduce the migrant flow. The EU’s promise of visa-free travel for Turks in exchange for a cut in the number of migrants, agreed on late last year, is a genuine prize for the Turks (“Visiting Germany is harder than buying land in heaven,” says one). But Europe is in a rush, and Mr Erdogan is not. Hence Mrs Merkel’s endless meetings with Turkish officials. Hence the EU’s willingness to overlook Mr Erdogan’s excesses. And hence the sense of betrayal among his domestic antagonists. “We need pressure from outside,” says Firat Anli, the co-mayor of Diyarbakir. “Otherwise we see where the state’s reflexes lead.” An insincere invitation In this telling, the Europeans might be able to blunt Mr Erdogan’s sharper edges if only they were brave enough to shed their hypocrisies. Certainly the EU was once a force in Turkish politics. In the early years of AK rule it was a useful anchor for Mr Erdogan’s economic and legal reforms, and an ally in his battle against Turkey’s old secular elite and their friends in the army. Yet the EU lost its clout years ago. Soon after membership talks began in 2005, Turkey fell victim to the sharp tongue of Nicolas Sarkozy, a former (and possible future) French president who once dismissed Turkey as part of “Asia Minor”, and the veto-wielding Cypriot government, which was let into the EU before solving its own Turkish problem. When Turkish citizens realised that accession was going nowhere, they lost interest. And once Mr Erdogan had got what he wanted from the process, he discarded it and moved on. Pro-EU Turks were left adrift. They have not lost hope. Support for membership is climbing as Mr Erdogan tightens his grip, and at least Turkey and Europe are talking again. Turkey’s local troubles have left it more dependent on EU markets and investment. Even the stand-off on Cyprus may be near a solution. Had Europe pledged a decade ago to allow Turkey’s application to go forward, and convinced Ankara (and itself) that membership was a realistic prospect, it might not find itself so helpless today. Last year’s deal may have been grubby and it may turn out to be pointless, but by the time it was signed, the EU had nothing left to lose. It is hard to think of a stronger indictment of Europe’s foreign policy.
