DEVIN NUNES raised eyebrows in 2013 when, as chairman of a congressional working group on tax, he urged reforms that would make America “the largest tax haven in human history”. Though he was thinking of America’s competitiveness rather than turning his country into a haven for dirty money, the words were surprising: America is better known for walloping tax-dodgers than welcoming them. Its assault on Swiss banks that aided tax evasion, launched in 2007, sparked a global revolution in financial transparency. Next year dozens of governments will start to exchange information on their banks’ clients automatically, rather than only when asked to. The tax-shy are being chased to the world’s farthest corners. And yet something odd is happening: Mr Nunes’s wish may be coming true. America seems not to feel bound by the global rules being crafted as a result of its own war on tax-dodging. It is also failing to tackle the anonymous shell companies often used to hide money. The Tax Justice Network, a lobby group, calls the United States one of the world’s top three “secrecy jurisdictions”, behind Switzerland and Hong Kong. All this adds up to “another example of how the US has elevated exceptionalism to a constitutional principle,” says Richard Hay of Stikeman Elliott, a law firm. “Europe has been outfoxed.” The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), passed in 2010, is the main shackle that America puts on other countries. It requires financial institutions abroad to report details of their American clients’ accounts or face punishing withholding taxes on American-sourced payments. America’s central role in global finance means most comply. FATCA has spawned the Common Reporting Standard (CRS), a transparency initiative overseen by the OECD club of 34 countries that is emerging as a standard for the exchange of data for tax purposes. So far 96 countries, including Switzerland, once favoured by rich taxophobes, have signed up and will soon start swapping information. The OECD is also leading efforts to force multinationals to reveal more about where and how profits are made, and the deals they cut with individual governments, in order to curb aggressive tax-planning. Because it has signed a host of bilateral data-sharing deals, America sees no need to join the CRS. But its reciprocation is patchy. It passes on names and interest earned, but not account balances; it does not look through the corporate structures that own many bank accounts to reveal the true “beneficial” owner; and data are only shared with countries that meet a host of privacy and technical standards. That excludes many non-European countries. All this leads some to brand America a hypocrite. But a fairer diagnosis would be that it has a split personality. The Treasury wants more data-swapping and corporate transparency, and has made several proposals to bring America up to the level of the CRS. But most need congressional approval, and politicians are in no rush to enact them. Some suspect that their reluctance, ostensibly due to concerns about red tape, has more to do with giving America’s financial centres an edge. Meanwhile business lobbyists and states with lots of registered firms, led by Delaware, have long stymied proposed federal legislation that would require more openness in corporate ownership. (Incorporation is a state matter, not a federal one.) America will often investigate a shell company if asked to by a foreign government that suspects wrongdoing. But incorporation agents do not have to collect ownership information. This is in contrast to Britain, which will soon have a public register of companies’ beneficial owners. America the booty-full No one knows how much undeclared money is stashed offshore. Estimates range from a couple of trillion dollars to $30 trillion. What is clear is that America’s share is growing. Already the largest location for managing foreign wealth, it has picked up business as regulators have increased information-exchange and scrutiny of banks and trust companies in Europe and the Caribbean. Money is said to be flowing in from the Bahamas and Bermuda, as well as from Switzerland. A recent investigation by Bloomberg, a news provider, found several wealth managers whose American arms have benefited, including Rothschild, a British firm, and Trident Trust, a provider of offshore services. New business has been booked through subsidiaries in states with strong secrecy laws and weak oversight, such as South Dakota and Nevada. Another investigation, by Die Zeit, a German newspaper, concluded that for the tax cheat looking to pull money out of Switzerland, America was now the safest bet. “It’s going nuts. Everyone is doing it or looking into it,” says a tax consultant, speaking of the American loophole. Some transfers are being requested for legitimate reasons of confidentiality—for instance, by Venezuelans who fear extortion or kidnap if their wealth is known. But much is of dubious legality. America is much safer for legally earned wealth that is evading taxes than for lucre that was filthy from the start. It has shown little appetite for helping enforce foreign tax laws and, unlike some other countries, does not count the banking of undeclared money as money-laundering. “Foreigners looking to evade tax in America are usually safe because of its secrecy,” says Jason Sharman of Griffith University in Australia. “But for those with dirtier money there is a small though real risk the US will investigate and apply the full force of the law, which is a scary prospect.” Dividing the spoils Foreign banks losing business to America can sometimes share in the profits, explains one tax consultant. A Swiss bank, say—generally a smaller one, as big ones are too scared—tells its client to close an account and open one with an American custodian bank. The client then appoints the Swiss bank as investment manager on the custodian account, and that bank instructs the custodian which funds to buy, often the Swiss bank’s own products. The Swiss bank earns fees for advice and fund-management; the custodian picks up business; and the account is deemed for regulatory purposes to be American, meaning it avoids the disclosure rules that apply only to countries signed up to the CRS. Only a few other financial centres have declined to commit themselves to the CRS, among them Bahrain and Nauru. Hong Kong has signed but will implement it one tax-treaty partner at a time rather than using a multilateral shortcut; some regard this as a delaying tactic. Undeclared Asian and Middle Eastern money is moving to Taiwan and Lebanon, respectively, both of which are outside the club. Panama, which vies with Miami for Latin American money, looks set to back out of its tentative commitment to the CRS, using America’s double standards as an excuse (see article). Frustration with America has grown in Europe, which forms the core of the CRS. A group in the European Parliament argues that, if America refuses to reciprocate fully, it should be hit with a reverse FATCA: a levy on payments originating in the EU that flow through American banks. “We don’t want a tax war, but nor can the US have it all its own way,” says Molly Scott Cato, one of the MEPs. One obstacle is that tax measures must be approved unanimously by the EU’s 28 member states. Others point out that the CRS itself has flaws. It was drafted in a rush, and one expert thinks it would fail to catch 80% of tax-dodging. Financial firms have been calling to report loopholes that could benefit less scrupulous rivals, most of which will be closed before it comes into force or soon after, promises the OECD. (Keeping banks’ compliance costs within reasonable limits means that some will inevitably remain.) America deserves great credit for taking on Switzerland and other long-standing tax havens. And a Treasury official insists that stashing undeclared loot there will not remain possible for long: “This is something that will be fixed.” Until it is, America will be the biggest tax loophole of all. PANAMA’S most notorious moment as a haven for tainted cash came with the nationalisation of money-laundering in the 1980s under Manuel Noriega, a military strongman. It has since clamped down on egregious financial criminality, but remains home to thousands of secretive firms and famous for the discretion of its bankers and lawyers. The Central American microstate is the financial and incorporation centre of choice for many Latin Americans and Europeans—and, critics say, many financial ne’er-do-wells. It is also holding out against global tax-transparency plans known as the Common Reporting Standard (CRS) being championed by the OECD club of rich nations. It says it will develop its own standard, which will probably mean less information, exchanged with fewer countries. Small financial centres, it huffs, are being bullied into accepting competitiveness-sapping rules shunned by some bigger countries, in particular America. “We’ll move at the same speed as the slowest,” says one of its leading lawyers. “Otherwise our financial centre faces a death sentence.” Some suspect a delaying tactic rather than a principled stand. The many conditions Panama has set for joining in the automatic exchange of tax information were crafted to ensure it never will, they say. But it has, to its credit, made some important reforms. A new law requires bankers, lawyers and professionals in 30 other industries to know the names of client firms’ real owners and to pass them to law enforcement on request. It hopes this will help get it removed from a list of countries with poor safeguards against money-laundering, compiled by more scrupulous governments. That will depend partly on how strictly the law is enforced. And there are other concerns, such as Panama’s fondness for anonymous bearer-share companies, widely regarded by other countries as a favourite vehicle of criminals. They must now be registered with a custodian. But the listed owner can be another firm. And Panama’s biggest law firms are giant offshore-company incorporation factories. Many wield power of attorney to conceal ownership. Some market their services to financial firms serving Latin American clients, “guaranteeing” that the country will not sign agreements to exchange information with their home countries, such as Argentina and Mexico. According to a Brazilian prosecutor, there is evidence that Mossack Fonseca, one of Panama’s largest law firms, laundered money for some of those implicated in a vast bribery scandal centred on Petrobras, Brazil’s state-controlled oil giant. The law firm, one of whose senior partners, Ramon Fonseca Mora, is a “minister counsellor” in Panama’s government, says it always does the required due diligence on clients. It says it has been a victim of a smear campaign by political opponents and is “certain that our name will be cleared very soon”.THE future is already arriving, it is just a question of knowing where to look. On Changshou Road in Shanghai, eagle eyes may spot an odd rectangular object on top of an office block: it is a collection of 128 miniature antennae. Pedestrians in Manhattan can catch a glimpse of apparatus that looks like a video camera on a stand, but jerks around and has a strange, hornlike protrusion where the lens should be. It blasts a narrow beam of radio waves at buildings so they can bounce their way to the receiver. The campus of the University of Surrey in Guildford, England, is dotted with 44 antennae, which form virtual wireless cells that follow a device around. These antennae are vanguards of a new generation of wireless technologies. Although the previous batch, collectively called “fourth generation”, or 4G, is still being rolled out in many countries, the telecoms industry has already started working on the next, 5G. On February 12th AT&T, America’s second-largest mobile operator, said it would begin testing whether prototype 5G circuitry works indoors, following similar news in September from Verizon, the number one. South Korea wants to have a 5G network up and running when it hosts the Winter Olympics in 2018; Japan wants the same for the summer games in 2020. When the industry holds its annual jamboree, Mobile World Congress, in Barcelona this month, 5G will top the agenda. Mobile telecoms have come a long way since Martin Cooper of Motorola (pictured), inventor of the DynaTAC, the first commercially available handset, demonstrated it in 1973. In the early 2000s, when 3G technology made web-browsing feasible on mobiles, operators splashed out more than $100 billion on radio-spectrum licences, only to find that the technology most had agreed to use was harder to implement than expected. The advent of 5G is likely to bring another splurge of investment, just as orders for 4G equipment are peaking. The goal is to be able to offer users no less than the “perception of infinite capacity”, says Rahim Tafazolli, director of the 5G Innovation Centre at the University of Surrey. Rare will be the device that is not wirelessly connected, from self-driving cars and drones to the sensors, industrial machines and household appliances that together constitute the “internet of things” (IoT). It is easy to dismiss all this as “a lot of hype”, in the words of Kester Mann of CCS Insight, a research firm. When it comes to 5G, much is still up in the air: not only which band of radio spectrum and which wireless technologies will be used, but what standards makers of network gear and handsets will have to comply with. Telecoms firms have reached consensus only on a set of rough “requirements”. The most important are connection speeds of up to 10 gigabits per second and response times (“latency”) of below 1 millisecond (see chart). Yet the momentum is real. South Korea and Japan are front-runners in wired broadband, and Olympic games are an opportunity to show the world that they intend also to stay ahead in wireless, even if that may mean having to upgrade their 5G networks to comply with a global standard once it is agreed. AT&T and Verizon both invested early in 4G, and would like to lead again with 5G. The market for network equipment has peaked, as recent results from Ericsson and Nokia show, so the makers also need a new generation of products and new groups of customers. On the demand side, too, pressure is mounting for better wireless infrastructure. The rapid growth in data traffic will continue for the foreseeable future, says Sundeep Rangan of NYU Wireless, a department of New York University. According to one estimate, networks need to be ready for a 1,000-fold increase in data volumes in the first half of the 2020s. And the radio spectrum used by 4G, which mostly sits below 3 gigahertz, is running out, and thus getting more expensive. An auction in America last year raked in $45 billion. But the path to a 5G wireless paradise will not be smooth. It is not only the usual telecoms suspects who will want a say in this mother of all networks. Media companies will want priority to be given to generous bandwidth, so they can stream films with ever higher resolution. Most IoT firms will not need much bandwidth, but will want their sensors to run on one set of batteries for years—so they will want the 5G standard to put a premium on low power consumption. Online-gaming firms will worry about latency: players will complain if it is too high. The most important set of new actors, however, are information-technology firms. The likes of Apple, IBM and Samsung have a big interest not only in selling more smartphones and other mobile devices, but also in IoT, which is tipped to generate the next big wave of revenues for them and other companies. Google, which already operates high-speed fibre-optic networks in several American cities and may be tempted to build a wireless one, has shown an interest in 5G. In 2014 it bought Alpental Technologies, a startup which was developing a cheap, high-speed communications service using extremely high radio frequencies, known as “millimetre wave” (mmWave), the spectrum bands above 3 gigahertz where most of 5G is expected to live. To satisfy all these actors will not be easy, predicts Ulf Ewaldsson, Ericsson’s chief technology officer. Questions over spectrum may be the easiest to solve, in part because the World Radiocommunication Conference, established by international treaty, will settle them. Its last gathering, in November, failed to agree on the frequencies for 5G, but it is expected to do so when it next meets in 2019. It is likely to carve out space in the mmWave bands. Tests such as the one in Manhattan mentioned above, which are conducted by researchers from NYU Wireless, have shown that such bands can be used for 5G: although they are blocked even by thin obstacles, they can be made to bounce around them. For the first time there will not be competing sets of technical rules, as was the case with 4G, when LTE, now the standard, was initially threatened by WiMax, which was bankrolled by Intel, a chipmaker. Nobody seems willing to play Intel’s role this time around. That said, 5G will be facing a strong competitor, especially indoors: smartphone users are increasingly using Wi-Fi connections for calls and texts as well as data. That means they have ever less need for a mobile connection, no matter how blazingly fast it may be. Evolution or revolution? Technology divides the industry in another way, says Stéphane Téral of IHS, a market-research firm. One camp, he says, wants 5G “to take an evolutionary path, use everything they have and make it better.” It includes many existing makers of wireless-network gear and some operators, which want to protect their existing investments and take one step at a time. On February 11th, for instance, Qualcomm, a chip-design firm, introduced the world’s first 4G chip set that allows for data-transmission speeds of up to 1 gigabit per second. It does the trick by using a technique called “carrier aggregation”, which means it can combine up to ten wireless data streams of 100 megabits per second. The other camp, explains Mr Téral, favours a revolutionary approach: to jump straight to cutting-edge technology. This could mean, for instance, leaving behind the conventional cellular structure of mobile networks, in which a single antenna communicates with all the devices within its cell. Instead, one set of small antennae would send out concentrated radio beams to scan for devices, then a second set would take over as each device comes within reach. It could also mean analysing usage data to predict what kind of connectivity a wireless subscriber will need next and adapt the network accordingly—a technique that the 5G Innovation Centre at the University of Surrey wants to develop. One of the most outspoken representatives of the revolutionary camp is China Mobile. For Chih-Lin I, its chief scientist, wireless networks, as currently designed, are no longer sustainable. Antennae are using ever more energy to push each extra megabit through the air. Her firm’s position, she says, is based on necessity: as the world’s biggest carrier, with 1.1m 4G base stations and 825m subscribers (more than all the European operators put together), problems with the current network architecture are exacerbated by the firm’s scale. Sceptics suspect there may be an “industrial agenda” at work, that favours Chinese equipment-makers and lowers the patent royalties these have to pay. The more different 5G is from 4G, the higher the chances that China can make its own intellectual property part of the standard. Whatever the motivation, Ms I’s vision of how 5G networks will ultimately be designed is widely shared. They will not only be “super fast”, she says, but “green and soft”, meaning much less energy-hungry and entirely controlled by software. As with computer systems before them, much of a network’s specialised hardware, such as the processor units that sit alongside each cell tower, will become “virtualised”—that is, it will be replaced with software, making it far easier to reconfigure. Wireless networks will become a bit like computing in the online “cloud”, and in some senses will merge with it, using the same off-the-shelf hardware. Discussions have already begun about how 5G would change the industry’s structure. One question is whether wireless access will become even more of a commodity, says Chetan Sharma, a telecoms consultant. According to his estimates, operators’ share of total industry revenues has already fallen below 50% in America, with the rest going to mobile services such as Facebook’s smartphone apps, which make money through ads. The switch to 5G could help the operators reverse that decline by allowing them to do such things as market their own video content. But it is easier to imagine their decline accelerating, turning them into low-margin “dumb pipes”. If so, a further consolidation of an already highly concentrated industry may be inevitable: some countries may be left with just one provider of wireless infrastructure, just as they often have only one provider of water. If the recent history of IT after the rise of cloud computing is any guide—with the likes of Dell, HP and IBM struggling to keep up—network-equipment makers will also get squeezed. Ericsson and Nokia already make nearly half of their sales by managing networks on behalf of operators. But 5G may finally bring about what has been long talked of, says Bengt Nordstrom of Northstream, another consulting firm: the convergence of the makers of computers and telecoms equipment, as standardisation and low margins force them together. Last year Ericsson formed partnerships first with HP and then with Cisco. Full mergers could follow at some point. Big, ugly mobile-phone masts will also become harder to spot. Antennae will be more numerous, for sure, but will shrink. Besides the rectangular array that China Mobile is testing in Shanghai, it is also experimenting with smaller, subtler “tiles” that can be combined and, say, embedded into the lettering on the side of a building. In this sense, but few others, the future of mobile telecoms will be invisible. AT THE pinnacle of the mining industry sit two Anglo-Australian companies, BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto, which are to iron ore what Saudi Arabia is to oil: the ones who call the shots. Their mines in Pilbara, Western Australia, are vast cash cows; with all-in costs below $30 a tonne, they still generate substantial profits even though prices have slumped from $192 a tonne in 2011 to about $44. They have increased iron-ore production despite slowing demand from China, driving higher-cost producers to the wall—an echo of the Saudis’ strategy in the oil market. But whereas Rio Tinto has doubled down on iron ore, BHP also invested in oil and gas—in which it has nothing like the same heft—at the height of the shale boom. Their differing strategies are a good test of the merits of diversification. The China-led commodities supercycle encouraged mission creep. Many companies looked for more ways to play the China boom, and rising prices of all raw materials gave them an excuse to cling on to even those projects that were high-cost and low-quality. Now the industry is plagued with debts and oversupply. On February 16th Anglo American, a South African firm that was once the dominant force in mining, said it would sell $3 billion of assets to help pay down debt, eventually exiting the coal and iron-ore businesses that it had spent a fortune developing. That would leave it with a core business of just copper, diamonds and platinum. The day before, Freeport-McMoRan, the world’s largest listed copper producer, was forced to sell a $1 billion stake in an Arizonan copper mine to Sumitomo of Japan, to help cut debts racked up when it expanded into oil and gas. With Carl Icahn, an American activist investor, agitating for a shake-up, analysts say its energy assets could follow—if there are any buyers. When BHP reports half-yearly results on February 23rd its misadventure in American oil and gas will be of particular concern because it has put the world’s biggest mining firm in the shadow of Rio for the first time. Since BHP merged with Billiton in 2001, its share price has outperformed Rio’s (see chart); it made an unsuccessful bid to merge with its rival in 2007. Yet in the past year its shares have done worse. Analysts expect that next week it will cut its annual dividend for the first time since 2001, thereby breaking a promise to raise the dividend year by year. Though Rio ended a similar “progressive dividend” policy this month, it did not cut the 2015 payout. BHP’s dividend yield began to soar relative to Rio’s in late 2014 so a payout cut should not be a surprise. But shareholders, especially those in income funds that depend on mining-industry returns, will be kicking themselves. They could have diversified their own portfolios, putting more money into oil majors like Exxon Mobil, whose payout is considered more secure, rather than have BHP expose itself to oil and gas on their behalf. Paul Gait of Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, says that because of BHP’s weak position in oil, it is suffering from the same cost pressures that it is inflicting on its competitors in iron ore. He calls it “nemesis to their hubris. They are in oil what they are attempting to destroy in iron ore.” BHP argues that its strategy enhanced shareholder returns during the good times, and that no one expected oil and metals prices to collapse with such synchronicity. It says its business mix is no stranger than that of an oil company like Exxon Mobil, which is into the refining and marketing of oil products as well as the exploration and production of crude. Its underperformance against Rio has also been the result of a mining accident in Brazil in November. Rating agencies worry that a big fine could put further strain on its balance-sheet. “We just have to be patient. Cycles are an inherent part of the business,” an executive says. BHP’s long-held belief is that by strengthening its oil and copper businesses it enjoys a longer cycle than if it were more exposed to iron ore and coal. In China, for example, demand for steel, and thus for iron ore and coking coal, has been central to the country’s building boom. But as it grows richer, it will need more copper for electric cables, and petrol for its growing fleet of cars. Such arguments were more compelling when Chinese growth seemed unstoppable. But Konrad von Szczepanski of the Boston Consulting Group says the downward leg of the supercycle has eroded the case for diversification, pushing firms to reconsider strategies last used in the 1990s: focusing on single commodities in which they have the cheapest, best-quality ores. Whatever they do, mining companies will now be required to demonstrate that the assets they have are high quality and capable of generating cash even in hard times. The trouble is that as they attempt to focus, as Anglo American is doing, there is no guarantee they will be able to sell their non-core assets for a high price. Acquirers, as one analyst puts it, only want the family silver, not the dross.Protector of passwords MARTIN LUTHER pinned his treatise to a church door. Tim Cook posted his on Apple’s website. On February 16th Mr Cook published a harsh critique of the government, which has clashed with his firm repeatedly over providing information on suspected criminals—most recently in the case of Syed Rizwan Farook, who, with his wife, murdered 14 people at a holiday party in San Bernardino last year. This week a federal court sided with the FBI, which had requested Apple’s help in accessing the contents of Mr Farook’s iPhone, and ordered the tech firm to comply. Mr Cook says the “chilling” situation represents “overreach by the US government” that calls for a “public discussion”.  A debate started immediately, with Donald Trump, the Republican presidential front-runner, asking why Apple should consider itself above the law. It is a sentiment others may share, but Apple has legitimate reasons for not wanting to comply with the court’s order. The court is trying to force Apple to create a way to deactivate the password-protection feature (which erases the device’s contents after ten failed attempts at guessing the password) on this one iPhone. However, Mr Cook warns that designing this tool, even for one particular case, could put other users at risk, because the federal government would always have the key and could use it in future instances. Other governments will watch the outcome of the case, and might compel Apple to build them a similar tool. This is not the first time that Mr Cook and American law enforcers have clashed, but the case may become “the epicentre of the debate over privacy and encryption,” says Alan Cohn, a lawyer at Steptoe & Johnson who previously worked at the Department of Homeland Security. Past requests for data have focused on lower-level criminals; Mr Farook is being investigated for terrorism, which heightens the urgency of the government’s request. Mr Cook has cast himself as a reformer on the side of justice. Might he be held in contempt of court and go to jail? It seems unlikely in the near term, especially since Apple will probably appeal against the ruling. But putting Mr Cook or another Apple executive behind bars for a few days would be no bad thing for the firm’s image. It has gone to great lengths to persuade its users that it respects their privacy and is doing what it can to protect them. So have other tech firms, such as Microsoft, which are fighting lawsuits demanding that they turn over customer data. In its stand-off with the government Apple and other tech firms have a lot to prove, as well as much to lose.IN RECENT years breakfast cereals seem to have lost their snap, crackle and pop. Many contain things that anxious consumers shun, from carbohydrates and gluten to artificial flavours and genetically modified (GM) grain. Add to this a rising disdain for big brands and adoration of small, “authentic” ones, and large cereal-makers have been suffering soggy sales. The market for “ready-to-eat” cereals shrank by 9% in America between 2012 and 2015, according to Euromonitor, a data firm. In Britain, the second-biggest cereal market, sales fell by 6%. Now, the manufacturers are trumpeting a turnaround. On February 16th General Mills told investors that its American cereal sales were stabilising. Kellogg is equally chipper, reporting on February 17th that it expects its American cereal sales to grow this year. But it will take hard work to revive breakfast’s flakiest business. Cereal firms have tried many ways to cope with waning appetites. They have diversified. Post Holdings, which sells Honey Bunches of Oats and Grape-Nuts, now also sells eggs and protein shakes. Some firms have acquired trendier brands, with mixed results. After Kellogg bought Kashi in 2000, many of its oat-munching customers fled. Kellogg is now trying to win them back, returning Kashi’s headquarters to California. A new Kashi cereal features popped sorghum, crispy yellow peas and smashed red beans. Pet hamsters will love it. Makers are also spending to revive their main brands. Kellogg has put more fruit in its Special K Red Berries cereal. General Mills has stripped GM ingredients and gluten from Cheerios. It plans to remove all artificial flavours and colours from its cereals by 2018. Some analysts question whether the changes are worth the extra costs. But Robert Moskow of Credit Suisse, a bank, reckons that cereal-makers can compensate by cutting overheads and streamlining supply chains. Retailers do not want cereal to enter terminal decline—it is too profitable for them. Jim Holbrook, who led Post’s cereal business and is now boss of Daymon Worldwide, a retail consultant, says grocers might boost sales by placing milk or bananas in the cereal aisle. For now, cereal-makers can take comfort that at least some brands are still thriving. Sales of Kellogg’s Froot Loops and General Mills’ Cinnamon Toast Crunch have risen in recent years, points out Alexia Howard of Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, even as more virtuous brands such as Fiber One, All-Bran and (until recently) Special K were waning. Health-conscious shoppers may or may not be lured back to their cereal habit by smashed red beans. But cereal’s most reliable customers are those who don’t mind heaps of sugar, or “red #40” food colouring, in their breakfast bowls.IN SPITE of booming demand for jetliners across the world, North American planemakers have had a miserable few months. So far this year Boeing, America’s biggest aerospace group, has suffered the two biggest daily falls in its share price yet seen, caused by downgrades to its production forecasts and news that regulators were investigating its accounting methods. But its woes look as nothing compared with those of Bombardier, a Canadian maker of planes and trains. On February 17th it announced net losses of $5.3 billion in 2015, mainly due to write-downs, and a $10 billion shrinking of its order book since 2014. Many are asking if the company will run out of cash. The trainmaking division is doing fine. But Bombardier’s aerospace division, which made only $138m in profit in 2015 before $5.4 billion of write-downs, is giving its executives nightmares. Those parts that used to generate good profits are stalling. The market for business jets, particularly large ones, is suffering from slower growth in emerging economies, says Stephen Trent of Citigroup, a bank. Bombardier has also been losing ground against more specialised competitors such as Textron and Embraer in the market for small and medium-sized business jets. The company’s biggest problem, though, is the CSeries, its project to develop a 100- to 150-seater plane to break the duopoly of Airbus and Boeing in this area (see table). Three years late and costing $5.4 billion to develop instead of the $3.5 billion originally forecast, the project has been soaking up cash. Although the plane’s entry into service is planned for later this year, it still has not been awarded safety certification by authorities in America and Europe. Ruthless pricing by Airbus of its A320neo and Boeing of its 737 MAX, as well as fears over Bombardier’s financial viability, have made the company’s cashflow situation worse by discouraging new orders. Until Air Canada announced the purchase of up to 75 of the plane’s larger CS300 variant, on February 17th, there had been no orders since 2014. It will be a long haul before Bombardier recoups its costs on the project, says Bjorn Fehrm at Leeham Company, an aviation consultant. The first 15 planes produced this year will cost Bombardier $60m each to make, he says, but will sell for just $30m or so. The programme will not become cashflow positive until around 200 planes have been delivered. The CSeries’ fuel efficiency may bring it more orders if the oil price goes back up. But so far, including Air Canada’s order if it is confirmed in full, it has sold only 318. To keep it going in the meantime, Bombardier needs cash. Last year it offered Airbus a majority stake in the CSeries project, but was rebuffed. Instead, the company’s home province, Quebec, offered C$1.3 billion ($1 billion) for 49.5% of the CSeries venture and a further C$1.5 billion from its pension fund for a stake in the rail division. This is unlikely to be enough. So the question is, where will the next cash injection come from? Airbus is unlikely to change its mind, and Boeing is busy sorting out its own problems. An investment from COMAC, a Chinese state-owned planemaker which is also trying to bust in on the Airbus-Boeing duopoly, and with which Bombardier signed a co-operation agreement in 2011, seems too politically toxic to be feasible. The Canadian electorate would not want to see a national champion fall into Chinese hands. So a further bail-out from either the Canadian federal or Quebec provincial government, in return for a stake in the CSeries, is most likely. This week Bombardier announced 7,000 job losses; the fear of even bigger cuts may force politicians’ hands. If so, taxpayers will not see a return on their investment for years, if ever.Closing in Athens, opening in Sofia, Tirana and Nicosia WHEN Panagiotis Korfoksyliotis set up a business in Athens in 2011, ferrying tourists around by car, he hoped to do his bit to help Greece emerge from its deep recession. He says he paid his staff a decent wage and declared all his earnings. Unfortunately, the taxman did not repay the kindness. Sharp increases in business taxes have prompted Mr Korfoksyliotis to pack his bags and move his company and his life to Bulgaria. Now he employs drivers to take foreign visitors around that country’s tourist spots instead. He is part of a growing trend. In recent years Greek governments desperate for cash have sought to squeeze it from companies, despite evidence that this is driving them away to places like Bulgaria, Cyprus and Albania. The combination of a deep recession and rising taxation has meant that by some estimates more than 200,000 businesses have closed or in some cases left Greece since then. Between 2009 and 2014 the taxable profits declared by the country’s businesses fell by more than €5 billion ($5.6 billion) to €10 billion. Precise figures are hard to find, but accountants, lawyers and businesspeople reckon that perhaps as many as 10,000 Greek-owned firms have moved abroad. In a recent survey of 300 firms, Endeavor Greece, a non-profit organisation that helps entrepreneurs, found that more than a third had either left or were thinking about going. Venetis, a bakery chain, recently said that, because of high taxes and capital controls, it will focus more on opening shops abroad than in Greece. Even if they have kept their Greek operations going, some multinationals have moved their headquarters. Fage International, a dairy firm, said in 2012, when taxes started to rise, that it would move its base to Luxembourg. That year Coca-Cola Hellenic, which distributes the American giant’s soft drinks in 28 mostly European countries, moved its base from Athens to Zug in Switzerland. In 2013 Viohalco, a metals-processor, moved its head office to Brussels. The latter two firms say that the main reason was to improve their access to capital. But Greece’s sharp tax rises were hardly an inducement to stay. Other euro-crisis countries, such as Portugal and Ireland, cut business taxes or kept them low, to encourage investment and growth. (Portugal’s corporation-tax revenues are only slightly below where they were, as a share of GDP, before the global financial crisis.) But Greece has raised its corporation-tax rate from 20% in 2012 to 29% in 2015, even though international lenders such as the IMF will surely have advised against this. Greece’s tax rise makes Bulgaria’s rate of just 10% even more alluring; likewise Cyprus’s 12.5% rate and Albania’s 15%. The country’s neighbours are delighted that it is sending business their way. Panagiotis Pantelis, an accountant in Athens, says he has been busy in recent weeks meeting officials from neighbouring countries on behalf of clients looking to move out. Alexandros Ziniatis of Viva Trust, a firm that advises businesses seeking to relocate within Europe, reports similarly brisk interest from Greek companies. The new leader of Greece’s conservative opposition, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has condemned the tax rises on business as counterproductive. But the left-wing ruling coalition is not listening. It is now proposing a 20% rise in a levy on companies’ profits that goes toward pensions. Carry on in this vein, and there will not be many businesses, or much profit, left to tax.
