IN RECENT months the business press has reverberated with cheers for the end of performance reviews. “Performance reviews are getting sacked,” crows the BBC. They “will soon be over for all of us”, rejoices the Financial Times. Such celebration is hardly surprising. Kevin Murphy, a performance-review guru at Colorado State University, sums up the general feeling about them: an “expensive and complex way of making people unhappy”. The problem is, they are not in fact being scrapped. A survey in 2013 by Mercer, a consulting firm, of 1,000 employers in more than 50 countries reported that 94% of them undertook formal reviews of workers’ performance each year and 95% set individual goals for employees; 89% calculated an overall score for each worker and linked pay to these ratings. It is true that a number of big companies have announced that they are abandoning annual performance reviews; this month IBM did so, joining Accenture, Adobe, Deloitte, GE, Microsoft and Netflix. In reality, though, they are no more getting rid of performance reviews than a person who shifts from drinking whisky to wine is becoming teetotal. Employee reviews are being modified, not abolished, and not necessarily for the better. Four changes are proving particularly popular. First, companies are getting rid of “ranking and yanking”, in which those with the lowest scores each year are sacked. GE, which practised this system with particular enthusiasm under its previous boss, Jack Welch, has now dropped it. Second, annual reviews are being replaced with more frequent ones—quarterly, or even weekly. Third, pay reviews and performance reviews are being separated. And fourth, some performance reviews are turning into performance “previews”, focusing more on discovering and developing employees’ potential than on rating their past work. Is this new system of employee reviews any better than the old? There are good arguments for getting rid of ranking and yanking: the ritualistic decimation of the workforce on the basis of a single number routinely paralysed businesses in the run-up to each year’s reviews, killing creativity and setting workers against each other. Thereafter the picture is murkier. Some of the arguments being advanced for the new-style reviews are hoopla. Deloitte says its new system is about “speed, agility, one-size-fits-one and constant learning”. The consulting firm’s employees sit down once a week with their “team leaders”. But good managers should give their charges constant feedback anyway. Adding another regular meeting to everyone’s calendar sounds like a formula for time-wasting. “One-size-fits-one” assessment is meaningless: a vital part of assessing people is measuring them against their peers—particularly when you have to think about who to promote or how to divvy out bonuses. It sounds nice to focus on people’s potential rather than their past performance. But how do you assess the former without considering the latter? And if decisions about pay are not based on performance, what will they be based on? Some of the arguments are not just hoopla, but dangerous hoopla. Social scientists have repeatedly demonstrated that performance reviews are distorted by two things: office politics and grade inflation. Managers are susceptible to lobbying. They also have an incentive to put a positive spin on things, often against their own better judgment, because in assessing their subordinates’ performance they are, to a large extent, evaluating their own ability to manage. Deliver a series of damning verdicts on your team and you inevitably raise a red flag about your own leadership. But the more subjective the reviewing process becomes, the more powerful these distortions are likely to be: “instant” feedback sessions can easily become orgies of mutual praise that do not teach anybody anything. For purists, such as Samuel Culbert of UCLA’s Anderson School of Management, this is proof that performance reviews are unsalvageable: better to get rid of them entirely than to replace one imperfect system with another. In fact there are good reasons why almost all organisations this side of Utopia use employee reviews of one type or another. Insurance against lawsuits Companies are always having to make difficult decisions, whether allocating limited resources (such as promotions and bonuses) or sacking people if they hold the organisation back or if the market turns down. It is preferable to make such decisions on the back of robust criteria rather than on the basis of managerial whim. Increasingly, firms also have to defend those decisions in the courts against people who feel hard done by. Firms that embrace more touchy-feely assessment systems, let alone get rid of them entirely, may be setting themselves up for legal nightmares. Annual performance reviews can certainly be improved. Companies need to put more effort into guarding the guards—training them in how to conduct reviews and holding them accountable if they are overgenerous or otherwise sloppy. Google wisely encourages its managers to review each other’s assessments. Bosses also need to be more rigorous about acting on what they discover: there is no point in amassing information about weak performers if you only act on it in a crisis. However, provided they are carried out consistently, rationally and fairly, and supplemented with more frequent feedback, annual performance reviews have many virtues. They provide a way of measuring an employee’s development over time (it is odd that some of those who criticise annual feedback for being too slow also criticise companies for being too short-term). They also provide a way of measuring all a company’s employees against each other rather than just their immediate colleagues. Bill Clinton once said that the best approach to affirmative action was “mend it, don’t end it”. The same is true of annual performance reviews.CATERPILLAR is one of the most renowned industrial brands. It makes the kind of heavy machinery—loaders, excavators and off-road trucks—that is used in the construction, mining and transport industries when things need to get dug out or shifted somewhere. But the firm’s latest results, released on January 28th, show that it is struggling to shift its own products. “This past year was a difficult one for many of the industries and customers we serve,” it said. Revenues in 2015 were nearly 15% lower than they were in 2014, and 29% below the 2012 peak. The company’s woes are emblematic of the problems facing manufacturers worldwide. Although manufacturing is a much smaller part of most developed economies than services—just 12% of output in America, for example—its recent weakness makes many economists nervous about the wider outlook. Recent data point to the size of the problem. Big jobs cuts have been announced this year by GE, Tata Steel and Bombardier. In December industrial production fell by 0.7% in Italy, 1.1% in Britain, 1.2% in Germany and 1.6% in France. In China both the official purchasing managers’ index (PMI) of manufacturing activity and that of Caixin, a leading financial magazine, are below 50, the threshold that indicates contraction (see chart). In America, manufacturing output rose by 0.5% in January but only back to its level in October; it has fallen in four of the past six months. The manufacturing PMI, compiled by the Institute for Supply Management, has been below 50 since October. Services-sector PMIs in most countries, by contrast, indicate continued expansion. A slowdown in Chinese economic growth, as the authorities try to switch from an investment-led to a consumption-led model, is blamed by many manufacturers in the developed world for their problems. The steel industry is suffering from the effect of past Chinese investment, which has led to massive overcapacity and plunging prices. China’s demand for raw materials in the first decade of this century also prompted mining companies to step up production, and shipping companies to build more vessels. As Chinese demand has dropped, both industries have taken a pounding. Bloomberg’s commodity index has fallen by 28% over the past 12 months. The Baltic Dry index of shipping rates is down by 98% from its peak. The latest data show that Chinese imports, by value, have fallen by 18.8% over the past year. Yet China itself is suffering from weak global demand; the value of its exports has fallen by 11.2% over the same period, including declines of 10% to America and 12% to the EU. Before the financial crisis, global trade used to grow faster than GDP, now it is lagging behind. The OECD, a club of mostly rich countries, estimates that trade volumes last year grew by just 2%. The sluggish nature of trade growth has a disproportionate impact on manufacturing. Around 25% of all American manufacturing jobs are linked to trade, compared with just 6% of jobs in services. Even though overall job growth in America has been strong, there were no net gains in manufacturing employment last year. In trade-intensive American industries, Bank of America Merrill Lynch estimates that output was growing at an annual rate of just 0.1% by the end of 2015. Falling commodity prices also mean that oil and metals producers are not investing in new plant and equipment, which hurts the companies that produce such goods. Exxon Mobil, an oil giant, has announced a 25% cut in its capital-expenditure plans for 2016, for example. American capacity utilisation, a measure of how much productive capacity is not idle, may have peaked at a lower level than in previous cycles (see chart). Firms seem to be struggling to sell what they produce: the inventories-to-sales ratio is higher than at any time since the financial crisis. By the time the fourth-quarter reporting season is over, American industrial companies in the S&P 500 are expected to have reported an annual decline of 5.4% in earnings and 7.3% in sales. The rising dollar is a problem for American firms, as it makes their wares more expensive. On a trade-weighted basis, the greenback is up by 22% since mid-2014. That is painful for companies that make low-margin commoditised goods such as paper or plastics. But currency movements cannot explain the weakness in European manufacturing; the trade-weighted euro has dropped by 11% over the past five years. The best hope for manufacturers is that this weakness is temporary. Falling commodity prices have had a short-term impact on the energy and materials industries. But in the medium term, lower prices should be good for consumer demand in the developed world, and they will step up their purchases of manufactured goods. Carmakers have already shown that it is possible to buck the trend. Low petrol prices encouraged American car buyers last year, with sales hitting a record 17.6m. As for China, recent data may be distorted by the effect of the lunar-new-year holiday. Chinese road freight grew last year; officials have started breaking out consumer-focused industries within its official PMI, and those data still seem robust. In a rare interview published this week by Caixin, Zhou Xiaochuan, the head of China’s central bank, dismissed worries on the part of developed-world manufacturers that the Chinese would devalue the yuan to enhance the competitiveness of their exports. He vowed not to pursue a policy of competitive devaluation, and insisted China had more than enough in foreign-exchange reserves to fend off those who were speculating against the currency. His comments sent the beleaguered yuan soaring: it hit its highest level this year on February 15th. For the moment, however, pessimism reigns. Even the shares of carmakers have taken a battering in the early weeks of 2016, underperforming the rest of the market. Global fund managers polled by Bank of America Merrill Lynch now have their lowest weighting in industrial stocks since 2011. Perhaps the much-larger services sector will pull manufacturing out of its rut. But investors are not counting on it. ECONOMISTS have been a bit puzzled by the market turmoil of early 2016. It seems to be driven, in part at least, by fears of either an American recession, or a sharp Chinese slowdown, neither of which looks likely from the data. Perhaps the answer to the conundrum is that market movements are not being driven solely by fundamentals but by recent developments in market liquidity. Central banks’ support for markets, via quantitative-easing (QE) programmes, is well known. Emerging-market central banks have also been big buyers of government bonds as they have built up their foreign-exchange reserves. But the Federal Reserve stopped its QE programme in 2014 and, in recent months, Chinese foreign-exchange reserves have fallen by around $700 billion. This means the Chinese authorities are net sellers, rather than buyers, of financial assets. Low oil prices mean that sovereign-wealth funds in oil-producing countries may also be selling assets. CrossBorder Capital, a research firm, says that the combined balance-sheets of the Federal Reserve and the People’s Bank of China were growing at more than 10% a year for much of the past decade—and reached a peak of 64.5% growth in 2008. But over the past year, they have actually contracted (see chart). Both the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan are still adding assets, of course. Nevertheless, CrossBorder’s global liquidity index, which reflects changes in the balance-sheets of a range of central banks, has fallen to 35; a world recession, says the firm, is signalled when the index drops below 30. Central banks may not be the only factor affecting market liquidity. Matt King, a credit strategist at Citigroup, highlights a number of oddities in a recent research note. The first is the relationship between government-bond yields and the cost of interest-rate swaps. A swap involves two parties agreeing to exchange a fixed-rate payment for a floating rate based on a variable measure, such as Libor. Since the counterparties to such deals tend to be from the private sector (notably banks), the fixed-rate element of the swap has tended to pay a higher yield than the equivalent government bond, to reflect the greater risk. But the cost of swaps has fallen below Treasury-bond yields, a phenomenon dubbed a “negative swap spread”. The other shifts are in the corporate-bond market. Investors with a strong view on where the bond market is heading can buy or sell individual bonds, or they can use a derivative called a credit default swap (CDS). A CDS is a kind of insurance policy, which pays out if the bond defaults; when corporate-bond prices are falling, the cost of a CDS rises. Mr King points out that the cash market has recently, and unusually, underperformed the derivative (ie, the spread, or excess interest rate, on corporate bonds has risen faster than the cost of insuring against default via a CDS). In a similar shift, the cost of insuring against the default of individual companies has risen faster than the cost of insuring a corporate-bond index. These changes in relative prices are the opposite of what happened in the crisis of 2008. Back then, the most liquid markets were the quickest to show the pain. Mr King’s explanation is that this is all to do with the reluctance of banks to tie up their balance-sheets, thanks to new rules on leverage ratios. Derivatives like swaps require banks to put aside very little capital compared with owning cash bonds, and so reduce demand for the latter. Banks are also unwilling to provide finance to traders who want to arbitrage such price disparities away; profiting from small price differences requires lots of borrowed money. Another sign that liquidity is shifting can be seen in the world of exchange-traded funds (ETFs)—portfolios of assets that can be traded on the stockmarket. According to BlackRock, which operates the biggest high-yield ETF, daily trading in the fund was briefly worth a quarter of the value of all American corporate-bond trading in December. Buying and selling an ETF has become a more liquid way of shifting an investor’s asset allocation. Since the crisis commercial banks seem to have retreated from their market-making role. The impact of this shift has been disguised by the huge amounts of liquidity injected by central banks. But as central banks scale back their support, the underlying investors (pension funds, insurers, hedge funds and the like) will have to rely on each other to act as willing buyers and sellers. That seems highly likely to result in more volatile markets than in the past, especially when the outlook for the economy is unclear. Buckle up.Kuroda corrodes the banks UNTIL this month bond traders were the most voluble complainers about the Bank of Japan’s vast programme of quantitative easing (creating money to buy bonds). The central bank’s interventions had slashed trading volumes in their market. But their gripes had a tiny audience and, understandably, received scant sympathy. Things have changed with the central bank’s new negative interest-rate policy (NIRP), which went into effect on February 16th. It has pummelled banks and spooked Mrs Watanabe, the archetypal Japanese saver. Fans of the new policy are hard to find. For around two trading days after the BoJ announced on January 29th that some bank reserves would be charged -0.1%, financial markets responded as intended—the yen weakened and the Nikkei 225 share index rose. Then, with the European Central Bank hinting at an extension of its own negative-rate policy, investors sought safety in the yen, which rose sharply. In turn that dragged down the stockmarket, since Japan’s exporting giants may earn less if their competitive position is eroded. Even after a rally on February 15th, when the Nikkei rose by 7.2%, the stockmarket is down by 9.6% since the BoJ’s announcement of negative rates; the yen is 5.9% higher against the dollar. Stocks were not helped by news that GDP contracted by an annualised 1.4% in the fourth quarter, chiefly because of weak consumption. The chief surprise for the BoJ was that banking stocks fell even faster than the overall market, with the drop coming close to 24%. The direct effect on banks’ profits is limited. For now, the central bank’s negative-rate policy applies to only ¥23 trillion ($200 billion) out of the ¥253 trillion that banks have parked with it. A further ¥24 trillion will earn 0%, and the rest will continue to earn 0.1%. But the BoJ may not have thought as much about the indirect effect on their business models, says Naohiko Baba of Goldman Sachs. Sharply lower long-term interest rates—the ten-year government-bond yield briefly dipped into minus territory (see chart), alongside overnight interbank rates—mean a sharp squeeze on net interest margins for all banks when profits from lending have already gone down. There is little room to shield margins. Deposit rates are wafer-thin; banks are unlikely to charge retail customers for parking their funds. Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency, expects profits at the five largest Japanese banks to fall by 8% over the next year or so and by 15% at regional banks, which are more dependent on their traditional lending businesses. A profits crisis among Japan’s 100-odd small local lenders may be just what the regulator ordered, since it is trying to consolidate them, but it probably had a smoother process in mind. If the BoJ ventures further into negative territory in order to reach its target for sustained inflation of 2%, the impact on big banks could become too pronounced for comfort. The governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, would probably like to bring rates to levels similar to those of some European central banks, at perhaps -0.5% or lower. Negative rates are a potent new means of easing when the BoJ may face limits on expanding its bond purchases from its current ¥80 trillion a year. It now owns around a third of Japanese government bonds. Expanding purchases to around ¥100 trillion is probably as far as it can go. Japan’s big banks have the capital and profits to withstand a squeeze. If, as the BoJ wishes, they are prompted to expand bargain-basement loans to companies and consumers, they will help stimulate the economy. Several are already lowering mortgage rates, sparking hopes for further house-price rises. Yet banking chiefs, who have until now supported the BoJ’s monetary easing, are likely to use their considerable influence to lobby against a further descent into the red. Many ordinary savers, meanwhile, view the central bank’s move as a portent of unstable times. Elderly deposit customers remember the time, after the second world war, when the government restricted cash withdrawals from banks and taxed deposits to pay off debts, notes Izuru Kato of Totan Research in Tokyo. Shopping malls in the capital are urging the merits of safety deposit boxes just in case commercial banks do impose negative rates, and they are selling well. A handful of local banks, such as Onga Shinkin Bank in Fukuoka prefecture, have defied the central bank with a rise in deposit rates to reassure their nervous customers. Given the volatility associated with the introduction of negative rates, the BoJ has indicated that it will gauge the market’s mood before lowering them further. The turmoil is also prompting questions about the policies of Shinzo Abe, the prime minister. If monetary easing is reaching its limits, fiscal policy may be needed to try to revive the economy. Mr Abe’s advisers are once again strongly urging the postponement of a second increase in the consumption tax, or VAT, which is due in April 2017. The rise has already been delayed once. Hawks at the Ministry of Finance are fighting hard against the possibility. But such a step would please almost everyone else, unlike negative rates.FINANCIAL markets may be drawing breath after their recent falls, but one industry in particular has little reason to feel calm. The life-insurance industry has deeper problems than just temperamental markets. Years of doling out goodies from a seemingly bottomless sack are now catching up with these actuarial Santa Clauses, who in their worst nightmares did not imagine that the interest income from their investment portfolios could stay so low for so long. Insurers tend to be prudent investors who like steady returns, which is why around 80% of their assets are in fixed-income securities. This served them well during the financial crisis, but today—with bond yields at historic lows, and even in negative territory—it hurts their investment income. This is particularly true for life insurers, which own over $21 trillion of the industry’s $28 trillion assets, and rely heavily on this investment income to pay policyholders. European insurers are especially exposed. Over two-thirds of life-insurance policies in force in the EU today offer some sort of guarantee. More than half of these policies have promised a higher income to policyholders than insurers can currently earn on newly-issued bonds, according to the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, a regulator. To make matters worse, many of these life insurers have a mismatch between the duration of the promises they have made to policyholders and the shorter time until their assets mature. Although there are big differences between firms, Moody’s, a rating agency, reckons those most at risk tend to be in Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and Taiwan, where average duration gaps are especially large (14 years in Norway) or guaranteed rates are eye-wateringly high (4-5% in Taiwan). On the top naughty step sits Germany. In the sunny years around the turn of the millennium most German life insurers gave customers a maximum guaranteed interest rate of 4% per year, both for savings and lifelong pensions. To meet such extravagant promises, insurers bought ten-year bonds at much higher rates than are available today. But when those assets matured, the liabilities remained (the average lifespan of existing German life-insurance policies is 20 years). The average returns promised to German policyholders are far higher than the yields on government bonds that insurers can now buy. Corporate bonds offer returns that are barely higher, which leaves two options: invest in riskier assets such as equities (which will require the insurer to put more capital aside), or face the fact that annual payouts to policyholders will outstrip income, a recipe for losses. Both outcomes sit uncomfortably with rating agencies, never mind investors. Fitch, another rating agency, warned in 2014 that some insurers might take too much risk in the hunt for yield. But the bigger worry today is that they stick to current policy and become unprofitable. Moody’s fears that if rates stay low for another four years, loss-making insurers will eat into their capital buffers, and some could—eventually—become insolvent. The more an insurer looks like it might struggle to meet future financial obligations, the higher the cost it will face if it eventually seeks to raise capital from investors to shore up its balance-sheet. Faced with this prospect, life businesses are doing what they can to push risk back to the customer. In some countries, such as France, the promises made to existing policyholders have the built-in flexibility to be scaled back. But mostly the burden falls on new policyholders, who are no longer sold products with guarantees. Ironically this de-risking creates a different danger: that the industry becomes irrelevant. By removing the key selling point of an insurer over a mutual fund—the assurance that a policy will pay out no matter what—the industry risks negating its business proposition to investors looking for security. (It does so, moreover, at a time when pension funds are watering down their long-term financial commitments, says Daniel Hofmann of the Geneva Association, who worries about the consequences for society and the economy.) The big question is whether new customers will buy savings-based insurance products at all in this shaky market environment, says Benjamin Serra of Moody’s. To survive, the life-insurance industry will need to address the question of what it is for. Most premium income for life insurers comes from the savings business, where guarantees play a central role. The classic model thrives on short-term interest rates of between 2-6%, government bonds yielding at least 4% and no worries about defaults. “That’s when we can sell policies cheap and generously,” sighs one nostalgic underwriter. Change of policy But with no prospect of such rate levels returning, life insurers must find a way to change. This could include merging with other (non-life) insurers, or developing new products that are not as dependent on yield but still give customers a long-term return. The transition will be a lot easier for those insurers without significant risks on their balance-sheets already. The unlucky ones with large loss-making policies already in place face a harder road. The good news is that they have a bit of time of their hands. Insurers are not as vulnerable to the risk of a run as banks. The assets of insurers are usually liquid and their liabilities tend to be tied to specific events—such as someone getting ill, retiring or dying—whose probabilities can be calculated. Unlike banks, insurers should not become insolvent overnight. A financial reckoning, should it come, can be put off for years, even decades. Regulation also helps, says Oliver Steel of Deutsche Bank. Banks were given until 2019 to raise new capital by the Basel 3 rules (and many did so earlier). But under the Solvency 2 regime set up by the EU to govern insurers, firms have generous transition periods of up to 16 years. The German government and regulator have also taken steps in recent years to strengthen the sector, such as forcing insurers to set aside specific reserves (Zinszusatzreserve) and limiting guarantees on new business. Such comfort only goes so far, however. In spite of these reforms, Moody’s believes that the German industry will incur losses if interest rates stay at low levels. And that looks likelier than not.QATAR’S capital is an inauspicious place for dealmaking. The Doha round of world-trade talks meandered on for almost 15 years. An agreement there on February 16th between Saudi Arabia and Russia, two of the world’s biggest oil producers, to freeze production at January levels if others join in, may presage a similarly never-ending saga to shore up oil prices. That seemed the likely outcome when, on February 17th, Iran’s petroleum minister, Bijan Zanganeh, emerged from a meeting with his Iraqi, Qatari and Venezuelan counterparts in Tehran saying that Iran supported the freeze, but without indicating whether it would take part. Oil prices climbed afterwards, but unless Iran participates fully, a production freeze is likely to be a non-starter. After years of sanctions it, more than anyone, has an incentive to wrest back market share from countries that cap their output (see chart). Oil-market bulls say that any sort of discussion about a freeze is a positive surprise. It comes despite tensions between Saudi Arabia and Russia over Russian military intervention in Syria. It coincides with production cuts in America’s shale-oil industry; as one analyst puts it, like central-bank currency intervention, it helps that market forces are heading in the same direction. It could also lead to broader co-operation. Ali al-Naimi, Saudi’s oil minister, called it “simply the beginning of a process”. Yet there are plenty of caveats. Saudi Arabia, Russia and Iraq were all pumping at or close to record levels in January. A freeze would do little to curb the oversupply that has pushed up oil inventories around the world—one of the biggest headwinds for prices. Iran has just loaded its first oil shipment to Europe since the lifting of nuclear-related UN sanctions last month, and has insisted it wants oil exports to increase by 500,000 barrels a day before the end of March. One Middle East oil expert suspects that the Doha meeting may have taken place only because of a negotiating trick by Qatar. He says both Russia and Saudi Arabia thought the other had agreed to a cut. Once in the room they realised there was no such agreement, but knew the consequences of admitting as much would be so damaging for oil prices that it was better to use a freeze as a figleaf. They also knew that, if the freeze failed, it could be blamed on Iran. Even if the big producers do one day decide that prices are so weak that a co-ordinated cut makes sense, it may provide only a temporary respite. Scenting higher prices, American shale producers could quickly try to pick up the slack.HOW important is America’s on-demand economy? Some worry that the likes of Uber, a car-hailing app, and Etsy, which helps workers to sell arts-and-crafts, are destroying traditional employment and with it pensions and health-care benefits. Others hail the flexible hours, low prices and convenience such apps facilitate. Until now not many data have informed this debate. Official statistics track things like part-time working, self-employment and working from home, but the app economy is too small to move those needles. In fact, most indicators suggest it is boring traditional work, rather than app-enabled odd-jobbing, that is on the rise. A new report plugs the gap. Researchers from the JPMorgan Chase Institute, a think-tank attached to the bank, studied the incomes of 1m of their customers with active current accounts of three years. They found that, in September 2015, 1% of them earned income through an (identifiable) on-demand platform. Of these, just over half used “capital” platforms, such as Airbnb, to lease stuff they own. The rest—about 0.4%—used labour platforms like Uber. Though small, the supply of on-demand labour and capital has grown rapidly: as recently as the end of 2012 barely 0.1% of the bank’s customers earned through online platforms. Since then, 4.2% have participated at one point or another. Is the on-demand economy replacing traditional jobs? Uber drivers are “independent contractors” who must pay their own payroll taxes, buy their own health insurance and save for their own pensions. Some drivers think this is wrong (and have taken their battle to the courts). In December 2015 two economists, Seth Harris and Alan Krueger (who has consulted for Uber in the past), penned a plan for a third category of worker, somewhere between a contractor and an employee, designed for the on-demand economy. The “independent worker” would get some benefits, like contributions towards health-care costs and payroll taxes, but would not be entitled to the minimum wage or unemployment insurance. Messrs Harris and Krueger say that equalising benefits makes it easier to compare earnings between jobs and apps, and that firms can use their bargaining clout to obtain health insurance more cheaply than individuals can. Such reforms, though, would be relevant to only a tiny fraction of the workforce. JPM’s data suggest that most on-demand workers use apps to supplement their income, rather than as a replacement for a full-time job. On average, labour platforms provided only one-third of on-demand workers’ incomes. And their participation was often sporadic; almost half of those who start working on a labour platform stop within a month. Earnings from Uber and the like are strongly correlated with negative shocks to incomes from other sources (capital platforms are used much more consistently). That suggests people use apps to smooth bumps in their earnings, which are frequent: more than half of JPM’s customers have seen their incomes swing by at least 30% in a month. Volatility in pay is largely responsible. Perhaps conventional jobs are not so great after all.IN 1990 hedge funds were still rare birds; 500-odd funds managed around $40 billion, mostly for rich individuals. Few people understood what they did or bothered to find out. By the end of 2015, the sector had mushroomed to include nearly 9,000 funds managing roughly $3 trillion. Along with private equity, the industry was classed as an “alternative asset”, attractive to pension funds and endowments. But a recent wave of fund closures, and the expectation that more will follow, suggest the industry’s era of stratospheric growth may be in the past. On the surface, fund closures are the norm in a cut-throat industry: every year hundreds of fund managers call it quits, only to be replaced by yet more would-be masters of the universe. But the gap between closures and launches is narrowing (see chart). In the first nine months of last year 785 new funds were launched and 674 were closed, according to Hedge Fund Research (HFR), compared with figures of 814 and 661 over the same period in 2014. In 2016, for the first time since the worst of the financial crisis, there may be more closures than launches, says Amy Bensted of Preqin, a data provider. The main reason for the shutdowns is poor performance. “It’s a performance industry. If you don’t perform people take their money and leave,” says Anthony Lawler of GAM, an asset manager. Last year was the industry’s worst since 2011; HFR’s fund-weighted composite index ended down by 1.09%. In the last quarter of 2015 investors withdrew $8.7 billion from the hedgies, according to Preqin. For the first time since the crisis more institutional investors now plan to cut their hedge-fund exposure than to increase it. This year has been no better. With losses of 2.8%, January was the worst month for the industry since September 2011, according to HFR. Market turmoil generated even steeper losses for large funds such as Pershing Square (which was down by 18.6% as of February 9th). Many funds that close have no choice but to throw in the towel. A tough macroeconomic environment, pressure to cut fees, increasing cost of regulatory compliance, and some very bad bets on distressed debt and energy assets, have all made it harder to run a hedge fund today than in the good old days of the 1990s. With investors becoming increasingly risk-averse, knee-jerk redemptions have become more common. For a small fund, if just one investor pulls out that can be the end of the business: 75% of the funds that closed in 2015 managed less than $100m. But there is a second, more surprising set of fund closures. A number of large high-profile funds, such as BlueCrest, Nevsky Capital and more recently, Standard Pacific and Orange Capital, have chosen to return outside capital to investors. This is puzzling; asset managers normally like to keep money. Disappointing performance, poor ratings and redemptions play a role in many voluntary liquidations, too. But many could have continued. Standard Pacific’s founders wrote to investors two weeks ago that “sometimes there is a logical conclusion to even a good thing.” BlueCrest’s Michael Platt, who in December told investors he would return their money, claimed the industry’s fee model was “no longer a particularly profitable business.” Nevsky’s chief investment officer, Martin Taylor, blamed the prospect of another bear market and a change in market structure that meant the fund’s research-heavy approach was less effective than before. One London banker thinks managers like Mr Platt were “just sick of investors’ monthly calls every time an asset drops a few percent.” Compared with private equity, hedge funds have short lockup periods, which means investors can redeem their cash relatively easily whenever they feel queasy about China or the oil price. Some managers have responded to this fickleness by running their funds as private family offices, much like George Soros or his old colleague, Stan Druckenmiller. A lot comes down to personality. Because the hedge-fund boom happened in such a short space of time, lots of today’s biggest managers come from the same generation. Many are tired and fed up; and with their millions made, they have little need to carry on. Moreover, succession planning has not been an industry strong suit: few fund managers have built organisations that will survive them. (Even those that have can run into trouble: investors in Bridgewater Associates, the world’s largest hedge fund, which manages $154 billion and had a very good 2015, were this month treated to a farcical set of mudslinging letters from the firm’s founder and its heir-apparent, asking them to judge each other’s conduct.) Fewer new funds seem likely to appear in 2016. Jonathan Miles, from Wilshire, a pension-fund adviser, thinks the governance and regulatory costs make it harder than ever to start a fund—particularly in Europe, where the regulatory regime has become especially tough (which also helps explain why more European funds closed in 2015 than American ones). Despite their sharp trades and sharper elbows, hedge funds have been slow to evolve. The field has become crowded and a natural selection of the fittest might be just what it needs, says Ms Bensted. Others, like Pierre-Edouard Coiffard of Laven Partners, a consultancy, think the business model of large hedge funds will tend to converge towards that of more traditional asset managers. Only the smaller specialist players will remain “pure” hedge funds. Whether investors will reinvest with the survivors or abandon the industry altogether is yet to be seen. But the days when hedge funds endlessly expanded appear to be over.IS THE job of central bankers more like that of technicians, carefully turning knobs as they fine-tune the economy, or magicians, manipulating the audience into the suspension of disbelief? Most of the time it is the former. Monetary maestros nudge interest rates up and down with meticulous precision. Yet in extreme cases—such as when economies become trapped in a low-growth rut—central bankers must try to conjure up a change in the public’s economic outlook. Just as uncertain magicians often fail to pull off their tricks, so central banks are finding their audiences in an ever-more sceptical mood. Economists have long acknowledged the role of mass psychology in business cycles. In 1936 John Maynard Keynes described the “animal spirits” that could drive swings in spending or investment. The power of an abrupt change in market beliefs came sharply into focus in the early 1980s, when many economies were struggling to clamp down on stubbornly high inflation. Economists at the time worried that using interest rates to rein in inflation would be enormously costly. Because the public had come to expect high inflation, they reckoned, growth-crushing rate rises would be needed to force down prices and create new consumer expectations. A common estimate at the time had it that reducing America’s inflation rate by just one percentage point would cause economic damage of nearly 10% of GDP. Thomas Sargent, a winner of the Nobel prize for economics, questioned this logic. In a paper published in 1982 he pointed out that historical episodes of hyperinflation did not end slowly, as central banks subjected economies to grinding recessions, but almost overnight. An abrupt but credible “regime change” in policy could realign popular expectations almost instantaneously, he reasoned. If people believed a government’s promise to halt inflation, and immediately began behaving as if the promise were credible, then in principle the adjustment could occur quickly. In a paper published in 1990 Peter Temin, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Barrie Wigmore, of Goldman Sachs, argued that Mr Sargent’s regime-change hypothesis might just as easily apply in reverse to an economy stuck in a slump. They analysed the American economy in the 1930s. Franklin Roosevelt’s programme of expansion—which included a departure from the gold standard, devaluation of the dollar, and a boost to government spending—was instrumental in bringing America out of depression, they allowed. But the turnaround in America’s fortunes occurred remarkably quickly, before those policies had time to work. As Christina Romer, an economist at the University of California, Berkeley, noted in 2013, the change in expectations in America happened almost immediately on Roosevelt’s arrival. Equity prices jumped by 70% between March 1933 and June of that year. An analysis of market expectations of inflation concluded that traders anticipated deflation of 7% at the beginning of 1933, but inflation of 6% by the end of the year. Messrs Temin and Wigmore credit Roosevelt with transforming the public’s beliefs about how the economy would perform in future. During his campaign and after his inauguration, Roosevelt repeatedly pledged to raise prices in the deflation-stricken economy. The choice to leave the gold standard—the centre of monetary orthodoxy at the time—was a powerful signal that the break with the past would be complete. When, in 1999, Japan became the first big economy to sink into a world of zero interest rates since the 1930s, economists spotted the parallel. Japan risked becoming stuck in a liquidity trap, they pointed out. When an economy is weak, a dose of bad news can cause people to revise down their expectations for future inflation (since less spending and hiring will mean slower growth in prices and wages). A drop in inflation expectations pushes up the real interest rate, squeezing borrowing and adding to pessimism. With the nominal interest rate stuck at zero, the Bank of Japan could not compensate for such increases through further cuts to interest rates; only the credible promise to boost inflation and keep it up could help the economy escape from the trap. In a paper published in 1998, Paul Krugman, another Nobel prizewinner, argued that Japanese central bankers had to issue a credible promise “to be irresponsible”. Ben Bernanke, who later became chairman of the Federal Reserve, mused that it was “time for some Rooseveltian resolve in Japan”. Both argued that Japan should aim for an unusually high target for inflation, of between 3% and 4%, and should promise to print money as needed to hit the target. The Bank of Japan instead opted for knob-turning. It eventually created money to buy assets. Yet not until 2012 did it set a firm inflation target, of just 1% (which it raised to 2% in 2013). When other advanced economies joined Japan in the zero-rate world after the financial crisis of 2007-08, they too failed to make a Rooseveltian commitment to regime change by promising, for example, to return the price level to the previous trend. Hocus pocus In this fraught world, central bankers risk falling into what Mr Krugman has called a timidity trap. The longer that knob-turning fails to get an economy out of the zero-rate rut, the less credible markets are likely to find subsequent attempts at regime change. Recent efforts to push interest rates into negative territory seem to have unnerved markets rather than sparked confidence. Perhaps more importantly, central bankers tend not to adopt major shifts in mandates and targets unless urged to do so by popularly elected governments. It is difficult to muster Rooseveltian resolve without a Roosevelt. Expect growing scepticism about the power of knob-turning until voters choose politicians confident enough to wave a magic wand.
