Staple foods of the rich world—wheat, barley, rice, maize and so on—have undergone long and sophisticated breeding programmes to increase their resistance to pests and pathogens, and to improve their yields and the convenience of harvesting them. The fruits of such research are found on the tables of the poor world as well, since these crops are ubiquitous. But poor countries often have other staples, and these have not usually been subject to such genetic ministrations. For one such staple, things are changing. Cassava, a crop whose starchy roots feed 500m Africans, is in the process of getting a makeover which employs the best that agricultural science has to offer. And Chiedozie Egesi of the National Root Crops Research Institute in Umudike, Nigeria, who leads the NextGen Cassava project, told the meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), in Washington, DC, all about it. From an African point of view a big problem with cassava is that it is originally a South American crop. It was introduced to Africa by the Portuguese, from their colonies in Brazil, but the strains they brought—or, at least, those that survived transplantation—represent a small fraction of cassava’s genetic potential. African agronomists would like to bring in other New World varieties, to improve their own crops, but they cannot because most such imports fall foul of cassava mosaic disease, a virus that does not exist in South America and which the successful African strains are generally able to shrug off. Dr Egesi and his colleagues are trying to deal with the aliens’ sensitivities by way of a breeding programme based on genomics. They started with 6,128 different cassava specimens from all over Africa, and genotyped them using a technique called SNP analysis. The acronym stands for single-nucleotide polymorphism, a place in the genome where a single genetic letter varies from strain to strain. They found more than 40,000 SNPs that they could use to act as markers of genetic variation. Examining and testing full-grown plants from the collection for desirable characteristics, known as phenotypes, permitted Dr Egesi and his team to find correlations between particular patterns of SNPs and particular phenotypes. They then picked out 100 specimens with especially promising SNP patterns and crossed them, to produce nearly 10,000 hybrids. They grew these, checked the SNP patterns of the offspring to see which their computer model predicted would have the desired characteristic (in this case, giving special attention to resistance to cassava mosaic virus), picked, once again, the 100 most promising, and repeated the process. They are now in the third cycle of the procedure (each generation of plants takes a year to raise and process) and reckon one more cycle will be required to get to the desired level of resistance. Moreover, what can be done for resistance to the cassava mosaic virus, Dr Egesi thinks, can be done simultaneously for other desirable phenotypes. He hopes SNP-based breeding will double cassava yields from their average value of about 10 tonnes a hectare as well as increase the amount of starch in the plant’s root, increasing its nutritional and economic value. And there are further diseases he hopes to get rid of this way, including brown-streak virus and bacteria blight. He hopes, too, to refine the identification of desirable phenotypes. Some physical characteristics of a plant can be judged by eye, or with the aid of a tape measure or scales. Testing disease resistance means challenging plants with the pathogens concerned. But many phenotypes require chemical analysis to detect—ideally, involving plants just plucked from a farmer’s field. The project is therefore experimenting with hand-held infrared spectrometers that need only be held up to the cut surface of a cassava root in order to measure its levels of chemicals such as beta carotene (a precursor of vitamin A). The prize for all this effort would be to put cassava on a par with the improved crops of the rich world. It might even become, like them, more of an industrial cash crop than something just grown for the pot, as is often the case now. Dr Egesi thinks his method can be used to improve the yield and quality of flour and starch made from cassava, making it more saleable. And that might have social as well as nutritional consequences. Most African cassava farmers are women. Putting money in their pockets would improve family budgets, and thus the welfare of some of the world’s poorest countries. A plan comes together TO DEFEAT the enemy, you must first know the enemy. In the immune system, that job is done by T-cells, which recognise the molecular signatures of threats to their owner’s well-being. This week, at the AAAS conference, researchers explained how turbocharging these cells can boost the immune system’s ability to fight cancer, and possibly other illnesses, too. The technology they use merges gene therapy, synthetic biology and cell biology. First, a batch of T-cells is extracted from the blood. A custom-built virus is used to implant them with new genes. The modified cells are then returned to the body, where their new DNA gives them a fresh set of targets to attack. Stanley Riddell, at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre in Washington state, creates cells that target a molecule, called CD19, that is found on the surfaces of some cancers. A firm called Juno Therapeutics is exploring whether the technique can be used to treat cancers that affect B-cells, another part of the immune system. Dr Riddell has meanwhile been refining the technology. He told the meeting of his attempts to isolate and modify certain types of T-cells that are known to respond best to a given disease. In a trial of 31 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), that approach brought about a complete remission in 93% of cases—something Dr Riddell described as unprecedented. Another refinement has been dealing with the toxic effects that these treatments can trigger. Sometimes, boosted T-cells can prove too eager for their owner’s good. As their numbers double, roughly every 12 hours, they can trigger a runaway immune reaction called a cytokine storm. This can be fatal: two of the patients in the ALL trial died in that way. The biggest cytokine storms, though, seem to come from the patients with the most advanced cancers. Dr Riddell’s solution is to give the sickest patients the lowest dose. This means that the T-cells multiply more slowly, reducing the chances of an immune-system overreaction. Although the ALL results are impressive, it is difficult to expand the approach to other cancers. To prime a T-cell to attack, it needs to be given precise co-ordinates. Otherwise it may lock onto, and destroy, something else in the body. But besides CD19, which is found in only a few cancers, scientists know of no other chemical target that is specific to cancer alone. In a paper published on January 28th in Cell, Kole Roybal and his colleagues at the University of California, San Francisco propose a solution: tweaking cells to attack when they sense two different target chemicals instead of one. In isolation, neither target may be unique to cancer cells—but the combination might be. That could allow the immune system to be unleashed on tumours whilst sparing healthy tissue. It is a long way from the lab to the clinic. But the technology is moving fast, and researchers hope that, one day, engineered T-cells might be used to treat a wide range of diseases, including HIV, immune deficiencies, and autoimmune disorders. Besides the elegance of the idea of boosting the body’s own defences, the technology offers another big advantage over traditional drugs: once they have done their job, the engineered T-cells stick around in the body. That could offer protection against re-infection or the recurrence of a cancer. Chiara Bonini, of the San Raffaele Scientific Institute in Milan, told the meeting she had found that some modified cells were so durable that they might be able to protect their owners for a decade or more.“IT HAS not escaped our notice”, wrote James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, “that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism.” What they had discovered was the structure of DNA and the way its halves matched up. It was a classic of understatement, for what they had noticed would revolutionise biology. With similar self-restraint, results published in Science, in 2012, noted “considerable potential for gene-targeting and genome-editing applications”. In fact, the study revealed a simple method allowing scientists to tinker, at will, with the genomes of animals and plants. It threw open the doors to a new and egalitarian era of genetic engineering—a way to tackle problems ranging from pest control to drug design to the undoing, with military precision, of harmful mutations. What remains to be determined, however, is who can claim to have discovered it. The CRISPR-Cas9 approach, as it is known, consists of a protein that can cut DNA and a short string of RNA that identifies where to do the cutting. It won two of the authors of the Science paper—Jennifer Doudna, of the University of California, Berkeley, and Emmanuelle Charpentier, of the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, in Germany—a $3m Breakthrough Prize in 2014. This week, Dr Doudna told a packed house at the AAAS meeting how it worked. She recounted how a serendipitous discovery about a bit of biochemistry, borrowed from a bacterium, led her team to a transformative technique that is already being put to use. In parallel, however, a nasty patent dispute has been unfolding. Although Dr Doudna and her colleagues were the first to file a patent on CRISPR-Cas9, they were not awarded the rights to exploit it commercially. That privilege was granted in 2014 to Feng Zhang, of the Broad Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), both in Cambridge, who also claim to have discovered the technique. This decision has been challenged, and in January the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) said it would begin a process to decide which side could claim ownership. Cutting questions The nub of the Broad’s argument is that what Team Doudna did is not gene-editing but rather little more than a study of the properties of a purified protein in a test tube. Robert Desimone, head of the McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT, has written that their work “involved no cells, no genomes and no editing”. Team Zhang, by this account, really put CRISPR-Cas9 to work by showing it functioned in mammalian cells. This view was reflected in a hackle-raising paper in January in Cell, by Eric Lander, head of the Broad, outlining a history of gene-editing that elevated the work of Team Zhang while marginalising that of Team Doudna. Supporters of Dr Doudna and her colleagues argue differently. Although CRISPR-Cas9 is by far the simplest gene-editing technique, it is not the first; others that rely on different nucleases, which do the DNA snipping, have been in use for a number of years. There is a pattern in the development of these other, trickier techniques: the substantive innovation, the one that ultimately leads to a functioning gene-editor, has been the ability to cut DNA at specific locations, something Dr Doudna did in fact show—in a test tube. The forthcoming USPTO proceedings must therefore determine who knew what and when. Although these days patents are granted on a simpler “first to file” basis, the dispute will be settled under the older, “first to invent” standard, which was in place when both applications were made. The question for the USPTO in its hearings, which start on March 9th, is which party made the discovery in the lab first—something that is as yet not clear. Team Zhang will be the “junior party” in the dispute, so the burden of proof lies with them. To win, Dr Zhang will need to show that he discovered CRISPR-Cas9 editing long before Dr Doudna’s paper in 2012. The Broad may even use as evidence work that was carried out in test tubes. None of this seems to have slowed commercial activity surrounding the technique. Editas, a company that currently holds the disputed patent, has said it will go public this year. Firms such as Caribou Biosciences, CRISPR Therapeutics and Intellia Therapeutics are also pursuing commercial applications of the approach; these either hold or license a patent filed by Dr Doudna that is pending. Whoever ultimately lays claim to the power over genomes that CRISPR-Cas9 represents, its “considerable potential” will be realised. But some things—including more prizes, and possibly a Nobel—do hang in the balance. When Dr Doudna took questions from the press at the AAAS meeting, there was more interest in legal, rather than scientific, issues. Asked how she was dealing with the furore, Dr Doudna said: “Fortunately there are people who are way above my pay grade dealing with that.”IN THE West naturalistic portraiture began in classical times. Well-stocked museums in Europe and America are full of busts depicting recognisable individuals. Painting, though, is a more precarious art form. Paint peels. Wood and canvas backings rot. Frescoes crumble and fall. Few painted portraits survive from the classical period, but arid desert conditions have preserved one set: the funerary mummy pictures of the second century AD, from Tebtunis in Egypt. These portraits, affixed to mummies’ bandages, depict the defunct in fresh and lifelike detail. Though neglected when they were rediscovered just over a century ago, they are now subject to intense scientific scrutiny. One of the scrutineers, Marc Walton of Northwestern University, in Illinois, told the AAAS meeting what he and his colleagues have found. One conclusion is that they can assign groups of portraits to particular artists. The three shown, for example, seem to be by the same hand. Dr Walton’s method here is to map each picture’s contours by illuminating it sequentially from many directions, building a relief map from the resulting patterns of light and shade. This reveals both the size of the bristles of the artist’s brush and the order in which he has composed the elements of the portrait. For these three, the bristles were 60 microns across, ruling out their being from cattle (160 microns), pigs (120 microns) or cats (30 microns). The best guess is that the artist used squirrel-tail bristles, which are about the right size. On top of this, spectroscopy suggests that in two of the portraits, one mixture of pigments used came from the same batch. This scientific analysis is supported by an artistic one which shows, for example, a way of painting hands that is shared by all three pictures. At the very least, then, the portraits came from the same workshop. It seems most likely, though, that the same artist painted all of them. These studies also reveal the extent of trade in the Roman empire. The paintings contain haematite and goethite from Keos, in the Aegean Sea, and red lead from Rio Tinto, in southern Spain. The lime-wood plaques on which the portraits are painted are from central Europe. The painter was also a shrewd businessman; he mixed indigo and madder to replicate the effect of the period’s most expensive pigment, Tyrian purple, which was extracted from sea snails and worth more than its weight in gold. Determining whether he told his customers of this economy is not, however, within the range of Dr Walton’s instruments.The Romanovs: 1613-1918. By Simon Sebag Montefiore. Weidenfeld & Nicolson; 745 pages; £25. To be published in America by Knopf in May. RULING Russia was not a tempting prospect in 1613, when the first Romanov reluctantly took the throne. Over the next three centuries the shrunken, war-torn principality of Muscovy became a colossal empire, though at a huge cost to the Romanovs’ long-suffering subjects—and to the family itself, where the currencies of dynastic politics included murder, torture and betrayal (sexual and otherwise), as well as habitual cruelty. Simon Sebag Montefiore’s story starts with the miserable, melancholic Michael, dragged to the smouldering ruins of the Kremlin by feuding boyars who were desperate for unity in the face of defeat by mighty Poland. It features the greats: Peter, manically debauched, and Catherine, the “regicidal, uxoricidal German usurper”; and also dismal failures such as Alexander III, who ruled Russia as a “curmudgeonly landowner”. It concludes with the pathetic Nicholas II, the last tsar, deposed and hurriedly murdered alongside his wife and children (pictured) by the Bolsheviks in 1918. His ill-starred reign was redeemed only by the “grace, patience, humour and dignity” which the doomed royal family showed in their captivity. The system rested on the idea that only “an all-powerful individual blessed by God” had the clout (the author prefers “effulgent majesty”) to run such a vast state, while also personifying the sacred mission of Orthodox Christianity. The key was delegation. Peter and Catherine, for all their whims and tyrannical ways, were superb at this: Catherine’s favourite, Grigory Potemkin, was an outstandingly gifted administrator; Alexander Suvorov an equally impressive military commander. The other monarchs mostly tried to run Russia themselves, with results ranging from the indifferent to the disastrous. The author’s many fans will find much to please them. As with his previous books, notably on Stalin, Mr Sebag Montefiore, a British historical writer, has an eye for the telling detail which lifts an unfamiliar narrative. His mammoth history of Russia’s royal dynasty features many such vivid, amusing and surprising particulars. Indeed it is startlingly lubricious and gory. The abundant mutilations, executions and other horriblenesses which the principal characters inflicted on each other and their subjects are described in nightmarish detail. In particular, the private passions of the Romanov court, preserved in letters and diaries, are on public parade. A fortuitously placed wart on the penis of the “mad monk” Rasputin, whose scandalous behaviour and bad advice helped bring about the dynasty’s downfall, is cited as a possible reason for his success with aristocratic women. Gore and sex aside, the author’s pen produces reams of fluent, sometimes sparkling prose. Many of his reflections on the Romanov era apply well to Vladimir Putin’s domains now: the “Russian pattern of behaviour”, he writes, is “servility to those above, tyranny to those below.” The Russian court was an entrepot of power: its role as a broker allowed participants to amass wealth and bonded them in shared loyalty. But it also allowed them to compete without resorting to civil war or revolution. That sounds pretty much like the modern Kremlin. However, the complexity of the material is still daunting. Most readers will need to make full use of the family trees and cast lists placed helpfully at the start of each chapter. A great many names make very brief appearances. The colour illustrations help fix the main characters in the reader’s mind; a few more maps might have helped illustrate the ebb and flow of nations. The focus is tightly on the intrigues of the court, and on the Romanovs’ role in European high politics. Economics, business, society and culture get only the skimpiest treatment. That is a pity. Alexander Etkind, an émigré historian, has argued that the root of Russia’s misfortunes is its natural wealth, which encourages its rulers to plunder the country, like colonial masters, rather than develop it. Yet despite its mostly dreadful rulers, the vast land did begin to modernise. The tragedy is that the later Romanovs were too scared, and in Nicholas II’s case also too out of touch, to start the reforms that could have saved them. That dilemma is as familiar as it is ancient. The Civil Wars of Julia Ward Howe. A Biography. By Elaine Showalter. Simon and Schuster; 243 pages; $28. HISTORY remembers Julia Ward Howe as the author of perhaps the most stirring song America has ever produced. In 1861, at the dawn of the civil war, she awoke with the lyrics to the “Battle Hymn of the Republic” almost fully formed in her head. Every American schoolchild knows the opening: “Mine eyes have seen the glory…” The anthem was sung at Winston Churchill’s funeral in 1965, at his request. Yet Howe was far more than a shooting star across America’s literary landscape, as Elaine Showalter makes clear in this delightful biography. She wrote poetry, plays and books, including an unfinished novel about an androgynous character who attracts the love of both men and women. Entitled “The Hermaphrodite” and written in the 1840s, it was vastly ahead of its time. Later, Howe emerged as a tireless speaker for feminist causes, notably women’s right to vote. Her life intersected with Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, the Brownings, Louisa May Alcott and Henry James. Howe’s letters and journals may hold the greatest fascination. These recorded with astonishing frankness her often bitter relationship with her husband, Samuel, whom Julia called Chev. The chief source of tension was that he wanted her to concentrate on the family and not a career. “Chev’s sourness of disposition becomes so dreadfully aggravated by any success of mine,” she wrote to her sister Annie. The tension could also emerge in her poetry: “Between us the eternal silence reigneth / The calm and separation of the tomb.” She published some of her writings behind his back. Howe, who bore six children, felt suffocated by the enforced focus on family. Early on, she realised that Chev would stay away from her bed when she was breast-feeding, so she extended her nursing, which helped with birth control. She was, she wrote to her sister Louisa, in “a state of somnambulism, occupied principally with digestion, sleep and babies…God only knows what I have suffered from this stupor.” Men, she complained, “think it glorification enough for a woman to be a wife and mother in any way, and upon any terms.” These are relatable sentiments, and the author wisely lets them carry the book. However, at times the account feels one-sided. Ms Showalter, a feminist literary critic and professor emeritus at Princeton University, relies heavily on Julia’s perspective, leaving little room for her husband to make his case. Samuel plainly limited Julia, but he was also a committed abolitionist (as was Julia) and a strong if flawed advocate for the blind. Ms Showalter notes Chev’s achievements and acknowledges that he had his defenders, yet still leaves the impression of a tyrant. Perhaps that is inevitable; marriage gripes did not flow prolifically from his pen. The “Battle Hymn” itself, which Howe wrote to a tune that Union soldiers were already humming, occupies only a handful of pages. Crucially, however, “its renown gave her the power and the incentive to emancipate herself,” Ms Showalter writes. Samuel died in 1876. Julia lived nearly 35 more years, finally able to embrace the cause of women’s liberation in full. A decade after she died, and thanks in part to the suffrage groups she led, women were able to lay claim to the ballot box.Movers and Shakers Paradise Now: The Story of American Utopianism. By Chris Jennings. Random House; 488 pages; $28. UTOPIANISM in politics gets a bad press. The case against the grand-scale, state-directed kind is well known and overwhelming. Utopia, the perfect society, is unattainable, for there is no such thing. Remaking society in pursuit of an illusion not only fails, it leads swiftly to mass murder and moral ruin. So recent history grimly attests. Although true, that is just half the story. Not all modern Utopians aim to seize the state in order to cudgel the rest of the world back to paradise. Plenty of gentler ones want no more than to withdraw from the mainstream and create their own micro-paradise with a few like-minded idealists. Small experiments in collective living swept America, for example, early in the 19th century and again late in the 20th. Most failed or fell short. None lasted. All were laughed at. Yet in this intelligent, sympathetic history, Chris Jennings makes a good case for remembering them well. Politics stultifies, he thinks, when people stop dreaming up alternative ways of life and putting them to small-scale test. Though with occasional glances forward, Mr Jennings focuses largely on the 19th century. At least 100 experimental communes sprang up across the young American republic in the mid-1800s. Mr Jennings writes about five exemplary communities: the devout Shakers, Robert Owen’s New Harmony, the Fourierist collective at Brook Farm, Massachusetts, the Icarians at Nauvoo, Illinois, inspired by a French proto-communist, Etienne Cabet, and the Oneida Community in New York state practising “Bible communism” and “complex marriage”. The Shakers’ founder was a Manchester Quaker, Ann Lee, a devout mother worn out by bearing dead or dying children. In 1774 she left for the New World, determined to forswear sex and create a following to share her belief. An optimistic faith in human betterment, hard work and a reputation for honest trading helped the Shakers thrive. At their peak in the early 19th century, they had perhaps 5,000 members scattered in some 20 villages across eight states. They counselled celibacy, to spare women the dangers of child-bearing, made spare, slim furniture, now treasured in museums, and practised a wild, shaking dance that was taken as a sign of benign possession by the Holy Spirit. Robert Owen, a British mill-owner and reformer, treated private property, along with organised religion and marriage, as a social scourge. In 1825 he bought land for a farm-and-factory commune in Indiana. It attracted farmers, artisans and intellectuals. Tools, food and housing were free. The commune had mixed-sex schools and a library. It sponsored scientific research. Without a shared faith or purpose, however, the members split into competing groups. By 1827, Owen’s secular community had disbanded. The difficulty of pursuing micro-communism in a capitalist society also dogged Cabet’s American followers. His New World Icarians split into several rival groupings. Shakers, Owenites and Icarians focused, each in their own way, on duties. They sought to tame human selfishness. Gloomy as he looked in portraits, the Frenchman Charles Fourier concentrated on fun. His writings inspired the Brook Farm commune near Boston and, less directly, Oneida. Fourier wanted to free people’s instincts so that everyone, especially women, might lead a life of varied enjoyments and sensual delight. Stripped of emphasis on sex, Fourier’s message that a good life was a cultivated life, not one of striving and work, appealed to New England intellectuals who formed Brook Farm’s core. “Paradise Now” is more than a record of failed hopes. Some ideas spread to the mainstream. Fourier’s feminism is a good example. Fourierist communes foundered across the New World and Old; his ideas about gender equality lived on. No society could improve, Fourier believed, until women’s lot improved. “The best countries”, he wrote, “have always been those which allowed women the most freedom.” That is a common thought today. It was radical when Fourier wrote it in 1808. Women more generally are at the centre of the Utopian story. Some communes he writes about were democratic, some authoritarian. None was patriarchal. Mr Jennings’s book is rich in fond hopes and improbable ventures. Rather than nudging readers to mock, which is easy, the author reminds them instead to remember that the maddest-sounding ideas sometimes become motherhood.AS THE bombs rain down, it is hard to think of Aleppo in terms of anything other than bloodshed, terror, and destruction. But the massive collateral damage includes the muwashshah, a courtly song-form to which Syria’s second city has been home for 800 years. The style is known as “Andalusian”, because that is where it originated—Al-Andalus, Moorish Spain. In the 12th century muwashshah-singing spread eastward, putting down roots in north Africa and the eastern Mediterranean, with its farthest outpost in Yemen. Wherever it settled, it took on local colour, but what it reflected was the unique Andalusian mix of Arab, Jewish, Christian and Berber influences. Its first and greatest celebrity was Ali Ibn Nafi, a charismatic black singer from Baghdad nicknamed Ziryab (Blackbird), court musician to the Emir Abd al-Rahman II in Cordoba. It became the fashion for rich patrons to maintain singing slave-girls whose refined artistry earned them rock-star fees and a life of luxury. Love-poetry is the main subject-matter of muwashshah and it may have influenced the poetry of the Provencal troubadours. But whether in the classical Arabic or in the Hebrew style, that love was simultaneously both human and divine. The poem’s typical setting would be a garden where a drinking party was served by a beautiful young cupbearer, but the love would be unrequited. The beloved would be unattainable; the lover would pine away for her (or him). No wonder this poetry and its music became the pabulum for Sufi gatherings, where this human-divine ambiguity was the keynote. Until revolution erupted in 2011, Aleppo and Damascus were the focal points for this music’s Syrian variant. The al-Kindi Ensemble—based in Paris, but with Syrian and Turkish musicians—was its highest-profile exponent. In its most recent CD, “Le Salon de Musique d’Alep”, al-Kindi skilfully evokes the atmosphere of this music, and the circumstances in which it was performed in Aleppo. Choral muwashshah are interwoven with instrumental and solo vocal improvisations to create the complex suites of music that are traditional in the Middle East, with a mood that is by turns exuberant and ecstatically devotional. The Syrian National Symphony Orchestra still gives occasional concerts of Beethoven and Brahms in Damascus; Western classical music has its own momentum. But when the bombs cease to fall on Aleppo, what will be left of its intimate traditional music? Without the continuity which has nurtured it in the heart of the old city, that music—like so much else in Syria’s traditional culture—is threatened with extinction.
