IT IS more than two weeks since the Federal Reserve raised interest rates for the first time in over nine years, and the world has not (yet) ended. But it is too soon to celebrate. Several central banks have tried to lift rates in recent years after long spells near zero, only to be forced to reverse course and cut them again (see chart). The outcome of America’s rate rise, whatever it may be, will help economists understand why zero exerts such a powerful gravitational pull. Recessions strike when too many people wish to save and too few to spend. Central banks try to escape the doldrums by slashing interest rates, encouraging people to loosen their grip on their money. It is hard to lower rates much below zero, however, since people and businesses would begin to swap bank deposits for cash or other assets. So during a really nasty shock, economists agree, rates cannot go low enough to revive demand. There is significant disagreement, however, on why economies become stuck in this quagmire for long periods. There are three main explanations. The Fed maintains that the problem stems from central-bank paralysis, either self-induced or politically imposed. That prevents the use of unconventional monetary policies such as quantitative easing—the printing of money to buy bonds. The intention of QE is to buy enough long-dated debt to lower long-term borrowing rates, thereby getting around the interest-rate floor. Once QE has generated a speedy enough recovery, senior officials at the Fed argue, there is no reason not to raise rates as in normal times. If the Fed is right, 2016 will be a rosy year for the American economy. The central bank expects growth to accelerate and unemployment to keep falling even as it lifts rates to 1.5% or so by the end of the year. Yet markets reckon that is wildly optimistic, and that rates will remain below 1%. That is where the other two explanations come in. The first is the “liquidity trap”, an idea which dates back to the 1930s and was dusted off when Japan sank into deflation in the late 1990s. Its proponents argue that central banks are very nearly helpless once rates drop to zero. Not even QE is much use, since banks are not short of money to lend, but of sound borrowers to lend to. Advocates of this theory see only two routes out of the trap. The government can soak up excess savings by borrowing heavily itself and then spending to boost demand. Or the central bank can promise to tolerate much higher inflation when, in the distant future, the economy returns to health. The promise of higher-than-normal inflation in future, if believed, reduces the real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rate in the present, since money used to repay loans will be worth less than the money borrowed. Expectations of higher future inflation therefore provide the stuck economy with the sub-zero interest rates needed to escape the rut. Governments pursued both these policies in the 1930s to escape the Depression. But when they reversed course prematurely, as America’s did in 1937, the economy suffered a nasty and immediate relapse. The liquidity-trap explanation suggests the Fed’s rate rise was ill-advised. The American economy, after all, is far from perky: it is growing much more slowly than the pre-crisis trend; inflation is barely above zero; and expectations of inflation are close to their lowest levels of the recovery. If this view is correct, the Fed will be forced by tumbling growth and inflation to reverse course in short order, or face a new recession. Stuck in a glut There is a third version of events, however. This narrative, which counts Larry Summers, a former treasury secretary, among its main proponents, suggests that the problem is a global glut of savings relative to attractive investment options. This glut of capital has steadily and relentlessly pushed real interest rates around the world towards zero. The savings-investment mismatch has several causes. Dampened expectations for long-run growth, thanks to everything from ageing to reductions in capital spending enabled by new technology, are squeezing investment. At the same time soaring inequality, which concentrates income in the hands of people who tend to save, along with a hunger for safe assets in a world of massive and volatile capital flows, boosts saving. The result is a shortfall in global demand that sucks ever more of the world economy into the zero-rate trap. Economies with the biggest piles of savings relative to investment—such as China and the euro area—export their excess capital abroad, and as a consequence run large current-account surpluses. Those surpluses drain demand from healthier economies, as consumers’ spending is redirected abroad. Low rates reduce central banks’ capacity to offset this drag, and the long-run nature of the problem means that promises to let inflation run wild in the future are less credible than ever. This trap is an especially difficult one to escape. Fixing the global imbalance between savings and investment requires broad action right across the world economy: increased immigration to countries with ageing populations, dramatic reforms to stagnant economies and heavy borrowing by creditworthy governments. Short of that, the only options are sticking plasters, such as currency depreciation, which alleviates the domestic problem while worsening the pressure on other countries, or capital controls designed to restore monetary independence by keeping the tides of global capital at bay. If this story is the right one, the outcome of the Fed’s first rises will seem unremarkable. Growth will weaken slightly and inflation will linger near zero, forcing the Fed to abandon plans for higher rates. Yet the implications for the global economy will be grave. In the absence of radical, co-ordinated stimulus or restrictions on the free flow of capital, ever more of the world will be drawn, indefinitely, into the zero-rate trap.EVERYONE remembers the Wright brothers, who made the first powered, heavier-than-air flights by human beings on a beach in North Carolina in 1903. Few, by contrast, remember Charlie Taylor, a mechanic at the brothers’ bicycle business in Dayton, Ohio. Yet it was Taylor who, by building an internal-combustion engine out of aluminium castings rather than iron ones, created a device both light enough and powerful enough to lift Orville and Wilbur into the sky. Engine design has always been crucial to aviation. To start with, more powerful versions of the piston-driven motor pioneered by Taylor ruled the roost. Then, a radical, new approach emerged as the designs of Frank Whittle, a British engineer, ushered in the jet age. The jet has since evolved into the turbofan, whose gaping intakes have—as seasoned air travellers will have noticed—grown larger and larger over the years, to accommodate ever bigger and better fans. And now, as 2015 turns into 2016, another new design is being rolled out. This is the geared turbofan, which is available as an option on the A320neo, the latest product of Airbus, Europe’s biggest aerospace group. Geared turbofans, as their name suggests, include a gearbox as part of the mechanism. Those on the A320neo are the brainchildren of engineers at Pratt & Whitney, a division of United Technologies, an American conglomerate. Designing and building geared turbofans, which Pratt & Whitney brands “PurePower”, is a gamble. The firm has spent two decades and more than $10 billion developing them. Connecting an engine’s inlet fan to the compressor and turbine in its core through a gearbox should give better fuel economy and make the thing quieter—both desirable outcomes. But the bigger the engine the bigger the forces on the gearbox and the more likely it is that something will go wrong. So, though gearboxes are found in turboprops (jet engines that turn a propeller) and in a few executive jets, no one had until now managed to scale one up to cope with the 30,000 horsepower delivered by the core of an airliner’s engine. Pratt & Whitney has persevered because it thinks the conventional, ungeared turbofan is reaching its limits, and that only by adding a gearbox can airlines achieve the performance and economy which will be required of them in the future. Airlines, though, are notoriously conservative, and are wary of new, complicated kit like gearboxes, which are yet one more thing that can go wrong. So Pratt & Whitney has had its work cut out to persuade them. Meshing it together A jet engine works according to Newton’s third law of motion: to every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. The reaction is forward movement. The action which provokes that is the ejection from the back of the jet of fast-moving gas. This gas generates thrust in proportion to its mass and to the speed with which it is being ejected. In the early, ear-splitting jet engines designed by Whittle and his contemporaries, the thrust came from air that entered the engine’s core at the front (see diagram) where it was squeezed by a compressor, mixed with fuel and ignited to produce hot gases that rushed out of the rear. Though the mass of this exhaust gas was small, its velocity was high, so the resulting thrust kept an aircraft fitted with such an engine aloft. The compressor, meanwhile, was turned by a turbine propelled by the exhaust gases. A turbofan works in a broadly similar way, but with a fan also turned by the turbine to push some of the air around, rather than through, the core. Though this core-bypassing air is not moving as fast as the exhaust gases, there is a lot of it—so it, too, produces a great deal of thrust. The upshot is a system that is more efficient and quieter than earlier jet engines. The proportion of air going around the core compared with that going through it is known as the bypass ratio. Some of the latest turbofans have bypass ratios as high as 9:1. It is to achieve this that fans (and therefore inlets) have increased in size. But as fan blades get longer, their tips travel faster—and now those tips are going at close to the speed of sound. Accelerating them any further would cause shock waves, and these might result in dangerous vibrations. A gearbox gets around this by letting the fan turn more slowly than the compressor and the turbine. This means the fan can be made bigger (and can thus accelerate a greater volume of air) without slowing everything else down to its rev rate. This arrangement permits all parts to be engineered for optimal performance. As a result, PurePower has a bypass ratio of 12:1. Doing all of this does, though, require an utterly reliable gear box. Pratt & Whitney uses advanced nickel-based alloys for the components of the box itself. The fan blades are made from a lightweight alloy of aluminium and lithium. And the turbine is composed of titanium aluminide, a substance developed in collaboration with MTU, a German firm, that has twice the strength of the conventional cast alloys used to make turbines. The upshot is that a pair of PurePower engines slung under an A320neo’s wings promise to reduce fuel consumption by 15% compared with a standard A320. This could save an airline more than $1.5m a year per aircraft in fuel costs. Geared turbofans also give the plane a longer range and are markedly less noisy. There have, inevitably, been teething problems. Industry reports suggest that the geared turbofan needs a slightly longer period to cool down than was expected, to avoid uneven wear when it is restarted. This might sound trivial, but at a busy airport it could cost a plane its take-off slot. For that reason Qatar Airways, which had been expected to be the first to take delivery of the A320neo, is believed to have postponed receipt. The honour of being first now looks like going to Lufthansa, a German carrier. Pratt & Whitney says the geared turbofan meets or exceeds all its performance requirements. During routine flight testing, ways to improve the engine were identified, but the company adds that any modifications will be minor. Whether geared turbofans will sweep all before them remains to be seen—and depends, at least in part, on the response of Pratt & Whitney’s two big rivals in the jet-engine business, General Electric (another American firm) and Rolls-Royce (a British one). These companies are also working on more efficient aircraft engines. Both, though, think improvements can still be squeezed from the conventional turbofan design without resorting to a gearbox. General Electric, in partnership with Snecma, a French firm, is offering a rival engine, called the CFM Leap, for the A320neo. This will be available later in 2016 and is claimed by the partners to provide fuel savings similar to those of a geared arrangement. The Leap is a conventional turbofan, but it is made using some unconventional techniques. These include new composite materials and also additive manufacturing (popularly known as 3D printing). Rolls-Royce, too, aims to get greater efficiency from its turbofan designs, though it does also have a gearbox-development programme, with a view to making a geared turbofan that might enter service on large passenger aircraft in around a decade’s time. As to PurePower itself, so far the opinion of airlines is divided. Airbus has taken orders for more than 4,400 A320neos. About a third of these will sport PurePower, a third Leap, and in the cases of the remaining third, the customer has yet to make up his mind. Pratt & Whitney, though, does not plan to be tied only to Airbus. It is also offering versions of PurePower to firms trying to break the duopoly enjoyed on short-to-medium-range aircraft by that firm and Boeing. Bombardier of Canada is one such. Its competitor to the A320 is called the CSeries. The Mitsubishi Regional Jet, from Japan, is another plane which Pratt & Whitney hopes might use PurePower. And there are also the MC-21, a 180-seat airliner from Irkut, a Russian aerospace company better known for its Sukhoi fighter jets, and the E-Jet from Embraer, of Brazil. Whether Pratt & Whitney’s PurePower play will pay off remains to be seen, but as Charlie Taylor knew over 100 years ago, gearing up for success does mean taking risks.FEW events exceed the splendour of the Nobel ceremony and gala dinner held every December in Stockholm. After champagne toasts to Sweden’s king, and to the memory of Alfred Nobel, 1,300 guests sitting in the city hall cheer the latest crop of laureates in chemistry, physics, physiology or medicine, literature and economics. (The peace prize is awarded at a separate shindig, in Oslo.) For many of the winners, perhaps more used to sporting white coats than white ties, the occasion is a career-defining moment of glamour. No other prize has anything like the stature of a Nobel. In scientific circles it is known simply as “the trip to Stockholm”. But some do whisper the question, “for how much longer?”  Nobel, who made his money by inventing dynamite, set things off with a bang. In 1895 he bequeathed 31m kronor (roughly $200m at today’s values) to create a foundation, the income from which would pay for the prizes. The endowment is now worth 4 billion kronor (some $500m). That sounds like a lot, but it hardly represents a spectacular return after 120 years. As a result, the prizes have suffered. Today, an individual award—which can be split up to three ways—is worth 8m kronor in addition to the 18-carat gold medal each recipient receives. A handy sum, but one whose lavishness has fallen as cautious investing has failed to increase the pot as fast as economic growth has increased people’s incomes. According to the foundation’s boss, Lars Heikensten, who was once governor of Sweden’s central bank, when the first prizes were awarded, in 1901, they represented 25 times the annual salary of a professor at a typical university in Europe or America. Now, the ratio is more like ten. Meanwhile rivals, such as the Kavli and Breakthrough prizes, are being endowed by more recent plutocrats. Many of these (see chart) pay out more than the Nobel Foundation—in the case of the Breakthrough prize, three times as much. The Nobel brand may thus be in danger of erosion, as the foundation itself admits in its most recent annual report. This says that “ensuring the importance of the Nobel prize in the long term continues to pose a significant challenge”. Mr Heikensten is trying to take matters in hand. He has overseen a big awareness-raising push on social media, and through conferences and debates that carry the Nobel name. And, sometime in the next 12 months, work will start on a Nobel visitor centre and conference venue in the heart of old Stockholm. This controversial cube of glass, costing 1.2 billion kronor, will be paid for by private donors, with much of the money coming from two families of Swedish billionaires, the Wallenbergs and the Perssons. Which is all well and good, but does not really get to the heart of the matter—that the whole Nobel proposition needs dragging into the 21st century. One ticklish question is whether the prize categories are still relevant. The science prizes—the core of the foundation’s fame—reflect the academic priorities of the founder’s era. Things have changed. Galling though it is to the memory of Nobel, a chemist, pure chemistry is largely worked out as an academic discipline. These days, most of the winners of the chemistry prize could have fitted just as easily into the physics or physiology-or-medicine categories. Meanwhile, biology has hypertrophied. Shoe-horning it into “physiology or medicine” seems bizarre, and excludes important fields such as ecology. Rivals have prizes for categories such as neuroscience and nanoscience. Changing or adding to the Nobel list, though, has not found favour. Even the economics prize, introduced in 1969, is looked down on by traditionalists as not being a proper Nobel. Then there is the question of replenishing the coffers. A praiseworthy desire to preserve independence by not taking donations into the endowment has become something of a drawback. This, as much as overcautious investing, is responsible for the prizes’ diminished financial value. A more welcoming attitude to donations (even if these are restricted to the personal, rather than the corporate, and perhaps to legacies rather than lifetime gifts that might be seen as involving some quid pro quo) might be sensible, to boost the prizes’ value. For reputation is a funny thing. Scandal can destroy it overnight, of course, and the foundation’s trustees might fairly argue that their cautious approach has avoided that fate. But reputation can also slip away, unnoticed, as the world’s attention shifts elsewhere.THE year 2015 was probably the hottest since meteorological records began. It certainly ended with a flourish. On North America’s east coast, dreams of a white Christmas were banished by springlike temperatures. In New York, for instance, the mercury hit 22°C (72°F) on Christmas Eve. Europe, too, enjoyed unseasonal warmth. But this was no festive gift, for the warm, moist air that caused it also brought humungous storms. In South America flooding has forced 130,000 Paraguayans from their homes. In the United States tornadoes before and after Christmas have killed at least 29 people. Thirteen more have drowned in floods caused by a storm that this week tracked across the Atlantic (see map), where it may add to the misery of people in large parts of northern England, who have already been inundated several times this year, the Christmas period included (see article). As The Economist went to press, forecasters were warning that this storm, dubbed Frank by British meteorologists, may develop into what is known as a bomb cyclone, undergoing a sudden, drastic drop in air pressure at its centre in a way that will suck warm air from the tropics and funnel it northward. If these predictions prove correct, the temperature at the North Pole is likely to rise a little above freezing. Though that is still chilly by most people’s standards, it is an extraordinary 30°C above the average for this sunless time of year. One explanation for the weird weather, at least in the Americas, is El Niño—a phenomenon in which a slackening of trade winds over the Pacific allows warm water to slosh back eastward, increasing the amount of heat and moisture in the atmosphere in a way that has various predictable effects across the tropics. The floods in South America are part of a typical Niño pattern, and the tornadoes in the United States tend to fit, too. Another factor is that the polar vortex, which traps cold air in the Arctic, has taken a form which permits balmier than normal weather in much of the northern high latitudes. This week’s bomb cyclone may change that, though. Bits of Europe could be in for a cold new year. Climate change is a contributor too. The greenhouse effect warms the oceans as well as the atmosphere, and they have stored up quite a lot of heat in recent years. The oceans are therefore unusually warm—not just the eastern Pacific, but the Indian and Atlantic, too. Kevin Trenberth of the National Centre for Atmospheric Research, in Boulder, Colorado, points out that a lack of hurricanes—which most people would welcome—may explain some of the effects around the Atlantic at the moment as heat normally released by summer hurricanes stayed in the ocean. As ever, connecting weather patterns across the seasons and across the globe is difficult. But learning how to do so is becoming ever more important.BOOKS that focus on what happened in a particular year have become a publishing phenomenon. So Keith Jeffery, a British academic historian whose last work was a fascinating, if slightly plodding, official history of Britain’s secret intelligence service, MI6, must have thought it a clever idea to go for 1916, the midpoint of the first world war. Mr Jeffery’s purpose is to show that not only was it a year of tremendous events, but one in which the effects of the war spread across most of the world, often with consequences that can still be felt a century later. By 1916, the war that some had believed would be over by Christmas 1914 had become an attritional slog on both the largely static Western Front and on the rather more fluctuating front in the East. To break the deadlock, the general staffs of all the main belligerents continued to work on new tactics, such as the creeping artillery barrage, and to seek new technologies, including the tank, which first saw action in September 1916. Contrary to a widely held view, the second half of the war was a period of unprecedented military innovation. The idea that sheer offensive élan could overcome well-entrenched defences equipped with modern weaponry, in the form of accurate artillery and the machine- gun, had died during the appalling bloodletting of late 1914. In the four months before the war of movement in the West ground to a halt, France and Germany had between them suffered over 1.5m casualties—a loss rate that was not exceeded until manoeuvre returned to the battlefield in the final months of fighting. By 1916 most of the soldiers on both sides had not only lost faith in imminent victory, but had become fatalistically resigned to the war as permanent crucible for their generation which civilians and politicians at home could not begin to comprehend. The last hope that the war might be brought to a swift conclusion by a stroke of strategic brilliance had faded with the abject failure of the Gallipoli campaign to deal the expected blow to the Ottoman Empire. Just a few days before the close of 1915, the Allied forces withdrew stealthily from the beaches at Suvla Bay and “Anzac” Cove (the acronym for the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps, which fought there with great gallantry, but, contrary to national myths, did not suffer the bulk of the casualties). The withdrawal, in contrast to the rest of the shambolic campaign, was rather brilliantly conducted. But the lesson was still a painful one: although “sideshows” continued to exercise the imagination of those with an imperialistic mindset, the grim reality for Britain and France was that the war would be won or lost on the Western Front. That realisation fed into something else. By 1916 sentiment had hardened into a widespread feeling on both sides that the sacrifices had already been so great that the possibility of a negotiated peace had ceased to be politically conceivable. The only way forward, it seemed, was to prevail in a fight to the finish whatever the cost. That was one reason why 1916 saw two of the most terrible confrontations of the war: the battle of Verdun, which began in February, and the battle of the Somme, which was launched on July 1st. During the whole of 1915 there were 1.8m casualties on the Western Front; in just eight months of 1916, thanks to those two epic struggles, France, Britain and Germany together sustained 2.2m casualties. For the German chief of staff, Erich von Falkenhayn, the fortress at Verdun was chosen as the place where “the forces of France will bleed to death”. Verdun, writes Mr Jeffery in “1916: A Global History” (Bloomsbury, $32 and £25) “became a byword for the manifest horrors of industrialised, ‘total’ war”. But for France, the defence of Verdun in the face of Germany’s greatest onslaught of the war so far became the ultimate symbol of national heroism. For the British, the battle of the Somme came to represent something less noble. At the outset, the British army suffered its greatest-ever loss in a single day (more than 57,000 casualties). The shock of July 1st 1916 came to stand for not just the suffering and courage of the soldiers, but, later, anger over the human cost of flawed tactics and supposedly callous military leadership. Yet at the time the battle, which continued until November, was not regarded as a disaster. The French made significant gains during September, which, William Philpott, author of “Bloody Victory” (2009), believes was the “tipping point” of the war. He argues that the Somme “relieved the pressure on Verdun, restored the initiative of the Allies, wore down the enemy’s manpower and morale and…stretched German resources dangerously thin”. With their superior manpower and resources, the Allies believed the Somme was “a strategic victory in a war of attrition” which they would eventually win. Paradoxically, the great naval battle of Jutland, two months before the Somme offensive, looked at best like a costly draw for the Royal Navy, which lost more ships and men than Germany’s High Seas Fleet, but was in fact a strategic success. Although, as Mr Jeffery points out, contrary to myth, it was not the last time the High Seas Fleet ventured out of Wilhelmshaven, the damage done to its smaller naval force at Jutland underlined the risks of seeking a definitive engagement. As a result, there was no further real threat to Britain’s naval blockade of Germany which, according to German apologists for their eventual military defeat, led to deteriorating conditions on the home front (malnutrition and sickness if not actual starvation) and the myth of the “stab in the back” by treacherous republican politicians. A further consequence of Jutland was that with waning appetite for another major fleet action and its attendant risks, German U-boats went back to a largely commerce-raiding role. It was the fateful decision early in 1917 to expand into unrestricted warfare that led directly to America’s entry into the war a few months later, in April. A thread thus leads from Jutland to the single event that perhaps did most to ensure that Germany would lose the war. The attritional struggles on both the main fronts were directly connected to the wider impact of the war as the fragile regimes of three of the belligerents, Austria-Hungary, Russia and the Ottoman Empire, began to crack under the strain. Austria-Hungary, whose attempt to chastise rebellious Serbia fuelled the initial descent into war, was by 1916 buckling at the seams. Neglecting the struggle against Russia in the East, Austria-Hungary’s chief of the general staff, Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf, had sent his best troops to fight the Italians, but had still got bogged down. Things turned from bad to worse when the Russian general Aleksei Brusilov launched a brilliantly conceived offensive in June. The Russian advance put intolerable pressure on the fragile loyalties of the multi-ethnic Habsburg armies. There were mass defections of Czech, Ukrainian, Croat and Slovenian units who were deeply reluctant to fight fellow Slavs. Brusilov eventually ran out of steam when German divisions arrived to stiffen Habsburg resistance. But his offensive proved to be another major turning point. Austria-Hungary was more or less destroyed as a military power, increasingly dependent on Germany to stay in the fight. Less obviously, exhausted by the inconclusive effort of its greatest feat of arms in the war, the Russian army turned in on itself, creating the conditions for the revolution the next year that was hijacked by Lenin with help from Germany. The battles on the Eastern Front in 1916 “crucially accelerated the political and social destabilisation of both the Russian and Habsburg empires”, as Mr Jeffery notes. Nearly all the areas where the fighting took place were in the colonised spaces of eastern Europe: that is to say, in places where “the population felt itself under the domination of a foreign power”. The war encouraged people to challenge the imperial status quo and assert their right to national self-determination, still a relatively new concept and one that has remained a source of conflict and controversy. With every major belligerent by 1916 in extremis, it was not just in eastern Europe and the Balkans that nationalist movements surfaced to exploit the distraction of the colonial power. Ireland saw the Easter Rising when 1,400 armed republicans seized a number of Dublin landmarks, including the GPO building, only surrendering when British artillery was used to shell their positions. The subsequent execution of 15 of the rebels and the imposition of martial law increased opposition to Ireland’s role in the war and gave a boost the republican cause that led to the establishment of the Irish Free State six years later. In the Middle East, the British and French pursued a policy of fomenting Arab nationalism as a means of undermining the Ottoman Empire and staving off German attempts to promote a pan-Islamist jihad against the two older colonial powers. In May 1916 two rather obscure diplomats, François Georges-Picot and Sir Mark Sykes, reached an agreement that divided Arab Ottoman provinces into areas of future British and French control or influence. The baleful results of their insouciant map-drawing are still being felt today, notably in the turmoil of Syria and Iraq. That 1916 was an extraordinary year is not in doubt. It was the pivotal year of the Great War, which as Fritz Stern, a German-American historian, rightly observed, was “the first calamity of the 20th century, the calamity from which all other calamities sprang”. The intensity and scale of the fighting was the trigger for a wave of political, economic and social upheavals that destroyed empires and forged national identities, sometimes for the better, very often for the worse. Historians have been hard at work teasing out the threads; readers can expect a deluge of new books in the coming months.Kennedy and Nehru step out JFK’s Forgotten Crisis: Tibet, the CIA and the Sino-Indian War. By Bruce Riedel. Brookings Institution Press; 256 pages; $29. IN THE autumn of 1962 Chinese troops invaded Indian-held territory, attacking across the 1,800-mile (2,880km) border that stretches along the Himalayas between the two giants of Asia. Mao Zedong instructed his army to expel Indian soldiers from territory that China claimed in Kashmir. In Washington the Chinese offensive was seen as a serious communist move in the cold war.  It was an inconvenient moment for the White House. President John Kennedy was absorbed in an even bigger crisis with communism closer to home: the flow of Soviet missiles to Cuba which threatened a nuclear conflict. Luckily for Kennedy, he had his own man in New Delhi. His friend from Harvard, John Kenneth Galbraith, was the American ambassador. So in a relatively easy act of delegation, Galbraith was put in charge of the “other” crisis. Galbraith proved up to the task, in part, as Bruce Riedel writes in “JFK’s Forgotten Crisis”, because he had access to the president and his aides. Most ambassadors report to the State Department, but the blunt Galbraith told the president that going through those channels was “like trying to fornicate through a mattress”. The border war did not last long. The Chinese crushed the Indians. Mao declared a unilateral ceasefire a month later and withdrew Chinese forces. He had prevailed over his Asian rival, humiliating the Indian prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru. But victory was not just about Chinese might. At Galbraith’s urging, the Americans had quickly backed the distressed Nehru. An emergency airlift of supplies was sent to Calcutta and a carrier battle group was dispatched to the Bay of Bengal. In the end, Mao judged that the Americans might actually come to the help of India. He did not want to suffer huge losses of Chinese soldiers so soon after the Korean war. Thus American deterrence worked, and a confrontation between America and China was avoided, Mr Riedel writes. The actual war is just one facet of this high-wire story of the geopolitics of the period, with its outsized characters and decisions that still reverberate today. Mr Riedel puts his experience as a former CIA analyst and a senior adviser on the National Security Council to canny use, uncovering details about an American covert operation in Tibet that has been mostly forgotten, though not by China. Between 1957 and the early 1970s America spirited young Tibetans out of their homeland through Bangladesh (then East Pakistan), trained them in Colorado, and parachuted them back into Tibet, where they fought the Chinese army. Galbraith described the covert effort as “a particularly insane enterprise”. But the CIA prevailed. In 1961 the Americans were so starved for information about China that the CIA bragged about the ambush of a Chinese army truck by the Tibetan rebels. Mr Riedel describes how a bloodstained satchel of Chinese documents from the truck was taken to the White House as prized bounty. The Americans were so ignorant about the early years of communist China, he writes, that the operation was deemed worth the risk because of the documents’ descriptions of the status of Sino-Soviet relations, and the grim conditions in the Chinese countryside. The current alliances on the subcontinent and the unsettling arms race between Pakistan and India hark back to the war of 1962. Kennedy’s decision to help India drew Pakistan closer to China. India started down its path to becoming a nuclear power after its defeat by China. When India tested a nuclear weapon in 1998, the rationale was the threat from China. Today China and India are competitors, not enemies. But more than 50 years after the war, the border dispute remains unresolved. The two countries account for more than a third of the world’s population. In July 2014 at the first meeting between the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, and Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, Mr Xi said: “When India and China meet, the whole world watches.” This superb history shows why.Remembering the revolution The Gates of Europe: A History of Ukraine. By Serhii Plokhy. Basic Books; 395 pages; $29.99. Allen Lane; £25. ROWS over inheritances are bitter—within families and between countries. At the heart of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine is the contested legacy of a long-forgotten superpower: Kievan Rus. Both Vladimir Putin’s Russia and post-Soviet Ukraine lay claim to the mantle of Vladimir the Great, a prince who just over 1,000 years ago accepted Christian baptism for his unruly tribes of Slavs and Vikings. To patriotic Russians, that was the founding action of their statehood. For Ukrainians, the story is the other way round: their country, so often wiped off the map by its neighbours, is the true descendant. That dispute underlies today’s smouldering war. Many Russians find it hard to accept that Ukraine is really a state; moreover, Ukrainians (especially if they speak Russian as a first language) are essentially Russians. The territory they inhabit is therefore part of Moscow’s patrimony. Ukraine’s identity and its enemies over the past ten centuries are the central threads of Serhii Plokhy’s admirable new history. He eschews polemic—almost to a fault, given the horrors he describes. The subject material could seem dauntingly dense: few readers will be familiar with the twists and turns of the history, and unfamiliar names and places abound. But Mr Plokhy—a Harvard historian whose previous book, “The Last Empire”, was a notable account of the Soviet Union’s downfall—treads a careful path. The story is not just of high politics, gruesome and enthralling though that is. Even when Ukraine did not exist as a state, he writes, “language, folklore, literature and, last but not least, history became building blocks of a modern national identity”. He pays particular attention to the linguistic complexities. Ukrainians may speak Russian yet also identify profoundly with the Ukrainian state. The real linguistic divide is with Polish: western Ukraine was for many decades under Polish rule. Memories of massacres and oppression are recent and vivid, making the reconciliation between those two countries all the more remarkable. The epilogue to “The Gates of Europe” rightly describes the Ukraine crisis as central to Russia and Europe as a whole. It is widely known that the Ukrainian national anthem begins: “Ukraine has not yet perished”. Mr Plokhy points out that the Polish one begins in similarly mordant style. The question for Ukrainians—and for Europe—is whether the country can summon up the determination that Poland has shown to tread the hard road which history has set before it. The stakes are high: a successful, stable Ukraine would be a strong candidate to join and strengthen the European Union. It would also be a devastating refutation of the Putin regime’s contention that bellicose autocracy is the best way of running a large ex-Soviet Slavic country. But the odds are uncomfortably long. Ukraine returned to statehood in 1991 shorn of its elites, thanks to famine, repression and Russification. The creeps and cronies who have so signally misruled the country since then have acquired great riches, and put down deep roots. Two democratic upheavals—the Orange revolution that began in late 2004 and the Maidan protests of 2013—have failed to dislodge this parasitic ruling class. Yet belief in Ukraine’s history of tolerance and legality, rooted in European Christian civilisation, keeps hope alive. In his elegant and careful exposition of Ukraine’s past, Mr Plokhy has also provided some signposts to the future.The Other Classical Musics: Fifteen Great Traditions. Edited by Michael Church. Boydell Press; 426 pages; £25. ANY self-respecting arts-lover living in America or Europe is familiar with a smattering of writers, painters and sculptors from outside the West. But few cultural buffs could name a single composer from, say, China or Turkey, let alone give any detail about them. A collection of essays, entitled “The Other Classical Musics”, shows how much they are missing. Intelligently edited by Michael Church, a British critic, the book looks at the canons of different parts of the world (India and China are deemed worthy of two chapters each, though Latin America is ignored). Written by different scholars, each chapter has a common structure, with a concise outline of the instruments, the style and the social relations behind the music. Lots of beautiful pictures and extracts of musical notation break up the text. The chapters on Indian classical music will be of particular interest to many readers, who may already have a vague understanding of it through the works of Ravi Shankar, a sitar-player (pictured). The book shows important differences between north (Hindustani) and south (Carnatic) Indian styles. For instance, tablas—drums with heads usually fashioned from goat skin—are more commonly used in Hindustani music; Carnatic melodies tend to contain more flourishes. (Shankar played largely Hindustani music.) Such characterisations are helpful for the lay reader; but the contributors also show a keen eye for historical nuance. Many of them question the usefulness of the term “classical”, arguing that what people may now perceive to be traditional has in fact constantly changed over time. In the chapter on classical Japanese music there is a wonderful illustration of two sheets of musical notation, one from 1303 and the other from the present day; their different styles hint at how the form has evolved. Classical Iranian music has likewise seen much change. During the 1950s it fell under the sway of European musical practices, but as the government grew concerned about Westernisation it sponsored efforts to reassert a Persian flavour. As for India, before the 20th century the country’s music was no more than “a variety of musical traditions performed in different places by different social groups”. Some historians argue that Indian “classical” music was really a cobbling together of different traditions by 20th-century nationalists. Alongside other chapters on places like Tajikistan, north Africa and Java, the book has one on European classical music. For many readers this chapter will be rather familiar; but for those who know little about composers like Pérotin (who was born in Paris and active in the late 12th century, when he came to be known as Pérotin the Great) or John Dunstable (c.1390-1453), a celebrated English composer of polyphonic music, it will be just as interesting as the others. And in fewer than 30 pages it offers as good a summary of the Western canon as can be found anywhere. Readers should not try and digest the whole book in one go; far better to use it for reference. Indeed, the best way to appreciate it is to read it while listening to the music under discussion (your reviewer searched for the relevant compositions on YouTube and played the extracts of notation on the piano). There is a treasure trove of underappreciated music out there; this book will convince many to explore it.Dealing with the wildlife WHEN one online reviewer misinterpreted a key sequence in “The Revenant”, Alejandro Iñárritu’s harrowing wilderness-survival drama acquired a nickname: “The Bear Rape Movie”. It is important to clarify, then, that Leonardo DiCaprio’s character, a shaggy-bearded 19th-century frontiersman called Hugh Glass, is not raped by a bear, although ursine sexual assault is just about the only ordeal he is spared. At the start of the film, Mr Iñárritu’s first since his Oscar-winning Broadway farce, “Birdman”, Glass is a member of a fur-trading party that is ambushed by Arikara natives. The ensuing forest battle has the nerve-shredding immediacy of the D-Day set piece in “Saving Private Ryan” (1998), Steven Spielberg’s second-world-war drama. Shortly afterwards, Glass is bitten, clawed, trodden on and flung around (but not raped) by a hulking grizzly, and then left for dead by a treacherous colleague (Tom Hardy). But he forces himself to trek for hundreds of miles to his associates’ fort, via frozen landscapes as hostile and beautifully strange as the surface of an alien planet. Mr DiCaprio has said that his notoriously gruelling experiences on the set of “Titanic” nearly 20 years ago were a breeze compared with making “The Revenant” on location in Canada and Argentina. But his tribulations have paid off. Like Mr Hardy’s recent hit, “Mad Max: Fury Road”, “The Revenant” is a thunderous riposte to those blockbusters in which digitally rendered cities are flattened, but the violence never registers as anything other than what it is: the reorganising of pixels on a computer screen. Watching Mr Iñárritu’s visceral film, the viewer feels Glass’s pain. Every plunge into an icy river, every mouthful of twitching raw fish, every arrow through the throat seems excruciatingly real. It is unfortunate, then, that the director has given in to his fatal weakness for distracting subplots and mystical hallucinations. If Mr Iñárritu had not fallen for padding out his primal revenge yarn to an unnecessary 156 minutes, the overpowering scenes of Glass struggling against the bear, his human enemies and nature itself would have made “The Revenant” into a classic of the action-movie genre.In a piece on historical agony aunts in our Christmas issue ("Whatever should I do?"), we described a British bigamist as having been transported to Australia before Captain Cook "discovered" the place. The two-timer may well have been shipped to another colony, such as America. Thanks to an alert reader for spotting this.
