Damascus Diaries: Life Under the Assads. By Peter Clark. Gilgamesh; 393 pages; £12.50. My House in Damascus: An Inside View of the Syrian Crisis. By Diana Darke. Haus; 282 pages; £9.99. WHAT is being lost as Syria bleeds? Not just lives, but a tradition of pluralism and tolerance, all too rare in the Middle East, and a rich cultural treasure-house. That is the message of these two very personal books by Britons who have lived in Syria and fallen in love with it. Peter Clark ran the British Council in Damascus for five years in the 1990s. His diaries—quirky, digressive, indiscreet—chronicle his attempts to build cultural relations in a police state filled with fear, corruption and red tape. Even friendly officials are wary of the ruling Baath party. When he starts English classes, they are infiltrated by the secret police. He persists, organising an exhibition of photographs of Syria by Freya Stark, a travel writer, in the 1920s and 1930s—and then, more ambitiously, an Anglo-Syrian production of Purcell’s opera “Dido and Aeneas”, which, against all odds, is a great success. In the midst of all this, he somehow finds time to translate a novel by Ulfat Idilbi, a spry old Syrian feminist in her 80s. There are political insights into the persecution complex of the Alawites, the heterodox religious minority, historically poor and marginalised, which has come to dominate the ruling civil and military elite. There is a chilling encounter with the president, Hafez al-Assad, whose “cold grey eyes” seemed to “look into your soul”. But the principal characters are the author’s Syrian friends—the writers, lawyers, bank managers and university professors with whom he eats, drinks, dances and gossips. He relishes the odd details of Syrian life: the old khan (or caravanserai) that used to be a lunatic asylum, the tea Syrian migrants have brought back from Argentina, the delightful word gommaji (an amalgam of Italian and Turkish), meaning a man who repairs punctures. Diana Darke’s book is set in the Syria of Bashar al-Assad, who succeeded his father in 2000. Ms Darke is a journalist and travel writer, and much of her early time in Syria was spent walking its hills and exploring its mosques, churches, monasteries and fortresses. But in 2005 she took the bold decision to use her life’s savings to buy an 18th-century Ottoman house in the Old City of Damascus. Her book, now in an enlarged third edition, tells the remarkable story of how she did so, despite a succession of legal and bureaucratic obstacles, and the onset of civil war. As with Mr Clark and his opera production, Ms Darke’s British and Syrian friends thought she was mad. Like him, she persevered. Interwoven with the story of how she renovated the house are asides on an array of issues—education, women’s rights, Islamic art—and on the Assads, whose regime she clearly detests. When the war forced her to leave, she turned the house into a refuge for Syrian friends escaping the violence. Both authors cling to the hope that Syria with its mosaic of communities and traditions, and its unique history and archaeology, will somehow rebuild itself. In the meantime their books serve as moving tributes to the Syria that has been lost.The look of love SOME artists never live to enjoy acclaim. Vincent Van Gogh died in obscurity, having sold only one painting. Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun, a French portraitist working in the decades before and after the French revolution, had the opposite problem. For much of her life she was celebrated and sought out by the rich around Europe; she charged such high fees that few could afford her. Her contemporary, Jacques-Louis David, praised one of her paintings as better than his own. However, after her death in 1842 at the age of 86, she began to be overlooked. Only one previous show in America, at the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth in 1982, has paid tribute to her evocative, graceful artistry. Vigée Le Brun is now being given her due. A new show of her work has travelled from the Grand Palais in Paris to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and will make its final stop at the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa. The exhibition offers two parallel narratives. One is the evolution of Vigée Le Brun’s stellar career, which was launched after she began painting France’s queen, Marie Antoinette, when they were both 23. The other is the turmoil of French politics, which changed dramatically over the course of the artist’s long life. The revolution of 1789 caused an exodus among the country’s nobility. Vigée Le Brun painted a few of them when they were in exile abroad. Her paintings, imbued with lightness and luxury before the revolution, took on a subtly sober tone in the years afterwards. Rarely is one afforded such an intimate view into the life of the rich in pre-revolutionary France, but Vigée Le Brun’s luscious paintings suggest how good the living was. She became expert at rendering fur, silk, ribbons and lace. The daughter of a hairdresser and a minor portraitist, Vigée Le Brun received no formal art training, but her innate talent helped her stand out early on, as did the support of the queen, who intervened on her behalf to make sure she would be accepted to the exclusive Royal Academy. Membership was capped at four women at a time; in its 150 years, just 15 women were admitted to the Academy, compared with 550 men. A life-size portrait of Marie Antoinette is on loan from Versailles, the first time it has travelled outside France. Although Vigée Le Brun made her name painting the queen, these stately works can feel more stiff than her others. A better picture is of Charles Alexandre de Calonne, the finance minister, who sits on a red chair, holding a letter marked “for the king”. The exhibition suggests how small the world of the French ruling class was during this period. Calonne’s portrait is placed next to one of the Countess du Barry de Cérès, his lover. When the revolution broke out, Vigée Le Brun worried that her relations with the monarchy would put her in danger and sought refuge in Italy. Leaving was an astute choice. One of her contemporaries, Adélaïde Labille-Guiard, stayed in France but received few commissions and had one of her best paintings destroyed. “Most artists lost a decade of work that they could have done because of the revolution,” says Katharine Baetjer, a curator at the Met. However, Vigée Le Brun remade her career several times while abroad, painting the nobility in Italy, Austria and the Russian empire. She was beautiful, socially gifted and an astute businesswoman. Few artists had such a global career and managed to overcome the sexism that hampered women’s artistic rise. Seeing Vigée Le Brun’s work assembled, it is clear that her early work was her best. She is gifted at painting children, including her daughter, Julie (pictured), to whom she was very close until their relationship shattered in adulthood. Her Russian paintings lack the subtle, introspective humanity of her portraits in France and Italy; many boast dramatic landscape backdrops and mythological elements. The most interesting work of her later years is a self-portrait, shorn of the frills and beauty of her youth. The contrast between it and an earlier, ebullient self-portrait she painted in 1790 for the Uffizi Gallery in Florence is striking. She had thought then that she might soon return to France, but it would be 12 years before she did. In all, Vigée Le Brun produced more than 600 paintings. The Met has about 80 on display; it is half the size of the show at the Grand Palais. This is partly because there are no pictures in the exhibition from Russian museums as a result of a long-standing legal dispute that has raised fears that any loans to America may be seized. But the Met also felt that a new and perhaps untutored audience would have the patience only for a smaller, more tailored show. Those seeing Vigée Le Brun’s work for the first time will be impressed by her skill and sensibility and wonder why they have not met her sooner.IF YOU were bold enough to ask Antonin Scalia questions, you had to be precise. Otherwise the bushy black brows would furrow, the chin would crumple and the pudgy, puckish body would start to rock, eager to get at you. Wasn’t he violently opposed to Roe v Wade, the abortion ruling? “Adamantly opposed, that’s better.” Did he have any guilty pleasures? “How can it be pleasurable, if it’s guilty?” Lesser lawyers who were vague in oral argument faced a barrage of sarcasm or, if he agreed with them, constant chiding to do better. (“That’s your strong point!”) Dissenting colleagues at the Supreme Court had their opinions described as “argle-bargle”, “jiggery pokery” and “pure applesauce”. Words had meaning. He revered them and used them scrupulously, even in insult. The law was written in words, and those ideally laid down bright lines for everyone to follow. As a committed textualist, he wasted no time looking to legislative history, the purported purpose of a law or the comments of some egregious congressman. It meant what it said. As for America’s constitution, speaking as the court’s originalist-in-chief, all that mattered was what its words meant when it was framed. He was in love with it; he was in awe of the men who wrote it; the late 18th century was a time when genius burst forth on the eastern seaboard, as it had in Periclean Athens. But for him the founding document was not “living”, not some organism endlessly adaptable to society, as Justice William Brennan, a distressingly liberal predecessor, used to think. It couldn’t be found suddenly to contain newfangled “rights” to privacy, as in Roe. It was dead! Dead! (Or perhaps, to be more tender and precise, “enduring”.) Its business was to block change, not advance it, and if it thereby obstructed something he himself, as a very conservative fellow, disliked, so much the better. Death-penalty cases he dismissed in minutes: the penalty was clearly constitutional. Church-and-state cases took no longer: the Framers had built no wall between them, and anyway, didn’t government get its authority from God? He would go home, to a Martini and a large dinner, and sleep like a baby. The beloved document, however, never promised perfect outcomes. In 1989 he found himself ruling (joining Brennan!) that it didn’t stop sandal-wearing bearded weirdos burning the American flag. (Personally, he would have clapped them all in jail; he longed to mark his opinion loudly with a rubber stamp, “Stupid but Constitutional!”) In several cases the constitution enhanced, rather than curbed, the rights of criminal defendants and terrorists. He did what he had to do. This made him a less predictable justice than many supposed. More often, the document said nothing at all about some modern obsession: torture, abortion, discrimination. But then such matters, as Justice Scalia kept saying, were never meant to be settled by an unelected committee of nine; they were meant to be resolved by the people, through legislation. If he were a king, as his swagger and opera-singing occasionally suggested, he would stretch the constitution any way he wanted. In fact, as he admitted with a grin, it handcuffed him. Not nearly enough, some people thought. His colleagues quailed when, in 1986, he first sat on the court as a brash 50-year-old whose experience had been mostly as a combative government lawyer: a justice who, in that sanctum of columns and deep judicial silence, was suddenly firing questions like grapeshot. (As the product of a Jesuit military academy, as well as an originalist, he loved to evoke cannon and muskets, and much enjoyed duck-shooting; he talked of tracking truth like a hunter in the forest, and was pleased to rule, in District of Columbia v Heller, that the Second Amendment did indeed mean that individuals had the right to bear handguns.) Though he was not the only New Yorker on the bench, he was the only spoiled-rotten Italian kid brought up proud and scrapping in Queens and familiar with rude Sicilian gestures. “Come right back at you!” was his motto, robed or not. Family-fond (nine children!), gregarious and funny, he got on with his colleagues, and made a surprising best buddy of the court’s chief liberal, Ruth Bader Ginsburg. But he spared no ammunition in dissent. As early as 2003, when Lawrence v Texas struck down sodomy laws, the majority had “signed on to the…homosexual agenda”. In 2015, when the court narrowly saved Obamacare, “We should [call] this law SCOTUScare.” He never tried for consensus, not rating it anyway, and increasingly sat with the minority, though always the most colourful and quotable. Facing down the Devil He spent three decades on the court, relishing every minute, and liking it even better when he could kick shins in public. Looking back, what pleased him most was to see more attention paid to text, legislative precedent sliding out, and far more questions from the bench: all his doing. He could detect, though, no fading of the fashion to force the constitution ever further into modern life. After abortion and same-sex marriage, why not assisted dying? The stalwart Catholic in him was revolted at the thought. He knew for certain, though, that the Framers were on his side; the Devil was on the other; and that heaven was his portion, for he was always right.  Dig deeper: Antonin Scalia’s death starts a political battleTributes were paid to Antonin Scalia, one of the justices on America’s Supreme Court, who unexpectedly died while holidaying in Texas. The political bickering over replacing him was less dignified. Barack Obama said he would nominate a successor to the conservative Mr Scalia. That person would need to be confirmed by the Senate. Republicans argued for a delay until the next president takes office in 11 months’ time, undoubtedly in the hope that he will be one of their own. See here and here.  A federal judge in California ordered Apple to help unlock the iPhone used by one of the Islamists who attacked an office party in San Bernardino last December, killing 14 people. The FBI wants Apple to disable the password feature. But the company is not complying, arguing that building the software to unlock the phone “would undeniably create a backdoor” to its encryption protocols and give the government “power to reach into anyone’s device to capture their data”. See article.  Wait and see Trucks carrying aid entered several besieged towns in Syria, including the rebel-held town of Muadhamiya, near the Syrian capital, Damascus. This came ahead of a planned “cessation of hostilities” in Syria’s war, thrashed out by America and Russia in Munich. No one expects the ceasefire to take hold. See here, here and here.  Members of opposition parties in the Democratic Republic of Congo went on strike to protest against efforts by Joseph Kabila, the president, to run for a third term in office. Crunch time Britain was on the brink of agreeing on new terms for its membership of the EU at a summit on February 18th and 19th, clearing the way for a referendum in June. David Cameron, the prime minister, was confident of securing a deal in Brussels, but Eurosceptics back home were poised to criticise whatever emerged from the talks. The European summit would also tackle the refugee crisis. Austria set a daily cap of 3,200 migrants whom it will allow to cross its borders. It also tightened border controls with countries in the Balkans that migrants cross to reach Austria. Many then travel on to Germany and Sweden. Turkey’s prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, cancelled a visit to Brussels after a bomb in Ankara, the Turkish capital, killed at least 28 people. The device was detonated close to the defence ministry as an army bus was passing by. Turkey blamed Kurdish rebels. Russia filed a lawsuit in a court in London to try to get Ukraine to repay a $3 billion bond. Ukraine says that Russia has refused to take part in negotiations over restructuring the debt. Meanwhile Ukraine’s prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, survived a vote of no confidence in parliament after the country’s president, Petro Poroshenko, called on him to step down, ostensibly over the slow pace of reforms. The economy minister recently resigned and blamed Mr Poroshenko for hindering reform. Obama to Havana Barack Obama is expected to visit Cuba in March. His visit will be the first by an American president to the island since Calvin Coolidge went in 1928. Since December 2014 the United States has eased its embargo on Cuba and the two countries have restored diplomatic relations. This week they signed an agreement that will allow scheduled flights between the two countries to resume after an interruption of more than 50 years. In Mexico 49 inmates at the Topo Chico prison in Monterrey, the capital of the state of Nuevo León, were killed in fighting between factions of the Zeta drug gang. The jail was overcrowded and understaffed, but in some cells investigators found portable saunas, air conditioners and other luxuries. Pope Francis paid a visit to Mexico. He ended his trip in Ciudad Juárez, near the United States border, where he highlighted the plight of migrants and visited a jail. Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s president, raised petrol prices—the first time they have gone up in 20 years—devalued one official exchange rate for the bolívar and said another would be allowed to float. Even after a 60-fold increase in its price, Venezuela’s petrol will still be the cheapest in the world. Meanwhile, Luis Salas left his job as Venezuela’s economic tsar after just six weeks. He had unconventional views, such as holding that inflation is caused by unscrupulous capitalists. See article.  Sea power Both America and Taiwan alleged that China has placed surface-to-air missiles on the South China Sea’s Woody Island, which is claimed also by Taiwan and Vietnam. If true it would heighten military tensions in the disputed sea, through which a third of world trade passes. China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, called the allegation an invention of the Western media. See article.  China decided to move more than 9,000 people to prevent electromagnetic interference with the world’s largest radio telescope, which will start to operate later this year in the south-western province of Guizhou. Chinese scientists involved in the project told the country’s state-owned news agency that the instrument would help in the search for intelligent life elsewhere in the universe. Britain said that the disappearance of a bookseller in Hong Kong, presumed to have been abducted by Chinese security agents, amounted to a “serious breach” of an agreement reached between China and Britain in 1984 on the handover of the colony to Chinese rule. The bookseller, Lee Bo, is a British citizen. Four of his colleagues are also believed to have been snatched while visiting Thailand and the Chinese mainland. China has confirmed it is detaining them.  In India a student leader, Kanhaiya Kumar, who was arrested after protesting in 2013 against the hanging of a Kashmiri militant, was charged with sedition under a colonial-era law. Academics, students and others staged demonstrations, saying the charges were unreasonable. A former university lecturer has also been arrested for sedition. Sindh became the first ever province in Pakistan, an Islamic republic, to give Hindus the right officially to register their marriages. The aim is to protect the country’s 3m Hindus. Women of that faith have been vulnerable to forced conversions and abductions, with widows left especially unprotected. In a surprise accord, Saudi Arabia and Russia said they would freeze oil production at January’s levels in an effort to boost prices, which fell to below $30 a barrel last month. It was the first pact between OPEC and non-OPEC oil producers for 15 years, but it is contingent upon other large suppliers agreeing to do the same. Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Venezuela signed up to the deal, but there were doubts that Iraq and Iran, which has only just returned to international oil markets after sanctions were lifted, would join in. Oil stockpiles are at record levels, and producers are still pumping out over 1m barrels of oil a day more than the world wants. See article.  Staying power After months of holding out the threat of moving its headquarters to Hong Kong, HSBC decided to remain in London following a review. The bank makes most of its profit in Asia, and like other British banks it is subject to a tax on its global balance-sheets. But London’s political stability, plus a recent easing of the regulatory burden, kept HSBC in Britain. Investors responded positively to the announcement by Crédit Agricole that it will simplify its corporate structure, which has hitherto been criticised for dragging down its market valuation. The French bank is to sell the 25% stake it holds in its regional lenders back to them, reduce its retail-banking business and focus on asset management and investment banking. Philippe Brassac, its chief executive, said the plan would end the “unbearable paradox” of lingering doubts about the bank’s structure, despite its sufficient capital. China’s exports fell by 11% in January (in dollar terms) compared with the same month last year; imports were down 19%. Both figures were much worse than had been expected and underscored worries about the extent of the slowdown in China. Performance review Japan’s economy contracted again in the fourth quarter of 2015, shrinking by an annualised 1.4%. It grew by just 0.4% for the whole year. The government blamed a warm winter for a sharp decline in consumption, but economists point to anaemic wage rises for the spiritless spending and investment. The central bank has embarked on a big programme of stimulus, recently introducing negative interest rates for the first time. Britain’s headline annual inflation rate rose slightly to 0.3%, still well below the Bank of England’s 2% target, which it now thinks won’t be reached until early 2018. Greece, meanwhile, slipped back into deflation, as consumer prices fell by 0.1% in January (on the European Union’s harmonised measure). Apple launched a $12 billion sale of bonds to help fund its share buy-back programme. Among the tranches of debt it is selling is its first seven-year “green” bond, the proceeds of which will go towards reducing the company’s “impact on climate change” and other environmental projects. Anglo American presented a restructuring plan. The mining company is to sell assets in coal and iron ore—the prices of which have slumped as demand in China has dropped—and concentrate on copper, diamonds and platinum. Its workforce will shrink from 130,000 to 50,000 (the bulk of the jobs will be transferred to the new owners of the assets). Last year the company suffered a $5.5 billion pre-tax loss and debt rose to $13 billion. The day before Anglo announced its strategy, Moody’s cut its credit-rating to “junk”. Fitch did the same the day after the announcement. Bombardier is to shed 7,000 jobs. The Canadian maker of planes and trains has struggled to find buyers for its CSeries passenger jets and has needed funding from the government in Quebec, where it is based. On the day it announced the job losses it said it had signed a “letter of intent” to build 45 aircraft for Air Canada, with options for an extra 30. See article. In one of the biggest leveraged buy-outs in recent years, Apollo, a private-equity firm, said it would take over ADT, which provides security and fire-safety systems to homes and small businesses, in a transaction valued at $15 billion. Until 2012 ADT was owned by Tyco, which recently announced that it is to merge with Johnson Controls in a $20 billion deal. A tender moment The demise of high-denomination banknotes drew ever closer. Larry Summers, a former secretary of the US Treasury, this week called for the $100 bill to be withdrawn from circulation. In Europe Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, told lawmakers there was a clear case for getting rid of the €500 ($560) note, colloquially known as “the Bin Laden” because of the proclivity of criminals and terror groups to use them.More KAL's cartoonsWORLD stockmarkets are in bear territory. Gold, a haven in times of turmoil, has had its best start to a year in more than three decades. The cost of insurance against bank default has surged. Talk of recession in America is rising, as is the implied probability that the Federal Reserve, which raised rates only in December, will be forced to take them back below zero. One fear above all stalks the markets: that the rich world’s weapon against economic weakness no longer works. Ever since the crisis of 2007-08, the task of stimulating demand has fallen to central bankers. The apogee of their power came in 2012, when Mario Draghi, boss of the European Central Bank (ECB), said he would do “whatever it takes” to save the euro. Bond markets rallied and the sense of crisis receded. But only temporarily. Despite central banks’ efforts, recoveries are still weak and inflation is low. Faith in monetary policy is wavering. As often as they inspire confidence, central bankers sow fear. Negative interest rates in Europe and Japan make investors worry about bank earnings, sending share prices lower. Quantitative easing (QE, the printing of money to buy bonds) has led to a build-up of emerging-market debt that is now threatening to unwind. For all the cheap money, the growth in bank credit has been dismal. Pay deals reflect expectations of endlessly low inflation, which favours that very outcome. Investors fret that the world economy is being drawn into another downturn, and that policymakers seeking to keep recession at bay have run out of ammunition. Bazooka boo-boo The good news is that more can be done to jolt economies from their low-growth, low-inflation torpor (see Briefing). Plenty of policies are left, and all can pack a punch. The bad news is that central banks will need help from governments. Until now, central bankers have had to do the heavy lifting because politicians have been shamefully reluctant to share the burden. At least some of them have failed to grasp the need to have fiscal and monetary policy operating in concert. Indeed, many governments actively worked against monetary stimulus by embracing austerity. The time has come for politicians to join the fight alongside central bankers. The most radical policy ideas fuse fiscal and monetary policy. One such option is to finance public spending (or tax cuts) directly by printing money—known as a “helicopter drop”. Unlike QE, a helicopter drop bypasses banks and financial markets, and puts freshly printed cash straight into people’s pockets. The sheer recklessness of this would, in theory, encourage people to spend the windfall, not save it. (A marked change in central banks’ inflation targets would also help: see Free exchange.) Another set of ideas seek to influence wage- and price-setting by using a government-mandated incomes policy to pull economies from the quicksand. The idea here is to generate across-the-board wage increases, perhaps by using tax incentives, to induce a wage-price spiral of the sort that, in the 1970s, policymakers struggled to escape. All this involves risks. A world of helicopter drops is anathema to many: monetary financing is prohibited by the treaties underpinning the euro, for example. Incomes policies are even more problematic, as they reduce flexibility and are hard to reverse. But if the rich world ends up stuck in deflation, the time will come to contemplate extreme action, particularly in the most benighted economies, such as Japan’s. Elsewhere, governments can make use of a less risky tool: fiscal policy. Too many countries with room to borrow more, notably Germany, have held back. Such Swabian frugality is deeply harmful. Borrowing has never been cheaper. Yields on more than $7 trillion of government bonds worldwide are now negative. Bond markets and ratings agencies will look more kindly on the increase in public debt if there are fresh and productive assets on the other side of the balance-sheet. Above all, such assets should involve infrastructure. The case for locking in long-term funding to finance a multi-year programme to rebuild and improve tatty public roads and buildings has never been more powerful. A fiscal boost would pack more of a punch if it was coupled with structural reforms that work with the grain of the stimulus. European banks’ balance-sheets still need strengthening and, so long as questions swirl about their health, the banks will not lend freely. Write-downs of bad debts are one option, but it might be better to overhaul the rules so that governments can insist that banks either raise capital or have equity forced on them by regulators. Deregulation is another priority—and no less potent for being familiar. The Council of Economic Advisors says that the share of America’s workforce covered by state-licensing laws has risen to 25%, from 5% in the 1950s. Much of this red tape is unnecessary. Zoning laws are a barrier to new infrastructure. Tax codes remain Byzantine and stuffed with carve-outs that shelter the income of the better-off, who tend to save more. It’s the politics, stupid The problem, then, is not that the world has run out of policy options. Politicians have known all along that they can make a difference, but they are weak and too quarrelsome to act. America’s political establishment is riven; Japan’s politicians are too timid to confront lobbies; and the euro area seems institutionally incapable of uniting around new policies. If politicians fail to act now, while they still have time, a full-blown crisis in markets will force action upon them. Although that would be a poor outcome, it would nevertheless be better than the alternative. The greatest worry is that falling markets and stagnant economies hand political power to the populists who have grown strong on the back of the crisis of 2007-08. Populists have their own solutions to economic hardship, which include protectionist tariffs, windfall taxes, nationalisation and any number of ruinous schemes. Behind the worry that central banks can no longer exert control is an even deeper fear. It is that liberal, centrist politicians are not up to the job. THAT China has lifted so many out of poverty and become so powerful so quickly is remarkable. No less remarkable is how America, the incumbent superpower, has mostly treated China’s rise less as a threat than an opportunity. However, in the South China Sea, through which about 30% of the world’s trade passes, China risks jeopardising this benign arrangement. Its behaviour there disdains international law, scares its neighbours and heightens the danger of conflict with some of them and with America itself. Recalling its own slogans about stability and peace, it should back off. The latest provocation is the apparent installation on Woody Island in the Paracel archipelago, south of Hainan, of two launch batteries for surface-to-air missiles. China has not clearly denied this dangerous military escalation, talking instead of its right to “limited and necessary self-defence facilities”. The Paracels are also claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan. China insists that virtually all the sea belongs to it, citing historical apocrypha. It has been building frenetically in the Spratly islands, to the south, creating artificial land on rocks and reefs also claimed by the Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam. The construction, like the missiles, flouts the spirit of a declaration China signed in 2002 with the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), in which the parties promised to “exercise selfrestraint” in the sea. China has also refused to accept the jurisdiction of a tribunal in The Hague which is adjudicating a case on its claims brought by the Philippines under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. If, as seems likely, the tribunal later this year finds in the Philippines’ favour on some counts, China will ignore it. This is not the global “responsible stakeholder” that America had hoped China would become. Two factors may have prompted China to deploy missiles. News of them came as Barack Obama was playing host at the Sunnylands ranch in California to an unprecedented summit of leaders from all ten ASEAN members, four of which dispute land features in the sea with China. The summit was intended in part to show America’s solidarity with them. China sees this as a ruse to embolden its neighbours to stand up to it, and so as part of a broader American strategy to contain it. Second, America late last year resumed “freedom of navigation” operations in the South China Sea, twice sending warships to sail through waters claimed by China. This seemed a belated attempt to show that, whoever owns the specks of land and rock in the sea, most of its waters under international law belong to no country and are open to navigation of all types. Regrettably America has muddied this message, by confirming that both operations were conducted as “innocent passage”, ie, under a provision of the Law of the Sea allowing even warships to sail unthreateningly through another country’s territorial waters. China seems to find the exercises provocative enough to try to deter America from further sorties—or perhaps they provide a useful pretext. The campaign season China may calculate that now is the time, in the final months of an American presidency it sees as weak and averse to confrontation, to create facts in the water that will give it an irreversible grip on the sea. So rather than yield to Chinese intimidation, America should continue to assert the freedom of navigation and overflight, and do so less ambiguously. Its friends in the region, habitually scared of upsetting China, should give it more full-throated support. It is in none of their interests to see the South China Sea, with its important shipping lanes, become a South China Lake.THE death of Antonin Scalia deprives America of a brilliant legal mind and a puckish wit (see our obituary). He poked fun not only at lawyers arguing before him, but also at himself. Asked for the secret of his long marriage, the father of nine quipped how his wife had made it clear “that if we split up, I would get the children.” The debate about how to replace Justice Scalia, by contrast, looks set to be crass, intellectually dishonest and not even slightly amusing. The departure of a Supreme Court justice is always momentous; Mr Scalia’s is doubly so. He was the court’s conservative heavyweight, whose eloquence and logic inspired his allies and forced his opponents to sharpen their arguments. His absence leaves the court balanced between its conservative and liberal wings. His replacement will tilt it one way or the other, perhaps for many years. And this is election season. Small wonder that a power struggle has erupted over the process of picking a new justice (see article). Barack Obama has promised to nominate a successor soon. That person would need to be confirmed by the Senate, but Mitch McConnell, leader of the Republican majority, says that no one should be appointed until after the inauguration of the next president in January 2017. He argues that voters should have their say—meaning that he hopes there will be a Republican president. It is a nakedly partisan and irresponsible argument. Following it would leave the court deadlocked for a whole year, at a time when many urgent cases are pending. It would also set a terrible precedent: if the Senate can refuse to hear a nominee almost a year before a president’s term is up, then why not two years before? Or longer? Mr McConnell’s party is in the grip of a fever, whose symptoms include Donald Trump, which attacks any Republicans who play by the old rules. This is the opposite of conservatism, which holds that long-established customs and institutions are likely to be superior to anything that could be drawn up from scratch. Mr McConnell would no doubt reply that he is defending America from a lawless president, who rides roughshod over the legislature by issuing executive orders. Republicans dispute, among other things, the legality of two of the president’s proudest recent achievements: stays to the deportation of illegal immigrants and the regulation of power stations to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions. Both actions would doubtless be upheld if Mr Obama were allowed to put whomever he liked in Mr Scalia’s vacant seat. But even if the Republicans are right about these cases, that would still not justify the Senate refusing to consider any nominee at all. The text of the constitution is admirably clear. The president has the power to nominate federal judges, with the “advice and consent” of the Senate. In other words, Mr Obama should pick a candidate, the Senate should grill him and, if it dislikes what it finds, it can demand that someone else be put forward, until the vacancy is filled. If Mr Obama is wise, he will propose someone sufficiently moderate for at least some Republicans to back his choice. If a qualified jurist appears reasonable during televised hearings and Republicans reject him willy nilly, voters can punish them for it in November. A court with too much power So much for the process. What about the court itself? You do not have to take Mr Scalia’s “originalist” view of the constitution to be troubled by the power wielded by the modern court. Its influence has grown partly because judges have substituted their own policy preferences for the written law, but more often because legislators have failed to do their job. Sometimes they write incomprehensible laws which the courts must unscramble (eg, Obamacare). Sometimes they hand hard questions over to judges because they would rather not take responsibility for resolving them (eg, gay marriage). If judges are to have such power, they should not enjoy life tenure. Rather, they should be appointed for fixed terms, staggered so that a single president cannot pack the court. Under today’s rules, good nominees are routinely passed over if they are over 60, incumbents never retire while a president they oppose is in office and confirmation battles are needlessly ideological. Alas, term limits require a constitutional amendment, which will not happen. So this fight over Mr Scalia’s replacement will only make the next one more brutal.
