IN A war as ugly as the one in Syria, several bleak lessons stand out: the longer it goes on, the bloodier it gets, the more countries are sucked into the vortex and the more unpalatable become the options to stop, or at least contain, the fighting. But perhaps the biggest lesson is how America’s absence creates a vacuum that is filled by dangerous forces: jihadists, Shia militias and now an emboldened Russia. Syria is a nasty complex of wars within a war: an uprising against dictatorship; a sectarian battle between Sunnis and Alawites (and their Shia allies); an internecine struggle among Sunni Arabs; a Kurdish quest for a homeland; a regional proxy war pitting Saudi Arabia and Turkey against Iran; and a geopolitical contest between a timid America and a resurgent Russia. Into this blood-soaked mess, Vladimir Putin has thrust himself on the side of Bashar al-Assad and the Shia axis. His air power has transformed the battlefield. Pro-Assad forces have cut off a vital corridor that resupplied rebel-held parts of Aleppo from Turkey. Mr Assad is on the point of encircling what was once Syria’s biggest city. Refugees are again pressing on Turkey’s borders, but many will stay put. In the diplomatic dance over ceasefires, humanitarian relief and a political settlement, Russia is now setting the terms, much as America did after intervening in the Balkan wars of the 1990s. Barack Obama’s policy in Syria—to wish that Mr Assad would go, without willing the means to get him out—has been wretched. Mr Assad, it seems, will outlast Mr Obama. But the war will not end. Indeed, it has taken a turn for the worse. Turkey is being sucked deeper into the maelstrom. It has started systematically shelling Syrian Kurds. It bundles them together with the Turkish Kurds, who have rashly resumed their decades-old insurgency inside Turkey. Yet the Kurds have been America’s best allies against the “caliphate” of Islamic State (IS). Recently they have tilted towards Russia and Mr Assad, helping sever the corridor to Aleppo in an attempt to merge the two Kurdish enclaves along the border with Turkey. In support of Turkey, Saudi Arabia has deployed military aircraft. It has announced war games at home involving Sunni partners such as Egypt, Morocco and Pakistan. The Saudis have offered to send special forces into Syria with American ones, ostensibly to fight IS. Diplomats talk of a return to “Charlie Wilson’s War”, the operation by America, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan to give Stinger missiles to Afghan groups fighting Soviet forces in the 1980s. Would Saudi Arabia now give Sunni groups anti-aircraft weapons to neutralise Russian air power? Most alarming is the risk of war between Turkey and Russia. In November Turkey shot down a Russian jet; Russia wants revenge and an opportunity to split the irascible Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, from his NATO allies. It has conducted “snap exercises” in southern Russia (see article). So Syria poses growing dangers to the West: that anti-aircraft missiles will proliferate, allowing jihadists to use them on Western planes; that countries such as Lebanon and Jordan will falter; that another flood of refugees will destabilise the European Union; that NATO could stumble into a war with Russia; that Mr Putin will be spurred to challenge the West elsewhere; and that he will inspire autocrats everywhere. Reaping the whirlwind The West should urge restraint on the Turks and Saudis: the risks of war with Russia and of jihadist blowback are too high. America should try to persuade its Turkish and Kurdish friends to accommodate rather than fight each other. For its wishes to carry weight, though, America must do more in Syria. If Mr Assad and Russia succeed in turning the war into a choice between the regime and the worst jihadists, it would be a disaster. Most Syrians are Sunni and many of them will never be reconciled to Mr Assad. If mainstream groups are crushed, they will be driven either into Europe or into the arms of the jihadists. Non-jihadist Sunnis therefore need support. The tragedy of Mr Obama’s feebleness is that actions that were once feasible—establishing a no-fly zone or creating safe areas—now carry the risk of a clash with Russia. Undeclared humanitarian zones may still be possible. Mr Obama’s best response would be to take his own policy seriously: create a moderate force to push back the caliphate in eastern Syria. This would involve Sunni states; it would give moderate rebels a hinterland from which to establish the nucleus of an alternative government under existing American air cover; and it would call Russia’s bluff about fighting the jihadists. The West will have to press Russia, starting with the renewal of EU sanctions this summer. Mr Putin has made canny use of force. The West’s response need not be limited to Syria.EVERY so often, organisations become bywords for something else. Apple means elegance, Berkshire Hathaway loyalty and BlackBerry decline. Alas, FIFA, the governing body of world football, spells corruption. Sprucing up this most tarnished of brands will take more than a bit of tinkering with the way FIFA is run. On February 26th FIFA’s member associations will hold a secret ballot—what else?—in Zurich to choose a new president who will replace Sepp Blatter. The omens are not good. Mr Blatter bequeathed his successor an organisation in crisis. His fifth term was cut short after the indictment last year of several of the game’s biggest-wigs for alleged money-laundering. He has since been suspended from football for eight years for making an undocumented SFr2m ($2.1m) payment to Michel Platini, then head of Europe’s football body. (Mr Platini, once a favourite to succeed Mr Blatter, has also been suspended from the game; both men deny wrongdoing.) The five candidates left to vie for the top job talk warmly of the need for term limits and better disclosure. But a radical reform would start with an idea put forward by Stefan Szymanski, a sports economist, among others—turning FIFA into a public company. For good measure, the new, cleaner FIFA would be listed in New York. A public listing would have several benefits. The first is that the level of transparency would shoot up. Scandals afflict listed firms too, but one thing you do not hear from executives at public companies is complaints about the absence of scrutiny. For FIFA to be under the referee’s beady eye would be precisely the point. According to its annual report, an organisation with just 474 employees spent an impressive $115m on personnel expenses in 2014. A listing would require FIFA to break out how much its executives get. They might expect to face questions from shareholders about the $35m they spent on meetings expenses that year, too. Opening FIFA to America’s justice system would also have a salutary effect. The reach of the Department of Justice and the FBI is already long: they were behind indictments in 2015 that eventually dethroned Mr Blatter. But a listing in America would bring some of the world’s most enthusiastic law-enforcers to the organisation’s door. In particular, it would make FIFA subject to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Given the allegations that still swirl around the award of the 2018 and 2022 World Cups to Russia and Qatar, seeking a home with a punitive anti-bribery regime would send a clear statement. Becoming a public company would also formalise and sharpen FIFA’s incentives to make as much money as it can through legitimate means. Of the $5.7 billion in revenue that FIFA pulled in between 2011 and 2014, the biggest chunk was from the sale of television rights for the 2014 tournament in Brazil. More revenue—from the sale of broadcasting, marketing and licensing rights to World Cups—and tighter cost control ought to be enough both to keep shareholders happy and also to raise money to foster grassroots initiatives worldwide. The profit motive would also encourage faster development of the women’s World Cup. Fantasy football The beautiful game should not be handed to Wall Street without safeguards. To protect FIFA’s mission to develop football, a portion of revenues would have to be ring-fenced for distribution to its member associations, perhaps by a separate charitable arm (which would also be responsible for the rules of the game). To ensure that some private-equity baron doesn’t take FIFA over and load it up with debt, this charitable arm would need to retain majority voting rights over the listed firm. That would still leave plenty of scope for shenanigans as money sloshed between FIFA and football’s member associations. But it would also ensure that FIFA received harsher scrutiny. Sadly, not one of the candidates vying to take over from Mr Blatter is likely to countenance a listing in New York. But when you judge their promises to restore FIFA’s integrity, that should be the yardstick.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Coping with refugees Together with Sweden and Germany, Austria is shouldering most of the burden in Europe’s refugee crisis (“How to manage the migrant crisis”, February 6th). There are 8.5m people living in Austria. Last year alone, 90,000 refugees came here. This year Austria has established a ceiling of 37,500 refugees. As responsible politicians we are tasked with keeping our social system alive. This system will be put at risk if we do not establish parameters. In 2016 we will probably spend over €1 billion ($1.1 billion) on refugees. Austria has a long tradition of humanitarian assistance. Our country was exemplary in its willingness to help after the second world war and has offered protection to those who were forced to flee wars and political persecution. In 1956, in the wake of the uprising in Hungary, 180,000 people found shelter in our country. In the course of the Prague Spring in 1968, we took in 162,000 refugees. In 1992, 90,000 people from the former Yugoslavia sought security in Austria. The current refugee situation however, presents this republic with the most difficult task it has had to cope with. REINHOLD LOPATKA In Denmark most migrants from the Middle East and Africa are unemployed and live in parallel communities that are predominantly Muslim. Many would be willing to work for less than the minimum wage, but this is not acceptable to the powerful cartel of Danish employers and unions. Economists have calculated that migrants make a negative contribution of DKr11 billion ($1.6 billion) a year. To make the migrant contribution neutral, we would have to create 46,000 jobs by 2020. This is completely unrealistic given the Danish tradition of putting migrants on the dole. ANDRÉ ROSSMANN The Economist has persistently championed Angela Merkel’s position. But it is her unilateral action of accepting 1m refugees in Germany without consulting her EU neighbours, her own voters, or her own governing coalition, that has prompted this negative reaction. The enormous sums of money now being promised to Turkey should have been spent long ago in building border controls and screening systems in Greece and Italy. “The situation today is a mess”, you argue. It is worse than that; it has discredited EU ideals of co-operation, and strengthened those who say it is an undemocratic, out-of-touch bureaucracy, incapable of governing efficiently in the interests of its citizens. IAN GLOVER-JAMES * I agree that Europe “needs to get much better at distinguishing refugees with a claim for international protection from migrants fleeing hardship”. Making this distinction is the key to crafting a European asylum policy with broad popular support. In public discourse and policymaking the categories of refugees and economic migrants are too often conflated. Even your own article alternates between “refugees”, “asylum-seekers”, “migrants”, “illegal migrants” and “immigrants”. The result is that where sympathy for the plight of real refugees is warranted, in many countries people instead see an unceasing flow of illegal migrants and fear the potential consequences.  This is unnecessary and morally undesirable. People who have gone through hardship to rescue themselves and their children ought to be able to count on getting the support that they are entitled to. Full stop. How Europe deals with economic migrants is an altogether different matter. You’ve got to be in it to win it Fifteen hundred years of history can tell us what Britain’s European policy ought to be (“The accidental Europhile”, February 6th). The United Kingdom should stay in the EU and share in the power of 500m people. Britain should lead a beautiful revolution (to quote Karl Marx in a good mood) to make the EU become what it could be. PHILIP ALLOTT Storing brains We read your piece on cryogenically storing organs with interest (“Wait not in vain”, February 6th), but thought it contradictory to say that organ banking is within reach whereas preserving a brain is “fantasy”. There is a growing body of evidence that today’s technology may preserve a brain, though without future technology it cannot yet be revived. Importantly, the remaining challenges of brain preservation such as ice and cryoprotectant control are the same as for cryobanking other organs. There has always been an initial bias against unconventional concepts. In vitro fertilisation, heavier-than-air flight and interplanetary space travel were all thought impossible. Organ transplantation itself was at first perceived as something out of “Frankenstein”. We should not arbitrarily curb the progress in preserving organs. Scientific inquiry should be critical while also receptive and non-judgmental. PROFESSOR RAMON RISCO Sanders go marching in * You wrote that New Hampshire “is crammed with white lefties” (“Trumped and Berned”, February 13th). This is a gross exaggeration. I live in a small town, populated by a large number of affluent professional people, in the otherwise mostly redneck northern county of the state. Even in my “liberal” town, where Democrats outnumber Republicans by two to one (statewide the ratio is closer to one to one), Sanders received only 65% of the Democratic vote and Clinton 35%. That doesn’t appear to me “crammed” with liberals, although I am certainly a “leftie” myself. Although Sanders’ proposals are impractical, they point in the direction the country must go in order to live up to its ideals. Nothing more than feelings “A world of hurt” (February 6th) described how easily the rulers of China takes offence. But this is not only the case in diplomacy; the Chinese people are oversensitive, too. Decades of propaganda have instilled an impervious sense of nationalism. Many still believe almost everything the party says, especially when it comes to history, sovereignty, human rights, etc. The “hurt feelings” in response to actions by America and Japan may be a government invention, but the people have internalised those same feelings. JIM JIANG Always waiting for next year Even the most casual American-football fan would find it amusing to describe the Cleveland Browns as “a successful team” (“If the game goes against you”, February 6th). The Browns haven’t advanced to the playoffs since 2002. If the NFL had a European-style relegation system, they would have been banished to the lower divisions long ago. CHAD PANKRATZ The Browns play in a stadium known as the Factory of Sadness. Their struggles are so mighty that their entire history has been summed up in just three words: God hates Cleveland. Your article on its owners’ woes adds a sardonic log to the epic dumpster fire of a team whose home city’s biggest river once caught fire from toxic waste. Cleveland is the only city that we native Detroiters can legitimately pity. JULIAN SWEARENGIN Political millennials Your leader on young people (“Young, gifted and held back”, January 23rd) laid out the difficulties we face today. But by calling on the young to vote because “it is not enough for the young to sign online petitions” you fall into the trap of preaching to “apathetic” youth. The young have never been so politically engaged. They boycott products, support referendums on issues they care about and, yes, they are very active online. The reason they don’t vote is a lack of trust in politics, which they see as unresponsive. Only 0.5% of MPs among Europe’s parliaments are under 30. For us, the political system is outdated. We want a more participative form of democracy. JOHANNA NYMAN I am reminded of a greetings card our daughter once sent to us, which read “Be nice to your kids—they choose your nursing home”. RICHARD SLADDEN *Letters appear online only AT THE start of most years in the past decade, the list of worries about the world economy has seemed longer than that of reasons for hope. The first few weeks of 2016 have upheld this new tradition. Many emerging markets are wrestling with excessive debts, slow growth, plunging currencies and rising inflation. China, the world’s second-largest economy, is a source of a peculiarly intractable anxiety. If its growth falters, it stokes worries about the prospects for other emerging markets; if activity holds up, though, concerns shift to the ever-rising debt that makes such feats possible, but not necessarily sustainable. The euro area’s troubles are no longer acute; but a chronic condition with an uncertain prognosis is a hard thing from which to take much cheer. The one big hope has tended to be the American economy. Some indicators there remain robust. The housing market shows few signs of weakness. New jobs are still being added. But despite this, signs of impending recession are now piling up. Economic growth seems to have stalled in the final quarter of 2015. Corporate profits are falling. Stock levels are above normal. Lending standards on bank loans to big firms have tightened, according to the Federal Reserve. A closely watched index from the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) shows that activity in manufacturing fell for the fourth consecutive month in January (see article). The malaise is not confined to factories: the ISM non-manufacturing index is at its lowest for almost two years. The growing anxiety is mirrored in financial markets. Stockmarket indexes have fallen, dragged down in particular by bank stocks, which have lost 16% of their value (in America) since the start of the year. America’s economy is not strong enough to buoy the world economy up; it may not even be strong enough to keep itself afloat. Pessimism among investors reflects not just the indicators pointing towards recession. There is a deeper concern that, if or when that recession comes, policymakers will have very few options for dealing with it. Short-term interest rates are close to zero in most of the rich world. The scope for adding further pep through quantitative easing, (QE, the purchase of government bonds using central-bank money) is limited. Long-term interest rates are already low; driving them lower with another round of QE is unlikely to invigorate aggregate demand much more. Tax cuts or increases in public spending could still be effective in fighting recession. But investors worry that there is little scope or appetite for financing a fiscal stimulus with yet more debt. Public debt in America rose from 64% of GDP in 2008 to 104% by 2015; in the euro area, it rose from 66% to 93%; in Japan, from 176% to 237%. If policymakers appear defenceless in the face of a fresh threat to the world economy, it is in part because they have so little to show for their past efforts. The balance-sheets of the rich world’s main central banks have been pumped up to between 20% and 25% of GDP by the successive bouts of QE with which they have injected money into their economies (see chart 1). The Bank of Japan’s assets are a whopping 77% of GDP. Yet inflation has been persistently below the 2% goal that central banks aim for. In America, Britain and Japan, unemployment has fallen close to pre-crisis levels. But the productivity of those in work has grown at a dismal rate, meaning overall GDP growth has been sluggish. That limits the scope for increases in real wages and in the tax receipts needed to service government debt. It is tempting to put this disappointing return down to the untested policy instruments wielded by central banks which played so prominent a role in the response to the previous recession. But this prominence, as Mohamed El-Erian, an economist, argues in his new book, “The Only Game in Town”, was forced upon them by inaction elsewhere. “This was not a power grab,” Mr El-Erian writes; central banks had to buy time until the political system got its act together—which by and large it didn’t. Far too little effort went into economic policies to work with the grain of monetary easing, and thus to amplify its effects. Such policies would require governments to make decisions that they would rather duck, either with an eye to reforming the structure of the economy—and thus removing some entrenched privileges—or to increasing deficit spending. If that remains the case, central bankers will have to reach yet further up their sleeves for radical new tricks with which to respond to the recession to come. But even if they do so, they will still require additional help—some of which, in a world of low interest rates, governments could more easily afford to offer. And if the problem runs deeper than a single recession—if, as Larry Summers, a Harvard economist, and others fear, rich nations are condemned to a long period of weak growth because of a persistent shortfall in demand—the need for bold new policies will become even greater. Accentuate the negative The menu of policy options comes in two parts. The first covers efforts to ensure that central-bank actions give their economies a bigger jolt. Second come well-targeted and flexible fiscal measures. Carefully chosen structural reforms can both complement such stimuli in the short term and sustain their good effects in the longer term by helping the recovery sustain itself. All these measures can be given more oomph if they are co-ordinated with similar efforts in other countries. Start with monetary policy. The scope for asset purchases by central banks is, in theory, unlimited. In a crisis such as that of 2008 the Federal Reserve can buy commercial paper issued by banks and companies or mortgage-backed securities. But it, or any central bank, could also buy an even broader range of assets, including high-yield bonds or stocks or even buildings, should financial markets go into free fall. Textbooks will tell you that, because they create new money, such purchases will eventually give central banks the inflation rates they want. But the experience of QE since 2008 suggests that this is too slow a road to reflation to justify the way that it distorts asset prices and upsets currency markets. Critics of QE argue that its main effect has been to boost shares and to flood emerging markets with cheap money, driving a debt cycle the downward leg of which is now hurting rich-world economies. Perhaps other unconventional monetary policies might work better. Last month Japan’s central bank joined its peers in Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark and the euro area by setting a negative interest rate—in Japan’s case, levying a 0.1% charge on a portion of the reserves that commercial banks deposit with it. In Europe, where the lowest deposit rate set by central banks acts as a floor for interest rates in money markets, and thus for rates on loans more generally, the benchmark for borrowing rates has never been so low. In Germany government-bond yields have turned negative for terms of up to eight years (see chart 2). Yet even if the boundary for interest rates is not zero, as people once tended to assume, it is not all that much less than zero. If interest rates were to go deep into negative terrain, depositors would switch to cash, which pays no interest but doesn’t charge any either. And negative rates are not good for banks; deposit rates cannot be pushed down as hard as lending rates for fear that small savers might switch to cash, an effect which is squeezing bank profits in Europe. Such a squeeze hurts the banks’ ability to rebuild the capital buffers that make them safe. Since the existence of cash is a limit on how low interest rates can go, Andy Haldane, the chief economist of the Bank of England, and Ken Rogoff of Harvard University have proposed abolishing it altogether. But even if such radicalism were to prove feasible in a few countries, its effects might be limited. Savers would find alternative stores of value, such as precious metals or foreign banknotes, or pass on the cost of having money in the bank to others by making payments early. One reason central-bank policy has been less effective than the bankers would like is that low interest rates have not led to more borrowing and spending. Credit growth outside America has been feeble (see chart 3). The central banks have tried to deal with this. The Bank of England’s funding for lending scheme of 2012 made the provision of cheap central-bank financing conditional on banks writing more loans to companies and householders. The European Central Bank (ECB) has come up with similar wheezes to try to induce banks to lend more freely. But their attempts have seen little success. Bigging up the banks As long as banks in the euro area face worries about their strength, they will be constrained in how much they can lend, no matter how cheap central-bank money is. Their record of raising fresh equity is worse than that of their counterparts in America and their profitability poorer, too. Despite this, capital has been allowed to leak from banks, notes Hyun Song Shin, head of research at the Bank for International Settlements, a clearing house for central banks. Most European banks still pay some dividends and have not cut costs enough. This combination means that they struggle to build up more capital on their own. American banks are performing better because in 2009 they were required either to raise capital for themselves or to have it forced upon them by government—in which case it would come with restrictions such as bonus caps for senior executives. This had a striking effect (see chart 4). Luigi Zingales, of the Chicago Booth School of Business, advocates a similar approach for the euro area. The European Stability Mechanism, an emergency euro-area fund, could be used to raise the money; the ECB could act as referee. An alternative is to free capital by taking bad loans off the banks’ books, or by forcing banks to write their value down. But that would be messier, slower and—if governments overpaid for the bad loans—fall foul of European Union rules on state aid. Healthier banks would be better able to supply loans; lower interest rates would make punters more willing to take them out. It is the essence of the current quandary that nominal interest rates can’t go much lower than they already are. But real rates could fall: all it takes is for borrowers to be persuaded that future inflation will be higher than they currently expect. Unfortunately, gauges of such expectations derived from bond prices—admittedly imperfect measures—are falling, not rising. The past two years have seen those expectations slump from 2.2% to 1.3% in America. One way to get them back up might be to set a higher inflation target. But when inflation sits so persistently below today’s targets, persuading people that higher targets would produce higher rates will require action, not just words. One way to raise expectations of inflation and boost aggregate demand is for a central bank and its finance ministry to collude in printing money to pay for public spending (or tax cuts). Such shenanigans are not possible in the euro zone, where the ECB is forbidden by treaty from buying government bonds directly. Elsewhere they might work as follows: the government announces a tax rebate and issues bonds to finance it, but instead of selling them to private investors swaps them for a deposit with the central bank. The central bank proceeds to cancel the bonds, and the government withdraws the money it has on deposit and gives it to citizens. “Helicopter money” of this sort—named in honour of a parable told by Milton Friedman, a famous economist—is as close as you can get to raining cash from a clear blue sky like manna from heaven, untouched by banks and financial markets. Such largesse is, in effect, fiscal policy financed by money instead of bonds. It is conceivable that a bond-financed fiscal tax cut might in fact be cheaper to finance: although cash has a zero yield, medium-term bonds in Japan and in much of Europe have negative yields. But the unaccustomed drama—indeed, the apparent recklessness—of helicopter money could increase the expected inflation rate, encouraging taxpayers to spend rather than save. It is not something to rush into, or to try prophylactically; but in the midst of a global financial crisis, or a deep recession, it would have much to recommend it. If it were co-ordinated by a group of rich countries, all the better. A related idea is to cancel a portion of the sovereign bonds purchased by central banks, ostensibly cutting public debt at a stroke. It would have the drawback, as would helicopter money, of leaving the central bank technically bankrupt, since its liabilities (money) would exceed its assets (bonds). But since most central banks are backed by national treasuries, this ought not to matter much. A bigger worry is that it is hard to know in advance what effect monetisation would have. Bond markets could panic about an inflationary surge, driving yields through the roof. Or they might just shrug the whole thing off. After all, the central bank could issue fresh bonds to soak up the excess money if things eventually got out of hand. Not the only game in town In places stuck in deflationary quicksand it may be necessary to be more radical still. Olivier Blanchard and Adam Posen of the Peterson Institute for International Economics have argued that Japan would benefit from an incomes policy. Under their proposal the state would mandate an across-the-board 5-10% increase in salaries in order to jump-start a spiral in which high wages drive up prices that drive up wages, thus soon leaving deflation behind. Such a radical idea would meet stiff opposition. The Bank of Japan would have to allow for a temporarily higher inflation target. Bondholders would be very unhappy. But as Mr Blanchard and Mr Posen point out, years of deflation have enriched Japanese bondholders at the expense of the country’s taxpayers. Putting the boot on the other foot for a while does not seem entirely unreasonable. In more open economies like America’s, where companies face more overseas competition and bondholders are more likely to turn to other markets, the obstacles would be harder to surmount—supposing that the idea of the government raising wages could be stomached in the first place. Those with memories of the dismal failure of incomes policies in the 1970s (aimed then at capping, rather than spurring, inflation) will be aghast that the idea might be considered at all. For one thing, employers back then often found ways to escape the mandate. Advocates argue that companies would be encouraged to meet the costs of the pay rises through higher prices—indeed that is the whole point. In the 1970s low real interest rates undermined the income policies’ wage caps; today monetary policy and incomes policy would be pushing in the same direction. The alternative to having treasuries and central banks working in ever more complex cahoots, or having governments fix pay rises, is to turn to the second part of the menu and deal with the shortfall in demand with straightforward fiscal policy. Increasing spending or cutting taxation is likely to be more effective than shaving interest rates a hair’s-breadth more or having central banks buy more bonds. Loosening fiscal policy has drawbacks, though, both political and economic. Fiscal policy is by its nature rather less fleet-footed than monetary policy: in normal times interest rates can be raised or lowered according to the ups and downs of the business cycle. Tax policy is a lot less flexible, but it can still be responsive, with changes introduced and reversed as needed. Spending plans are less easily changed. Once current spending on things like wages and pensions goes up, it is hard to cut; capital spending on public infrastructure requires planning, so is difficult to mobilise quickly. Tax cuts are thus the better tool for boosting demand quickly. But they need to be carefully designed to maximise their impact. Income-tax cuts or increases in tax credits should be skewed towards those (typically the low-paid) who are more likely to spend them. In general, taxes should not overly influence decisions on what to buy or produce; better rely on the signals that the market provides. But in a recession, this principle might be suspended. It is discretionary spending that recessions hit hardest. So a temporary cut in the taxes on durable goods—cars, kitchens, televisions, and so on—can be expected to have greater impact on overall spending than a smaller cut in taxes on all goods, including necessities such as clothing and utilities. At the same time as they tweak tax rates to stimulate the economy, governments would be well advised to overhaul the whole basis on which they are set. An ideal tax system has three aspects: it should be simple; it should be progressive, placing a greater burden on the rich; and it should not overly influence choices about how hard to work, what to produce or what to consume. Few rich-country tax codes match up to this ideal. Getting them closer to it would help both boost economic growth and government finances in the long run. All the bridges rusting There are useful ways to increase current spending in a recession. Some countries, such as Denmark and Australia, run state-funded schemes to retrain those who have lost jobs and match them with available vacancies. Others might usefully follow their lead: “active labour-market policies” of this kind are all the more urgent in Europe, because of the influx of refugees from Syria. But the most effective fiscal boost comes from capital spending on new infrastructure or on the upkeep of that which is already there. Unlike tax cuts, which may be saved or spent on imports and thus have less effect on GDP, money sunk into roads, schools, hospitals and the like stays put. And capital spending induces complementary spending elsewhere in the economy more than any other intervention. Despite the benefits of spending on public infrastructure, governments find it notoriously hard to deploy as an effective stimulus. For one thing, when public finances are under pressure during a recession the reflex response is to cut capital spending. For another, such cuts are sometimes quite good ideas: a lot of infrastructure spending is indeed wasteful. China has pristine highways that few wish to drive on. Alaska has bridges to nowhere. Governments tend to choose projects that make a political splash but have little underlying logic. That is in part why decades of capital spending in Japan have not done more to boost the economy. Yet there is a painful need for more and better public infrastructure in a lot of countries, especially America. Mr Summers often gives the example of John F. Kennedy Airport, a rundown gateway to New York where the air-traffic control system is from another era. Last year a study by Trip, a transport think-tank, found that the potholed roads in 25 American cities were pushing up citizens’ annual car-maintenance costs by more than $700 per vehicle. In 2013 a study by the American Society of Civil Engineers found that a third of America’s main roads were in a poor or mediocre state, and that one in nine of its bridges was not structurally sound. In 2010 Barack Obama tried to move things along. He proposed a public infrastructure bank, to be staffed by technocrats who would appraise the costs and benefits of capital projects and put some money behind the ones they approved. The proposal failed to clear the Senate, which at the same time blocked a scheme to spend $50 billion on improvements to roads, railways and airports. In principle a public-infrastructure bank has had bi-partisan support for decades. Hillary Clinton is only the latest of many politicians to back the idea. But all previous plans have foundered amid partisan squabbling. An Australian initiative that combines infrastructure spending with privatisation shows promise. In 2013 New South Wales sold the ports of Botany and Kembla for A$5 billion ($5.3 billion), a handsome multiple of their earnings. The proceeds went to a state fund for reinvestment in other infrastructure. This model of “social privatisation” is a template for others to copy, says Brett Himbury, the boss of IFM, a big fund that invests in infrastructure assets on behalf of pension funds. The cash-strapped states that own airports in America might usefully follow it to fund much-needed road repair. In private hands the condition of the airports would improve, too. Make no small plans Mr Himbury also has ideas on how to organise greenfield infrastructure projects. Involving private-sector partners in public infrastructure projects has often proved something of a sham. Rather than bringing hard-nosed business sense into the game, it can often both hide and escalate a scheme’s true cost: think of the debacle of the upgrades to the London tube. But pension funds around the world are crying out for long-lived assets that will generate the inflation-linked income they have promised to those who retire. The specialist funds that manage these assets have expertise in appraising projects: they will often, for instance, take a more sober view than government officials on forecasts of traffic on a proposed toll road. Mr Himbury suggests bringing these sources of patient capital in at the outset of a project to advise on its merits and to exert cost discipline on construction firms. The chosen builders should be rewarded for getting things right but should have deep enough pockets to pay the penalties when projects overrun. The private-capital partners in a project should agree on a range of returns and then share any extra profits or losses with government. The precise choice of policies, and the degree of radicalism, will vary from country to country and according to the nature of the threat. A garden-variety recession in which output falls as existing stocks are run down would require a less drastic response than a bigger systemic shock, such as a Chinese hard landing. It would be wise for governments to work harder on improving public infrastructure or reforming taxes even in less uncertain times. But the growing constraints on monetary policy mean that fiscal fixes and structural reforms that work with the grain of stimulus policies are more urgent than ever. Big and long-running programmes of public capital spending would give private firms greater confidence about future demand and make a sustained recovery more likely. Simpler tax codes would provide a sounder basis for the sort of shifts in tax rates that will be needed in future to counter the business cycle. Central banks have done their bit. Although more work from them will be vital, it is now time for governments to be bolder. WHEN Ronald Reagan tapped Antonin Scalia to fill a vacant seat on the Supreme Court in 1986, America’s highest tribunal was a very different place. So was the Senate. Mr Scalia had solidly conservative credentials as a judge on the US Appeals Court for the District of Columbia, and made no bones about his opposition to busing, affirmative action and abortion choice, among other liberal priorities. Yet the Senate did something no one could imagine happening in today’s hyper-partisan climate: in a matter of weeks, it confirmed him by a vote of 98-0. Mr Scalia’s successor will not have such a quick and easy vetting. And she or he will join a court that has never been so neatly sorted along ideological lines, with the wrinkle of the Reagan-appointed Anthony Kennedy, who joins the four liberal justices in gay-rights decisions and occasionally in cases involving racial justice. All the justices, in nearly all the biggest cases, vote in line with the party of the presidents who nominated them. All the justices resist the charge that they are, in the words of one liberal justice, Stephen Breyer, “nine junior varsity politicians”. Earlier this month, Chief Justice John Roberts lamented how badly the court is misunderstood. The justices “don’t work as Republicans or Democrats”, he insisted. “We often have no policy view on the matter at all.” The public could be forgiven for thinking otherwise, given recent party-line votes on campaign-finance reform, voting rights, same-sex marriage and environmental regulation. Thirty years ago the court was less predictable. It was also, perhaps as a result, more popular: last September Americans’ disapproval of the court reached a new high of 50%. When Mr Scalia joined the bench in 1986, only 10% of Americans told Gallup they had “very little confidence” in the institution; today, that figure stands at 23% and is bound to keep rising with the particularly bloody confirmation battle now in view. Mr Scalia’s “originalism”, which aims to strip politics out of judging, may bear part of the blame for the court’s decline in public estimation. Originalists strive to interpret the constitution in the light of how it was understood when it was written. They decry the opposing “living constitution” approach as shot through with bias. Such a view, Mr Scalia wrote two years into his tenure as a justice, is incompatible “with the very principle that legitimises judicial review”. A judge who looks at the constitution this way is bound to find his own values lurking there. “It is very difficult for a person to discern a difference”, Mr Scalia wrote, “between those political values that he personally thinks most important, and those political values that are ‘fundamental to our society’.” In his magisterial, biting dissents, Mr Scalia echoed this theme time and again. In 1992 he dissented from a ruling that prayer has no place in public-school graduation ceremonies. The majority opinion was “conspicuously bereft of any reference to history”, he wrote, and undertook a “psycho-journey” to reach its conclusion that prayer coerces graduates and thus violates the First Amendment’s rule against establishing religion. “Today’s opinion shows,” Mr Scalia warned, “why…that fortress which is our constitution, cannot possibly rest upon the changeable philosophical predilections of the justices of this court, but must have deep foundations in the historic practices of our people.” Accusing his fellow justices of substituting their views for the true meaning of the constitution was a typical Scalia move. Yet the same charge was levelled at him, to his irritation, for his majority opinion in 2008 finding an individual right to own guns in the Second Amendment, or his vote two years later to regard corporations as bearers of free-speech rights. In last year’s dissent to the gay-marriage ruling, Mr Scalia issued a scathing review of the five justices who had widened marriage laws. The judges were not interpreting the constitution, but changing it: “This practice of constitutional revision by an unelected committee of nine, always accompanied (as it is today), by extravagant praise of liberty, robs the people of the most important liberty they asserted in the Declaration of Independence”. After scores of similar dissents, no wonder that the public has a low opinion of the court. The justices regularly condemn each other as opportunistic ideologues. Clarence Thomas, a fellow conservative, called Mr Scalia’s death “untimely”; and indeed, for the court’s right wing, this is a bad moment for the 30-year veteran to go. The docket is packed with opportunities to roll back liberal gains involving voting rights, abortion, immigration, affirmative action and public unions. With the court now stymied 4-4, expect a lot of ties for the time being. Deadlocks reward the victor in the court below, though no binding precedent is set. This means that public-sector unions, whose financing looked doomed after the Friedrichs v California Teachers hearing last month, will eke out a win, and that in Evenwel v Abbott, Republicans are unlikely to get a chance to improve their odds by changing the way people are counted in drawing election maps. But since the Obama administration lost its battle over executive orders on immigration in the lower courts, a tie at the Supreme Court will be bad news for the nearly 5m immigrants the president had hoped to protect from deportation. And if the justices tie 4-4 in the abortion case being heard next month—the biggest for a decade—the Texas regulations will stand, forcing half the clinics in the state to close. All of which explains why filling Mr Scalia’s chair has turned into a titanic political battle that will overshadow the 2016 presidential campaign and quite possibly outlast it. The first response of Senate Republicans was to warn Mr Obama against even nominating a replacement, chiding him as a “lame-duck” president with no right to make such an enduring decision. Amid a backlash at this obstructionism, Republican leaders began to hint that they may allow hearings on an Obama nominee; Charles Grassley, chair of the judiciary committee, says he would “wait until the nominee is made before I would make any decisions”. Mr Obama’s shortlist includes a number of talented candidates in their late-40s and early 50s, including Loretta Lynch, the attorney-general; Sri Srinivasan, a judge on the DC circuit court; and Paul Watford, a judge on the ninth circuit court. None carries much ideological baggage. But in this election year all face partisan scrutiny (not to mention stonewalling) that would be unrecognisable to both the framers of the constitution and to a young Antonin Scalia. TO SEE George W. Bush on stage in Charleston on February 15th, exuding that old aw-shucks charm, as he told corny jokes and wisecracked about his supposed lack of intelligence, was to recall the presidential standup act that disappeared so suddenly, back to Texas, almost as if his eight years in the White House had never happened. A few in the South Carolinian crowd marvelled that they ever had; even among Republicans Mr Bush is divisive. Around a quarter rate his presidency highly; a third say it was “poor”. That is one reason why this was his first public appearance, alongside his wife Laura and brother Jeb, in Jeb’s presidential campaign. Another was to mitigate the unpleasant whiff of dynasticism that clings to it; Jeb’s campaign coffers were filled by friends of the Bush brothers’ daddy, President George H.W. Bush, as were George W.’s coffers before him. A third reason was that George W., now happily retired to paint bad pictures and grow trees on his ranch, has become even more contentious during the primary contest, as his legacy, of military fiasco, lavish spending and a failed stab at immigration reform, has come under attack from Jeb’s rivals. At a Republican debate in South Carolina on February 13th Donald Trump accused George W. of wittingly invading Iraq on a false prospectus and failing to “keep America safe”—the phrase apologists for the former president are most likely to use when defending his record. But if his appearance in Charleston was in that sense inauspicious, it was justified as an act of desperation. Trounced in Iowa, only slightly redeemed in New Hampshire, Jeb!—as image consultants have branded him—needs at least to beat Marco Rubio, his main rival for the establishment vote, in South Carolina on February 20th if he is to avoid humiliation and abandonment by his father’s friends. His advisers believed that George W., whose own presidential ambitions were once saved by South Carolina and who is liked by its many ex-servicemen, might be the filip he needs. “Bush country,” they call the state. There was noisy enthusiasm for the former president in the crowd—of a thousand or so white-haired pensioners, servicemen with buzz-cuts and proper-looking professionals, some with children. Most said they had come, on Presidents’ Day, mainly to see George W., not his brother. “He was my president when I enlisted,” said Joseph Beaudeg, a 30-year-old marine, who had brought his six-year-old daughter to “see a president.” “This is why we’re here,” said Rutledge Young, a lawyer, pointing to his discreet “W” lapel badge. Only a handful volunteered much enthusiasm for Jeb. Miranda Dobbins, a college administrator and Ted Cruz fan, was one of several who said they had not given him much thought. What accounts for the brothers’ contrasting political fortunes? It is not all Mr Trump’s doing—though his ridiculing of Jeb as a “low-energy” dolt has been relentless and brilliant. (“I said, Why don’t you use the last name, you’ll do better—believe me, it’s better than exclamation points,” Mr Trump chipped in this week.) One explanation is that George W. is a much better retail politician than the wonkish former governor of Florida will ever be. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar When “W” told an execrable joke about being a tree farmer (“It helps me practise my stump speech!”), it was almost funny; the crowd loved it. When Jeb! cracked a better gag—he claimed to have vetoed so much regulation in Florida that they called him Veto Corleone—no one laughed. In a rare serious remark, in a speech in which he did not deign to name any of his brother’s rivals, George W. declared himself proud to be a member of the reviled establishment. Yet with his blokeish manner, accident-prone English and earnest religiosity, he never seemed particularly like one. By contrast stiff, proper Jeb, though in some ways, including his bilingual household, less conventional than George W., seems like a man prone to wear chequered golfing slacks to unwind. That makes him, metaphorically speaking, not well-suited to America’s distempered electorate. There was little reason, with the primary vote looming, to suppose George W.’s return from obscurity would fix that. The Bush brothers’ first instincts were right: if Jeb’s famous relatives may boost him with some voters, they will turn off others. Moreover, South Carolina is not really Bush country these days. The mixture of social conservatism and pro-business posturing that won the state for George W. in 2000 did not work for Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee in 2012. He lost South Carolina to the more acerbic Newt Gingrich, whose attacks on Washington found favour with anti-government Tea Partiers and disaffected working-class whites. That both groups had suffered a crashing loss of confidence in steady-as-she-goes establishment conservativism was chiefly because of the economic and foreign-policy calamities George W. presided over. And the suspicion and contempt they engendered endures, which is why all the mainstream Republican candidates—even more compelling ones than Jeb!—are now struggling. It was rather heart-warming to hear the nostalgic, faintly defiant cheers for George W. from a crowd of cautious, quietly prosperous Republicans who do not want a thuggish property tycoon to rip America up and make it great again. But the evidence suggests that W. played his main hand in this race years ago, and it has not turned out well.Swipe right for socialism THE thousands of Atlantans at Bernie Sanders’s rally at Morehouse College on February 16th heard some top-notch oratory. Danny Glover, the senator’s impressive point man in the historically black universities he is touring—of which Morehouse is among the most venerable—fired up the young, largely black crowd. Killer Mike, a charismatic rapper and Morehouse alumnus, declared that Mr Sanders’s social platform closely matched Martin Luther King’s. “We ain’t nobody’s firewall!” thundered Nina Turner, a politician from Ohio, referring to the notion that black southern voters will shore up Hillary Clinton’s queasy bid for the Democratic nomination. It was heart-soaring stuff. Then Mr Sanders spoke. He loped to the podium, incongruously rickety in this lithe company, and in his croaky New York whine rattled off his idealistic policies, some reasonable, most unachievable. He revelled in his strong showing so far, a Trump-style touch he has adopted, along with critiques of the media and the corruption of campaign finance. He railed against racism in the criminal-justice system; he earned a roaring ovation for noting that America could afford to rebuild Iraq’s infrastructure but not Flint, Michigan’s. The crotchety routine seemed to work—as it must, and quickly, if Mr Sanders is to win over the black voters who will be decisive in the string of imminent southern primaries, beginning with South Carolina’s on February 27th. Two young women studying at Clark Atlanta University, adjacent to Morehouse, said they were switching to Mr Sanders from Mrs Clinton; she, one said, was “a people-pleaser”, whereas he was “more adamant” in his convictions. A trickle of black politicians are also flipping. Vincent Fort, a prominent Georgian state senator, this week came out for Mr Sanders, citing his concern for inequality and social mobility. Given Barack Obama’s victory, Mr Fort says he is “not going to listen to anybody who says ‘can’t’ or ‘won’t’ or ‘shouldn’t’.” US primaries: The voting power of blacks and Hispanics Still, most of the black political establishment remains in Mrs Clinton’s camp, a bond forged during her husband’s presidency. John Lewis, an influential loyalist, congressman and hero of the civil-rights movement, recently appeared to question Mr Sanders’s record in it. “I never saw him,” said Mr Lewis, later insisting that he intended no disparagement. Kasim Reed, Atlanta’s mayor, is another outspoken Clintonista. Polls suggest most black voters still share this old allegiance: Mrs Clinton retains a big lead in South Carolina, and an even bigger one among blacks. One student at Morehouse, recounting mistreatment by police, said he would urge his parents to vote for Mr Sanders. His young fans had better hurry up if he is to oust Mrs Clinton in the South.Government by the people“Is Jeb Bush related to George W. Bush?” Fight night“Ted Cruz is a totally unstable individual. He is the single biggest liar I’ve ever come across…and I’ve seen some of the best.” The calming Mr Kasich Off-roading Adviser of the week The South will rise again Truther“It’s a horrible topic, but they say they found a pillow on his face, which is a pretty unusual place to find a pillow. I can’t give you an answer.” Troll-in-chief Expanding the base Dark money Perks of the jobWHEN Donald Trump announced that he was running for the White House, there was only one venue for his speech: Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue. The skyscraper has been central to Mr Trump’s business life. Built between 1979 and 1984, it was a triumph for a young property mogul whose father rented out mere apartments in Brooklyn. Nearby is the Plaza Hotel, which a middle-aged Mr Trump sold in 1995 after his casino operation folded. Today half his wealth is still tied up in buildings within a four-mile radius of this spot. The Tower’s bar exemplifies Mr Trump’s late-life pivot to the business of celebrity, with cocktails named after his TV show The Apprentice, which was filmed there. A gift shop stocks Trump aftershave that “captures the spirit of the driven man”. Mr Trump’s drive and ownership of Trump Tower are among the few clear and consistent features of his 40-year business life. Much else is opaque, volatile and contested. Mr Trump sees himself as a largely self-made man whose global career qualifies him to be president: “Nobody in the history of the presidency has been nearly as successful as I have,” he says. Rivals in the Manhattan property game think he has taken his eye off the ball. His enemies say he inherited a fortune and built upon it an empire of defaults and exaggeration. To others Mr Trump is a mere celebrity playing a dangerous political game: a cross between Mussolini and the Kardashian clan. Which version is right? A review of Mr Trump’s career, his filings with regulators and third-party estimates of his wealth, suggests four conclusions. First, his fortune is in the billions of dollars. Second, his attempt to shift away from debt-heavy property and to create a global brand has been a limited success. About 93% of his wealth sits in America and 80% is in real estate (including golf courses). Third, Mr Trump’s performance has been mediocre compared with the stockmarket and property in New York. Lastly, his clannish management style suggests he might be out of his depth if he ran a larger organisation. “I’ve been through cycles, I’ve been through a lot,” admits Mr Trump. His career can be split into three stages. The era of debt-fuelled expansion was in 1975-90. Mr Trump’s big break was the renovation of a site at Grand Central Station, which is now occupied by the Hyatt Hotel. He raised cash, found a tenant, secured permits and completed a complex building job, according to his biographer, Michael D’Antonio. Buoyed by success he went on a long spree, buying buildings in a depressed Manhattan (including the site of Trump Tower), expanding into casinos in Atlantic City and picking up a small airline. His investments over this period were worth perhaps $5 billion in today’s money, with four-fifths of that debt-financed. The era of humiliation came in the 1990s, as the casino business faltered and two of his gambling entities defaulted (two other related casino enterprises defaulted in 2004 and 2009). This destabilised the whole of Mr Trump’s operation, which may have had as much as $6 billion of debt in today’s prices. Through asset sales, defaults and forbearance from his creditors, Mr Trump clung on and avoided personal bankruptcy. As property prices in Manhattan rose he recovered his poise, and by the early 2000s he was doing small deals again, for example buying the Hotel Delmonico on New York’s Upper East Side. The final stage, of celebrity, came with his starring role in the The Apprentice in2004. The success of the TV show, which had 28m viewers at its peak and ran until 2015, led Mr Trump to create a flurry of ventures to cash in on his enhanced fame. He is now involved with 487 companies, up from 136 in 2004. They span hotel licensing in Azerbaijan and energy drinks in Israel. At face value Mr Trump has turned his name into a global brand that prints cash. The numbers of the beast Information about Mr Trump’s business is sketchy. He doesn’t run a publicly listed firm, and does not appear to have a holding company into which his assets are grouped. He releases a one-page, unaudited, estimate of his wealth. He has also made a filing on his finances with the Federal Election Commission (FEC), although this does not specify the value of assets worth over $50m and may not include all kinds of income. Estimates of his wealth have been made by Forbes magazine and Bloomberg, a financial-data provider. In the New York property world Mr Trump is perceived to have gone off the boil in the past decade—“He’s been distracted,” says one broker—with other developers doing bolder projects, such as the Fisher and Durst families, and Gary Barnett. But there is not too much disagreement about the value of Mr Trump’s existing buildings and golf-resorts. The contentious bit is his branding operation. According to his FEC filings, this generated about $68m of income in 2014. Valued on a multiple of ten to reflect the fact contracts are finite, this is worth $680m. Based on a composite of figures from the FEC, his estimates, real-estate brokers and Forbes, Mr Trump is worth $4.3 billion. Whether he has transcended the business of property to become a global brand is debatable. His appeal is strong in golf, where Trump-flagged resorts are well regarded. Mr Trump’s name carries less cachet in hotels or consumer goods, and does not travel well beyond the country he says he wants to make great again. Of his wealth, only an estimated 7% is outside America and 66% is made in New York. Only about 22% of his worth is derived from assets that he actively created after 2004, when he became a reality TV star. Some 64% is from conventional property and a further 17% from resorts and golf clubs. His biggest recent deal has been in real estate: buying the Doral hotel in 2012 out of bankruptcy. Only 11 of the licensing and branding companies created since 2004 make more than $1m of income. Mr Trump says there are 38 more deals in the pipeline but it is hard to know their worth. Mr Trump’s performance is tricky to gauge, too, because early estimates of his wealth may have been overstated. We take three starting points and use Forbes’s data (see chart 2). The best long-term starting point is 1985, when Mr Trump first appeared in the rankings without his father. The most generous starting point is 1996, when Mr Trump had just clawed his way back from the abyss. The final starting point is a decade ago. Judged from the low point in 1996, he has outperformed the S&P 500 index of big firms and the New York property market. Judged by his long-term record, he has done poorly. And over the past decade Mr Trump has lagged both benchmarks. His ranking among American billionaires has fallen from a peak of 26 to 121—by the standards of the country’s oligarchy, he is small beer. His property empire is a seventh the size of America’s biggest real-estate firm. Mr Trump was sensible enough to get out of casinos in Atlantic City. But he missed out on the industry boom in Macau that propelled erstwhile rivals such as Sheldon Adelson of Las Vegas Sands into a different league. Mr Adelson is worth $26 billion, according to Forbes. When considering Mr Trump’s performance, one should also spare a thought for outside investors in his projects. Many have made money. But roughly $5 billion of equity and debt (at current prices) from outsiders sat in Trump vehicles that went bust. What of Mr Trump’s management style? His attributes are charisma, spontaneity, frequent communication and quick decision-making. He is a fine negotiator, grinding down the other side with charm and relentless tweaks of the fine print. “He is incredibly charming and deeply frustrating,” says someone who has acted for him. A former top executive at the Trump organisation says, “People think he is running everything from 30,000 feet, but it is the opposite. He knows if the carpets were cleaned and every clause in the contract.” The flip side of Mr Trump’s personality is volatility, with explosive outbursts and unpredictable behaviour. “He’s not stable. He has a nuclear temper,” says the same source, who recalls spittle flying and desks being swept empty. Throughout his life Mr Trump has pursued energy-sapping feuds. Just as his campaign machine is improvised, he appears to have a puny apparatus to support his business. The Trump organisation has a dozen key executives, including Mr Trump’s three eldest children, Donald, Ivanka and Eric. Based on the FEC documents, the structure of the Trump organisation is crude, with most of the legal vehicles owned directly by Mr Trump, rather than being grouped together. Put your hair up pretty He thus has a healthy dislike of bureaucracy but no real experience of a big, complex organisation. “Every company is small compared to the United States,” argues Mr Trump, who says he will appoint business figures to run his administration. He is a veteran of publicity but not of scrutiny. He was in charge of a publicly listed company in 1995-2004. It defaulted. If Mr Trump becomes president he insists that he will “have zero to do with” his business, which he will put in a trust. Mitt Romney, who ran in 2012, and Ross Perot, who ran in 1992 and 1996, took similar approaches. Mr Trump’s children would run the show. They are well thought of, but might struggle to make a leap forward. The organisation has only $200m-300m of cash in hand, and it would be hard to sell the buildings without his consent. If Mr Trump fails to become president, he will go back to his business, although he admits, “it will be much less exciting than what I’m doing now”. Perhaps a bonanza will beckon as he launches another flurry of branding efforts, similar to the push after 2004. The election would have been the ultimate marketing campaign. Heir, tycoon, apprentice, candidate Yet his initiatives over the past decade have not been a wild financial success. Mr Trump says his candidacy is boosting his brand. But he has lost some business, for example a deal with Univision, a media firm, to broadcast the Miss USA pageant, which he owned. The room rates charged by Trump hotels are on average 10% below other luxury hotels (taking figures from Expedia for eight Trump-branded hotels on March 1st and comparing them with other five-star hotels in the same cities). Being, to use his phrase, a “loser”, might hurt his appeal. Bob Dole resorted to advertising Viagra after missing out on the White House. With Mr Trump’s 70th birthday approaching in June, the jury is still out on his business career. He has great wealth, much of it made well over a decade ago from a few buildings he has retained in Manhattan, including his favourite on Fifth Avenue. But he has not yet created a great company, raised permanent capital on public markets, gone global or diversified very successfully. Something to think about when you are sipping an $18 “You’re Fired” Bloody Mary at the Trump Tower—or voting in a presidential election.LEXINGTON once asked America’s most successful centrist to explain the strength of the two-party system, in a country that views those same parties with scorn. The problem is tribal loyalties, replied Michael Bloomberg, then in his final days as mayor of New York, in late 2013. Running for national office as an independent is “just not practical”, explained Mr Bloomberg, a technocratic billionaire who looked into, then decided against, a non-party presidential run in 2008. Such a big share of the population “will vote the party line no matter what your policies are”, he sighed. “That may not be good, but that is true.” Now the Michael Bloomberg of early 2016 hears calls to think again. For the main parties may be about to pick presidential nominees who repel all but the most tribal voters. The chances are rising that Republicans will choose either Donald Trump, a snarling demagogue, or Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a glib and calculating tribune of the hard-right. The presumed Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton, is struggling to hold off her leftist rival Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, whose plans would by his own admission require a political revolution. Bloomberg-boosters see a chance to remake national politics. In a true three-way race, they reason, winning the White House does not require a majority of voters: about 38% of the electorate in the right states would do. Mr Bloomberg, who is 74, does not have long to decide: he must launch a campaign by early to mid-March to get his name on the presidential ballot in all 50 states. Allies see a path ahead for him if Republicans pick Mr Trump or Mr Cruz and Democrats choose Mr Sanders. They also see a way to win if Mrs Clinton looks like prevailing, but has been weakened and driven to the left (or if she faces the real danger of an indictment for mishandling government e-mails as President Barack Obama’s first secretary of state). The din and fury of this year’s presidential primary season actively encourages Bloomberg-backers. They argue that most Americans abstain from such party contests. Studying polls, they spy a “new silent majority” that is fed-up with the status quo, but is not ready to burn it down. Mr Bloomberg certainly breaks the two-party mould. He served at first as the Republican mayor of a mostly Democratic city, then became an independent. A Republican could not be elected president with Mr Bloomberg’s record. Raised Jewish in a blue-collar suburb near Boston, he is a secular big-city liberal on social issues, backing gay marriage and abortion rights. He tried to ban the sale of large sugary drinks and backed government action to curb climate change. The right loathes him for funding gun-control campaigns across the country. But Mr Bloomberg would also struggle to run as a Democrat. He clashed with teachers’ unions over school reforms. He angered the left by defending “stop-and-frisk” police searches which often involve non-whites. Such searches cut crime, he argued as mayor, in part by “scaring the kids to not carry guns”. When he defended the ultra-rich as valuable taxpayers those livid about inequality fumed. Mr Bloomberg can be cranky. Asked by pollsters if they would want to spend Thanksgiving dinner with their then-mayor, nearly 60% of New Yorkers said no. Supporters say that Mr Bloomberg need not be loved: he just needs to be an acceptable third option for voters facing an otherwise appalling choice. The idea of Mr Bloomberg in a presidential television debate fills fans with nerdish joy. The self-made founder of a financial-data empire, he is worth an estimated $40 billion, or nine times more than Mr Trump, a rich man’s son—indeed, as a philanthropist, Mr Bloomberg has given away almost as much money as Mr Trump is thought to possess. Most of all, supporters say, he would stand out for knowing how the global economy actually works. Frank Luntz, a Republican messaging guru (who is not working for any presidential candidate), says Mr Bloomberg offers voters a unique combination. He funds all his political campaigns from his own pocket, unlike Mr Cruz, Mr Sanders and Mrs Clinton. Unlike Mr Trump, he has a governing record. Lastly, he can appeal to both Democrats and Republicans, unlike any of his rivals. A poll taken by Mr Luntz in January saw Mr Bloomberg drawing more than a quarter of all votes in hypothetical matchups against Mr Trump, Mr Cruz and Mrs Clinton—though it is true that Democrats view him more favourably than Republicans do. Steve Schmidt, a senior adviser to Senator John McCain’s Republican presidential campaign in 2008 (but unaffiliated this time) describes the two traditional parties as in a “state of collapse”. He sees in that a chance for innovation, as Mr Bloomberg would have the funds to invest in high-tech targeting of voters, driving tactical voting in his favour, including in the 30-odd states that usually have no impact on White House races. Still a long shot Alas for Bloomberg-boosters, there are reasons to be sceptical, too. The ex-mayor is a defender of free trade and immigration in a time of haul-up-the-drawbridge populism. Moreover, America’s established parties will fight hard to defend their duopoly. Democratic leaders have already urged Mr Bloomberg to stay out, fearing that he will mostly hurt their party. Republicans gleefully agree, and are urging him to run. Even the electoral rule-book helps traditional parties. Presidential contenders win by securing 270 or more electoral-college votes. If no candidate reaches 270, then the president is chosen by the House of Representatives. The next House will almost certainly be Republican-held. Especially with a Supreme Court vacancy at stake after the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, it can be expected to vote on party lines. Mr Bloomberg may run anyway, drawing the support of millions of reasonable people. Yet if after some months it becomes clear that he will lose and help elect a President Trump, hope that he drops out. Being a true moderate is a responsibility, as well as an opportunity.
