WHENEVER someone questions Venezuela’s creditworthiness, the country’s president, Nicolás Maduro, retorts that his government has never missed a debt payment and never will. His predecessor and mentor, the late Hugo Chávez, said the same thing. Creditors are demanding a handsome reward for their trust in that promise. The yield on Venezeula’s dollar bond that matures in 2020 is 37%. Bondholders’ faith will soon be tested. On February 26th Venezuela is due to pay $2.3 billion, mainly to hedge funds and investors that specialise in emerging-market debt. There is little doubt that it will make the payment. After that, the risk of a default on Venezuela’s remaining $64 billion of foreign-currency denominated bonds will rise sharply. In the second half of 2016 the government of Venezuela and PDVSA, the state-owned oil company, are due to pay $6 billion to creditors (see chart). With Venezuela’s heavy oil, virtually its only export, selling for as little as $25 a barrel, the country’s main source of foreign currency is drying up. “It now is a question of when they default, not if,” says Russ Dallen of Latinvest, an investment bank. At the recent low price for its oil, Venezuela would earn $22 billion from exports this year, a drop of 77% from 2012. The government has so far responded by restricting imports to half of what they were that year. That, combined with price controls and a bizarre system of multiple exchange rates, has led to shortages of such necessities as rice and toilet paper. It is hard to see how imports could be further squeezed without provoking a social explosion. Even with imports at rock-bottom levels, Venezuela is expected to have a financing gap of more than $30 billion this year. Its $52 billion-worth of sellable assets are shrinking fast. A hefty chunk of its reserves is in the form of gold held in the vaults of the central bank, a cumbersome means of payment. Chávez, in a nationalistic gesture, brought 160 tonnes to Venezuela from storage abroad. Now at least 27 tonnes are thought to have been shipped back to service debt. About half of Venezuela’s foreign debt is explicitly owed by the sovereign; the rest is owed by PDVSA. There are important differences. Most of the sovereign-debt contracts have collective-action clauses (CACs), under which a restructuring, if accepted by holders of an agreed proportion of debt, can be imposed on all of them. PDVSA, Venezuela’s main source of foreign exchange, would have a harder time restructuring its debt. Its bond contracts do not have CACs; if all bondholders are not satisfied by a restructuring offer, a few could hold PDVSA to ransom. But a default would be messy. Unlike Venezuela itself, the oil monopoly owns big assets outside the country, including Citgo, an oil company in the United States. The risk that creditors might seize these is one of the main reasons that Venezuela is so eager to avoid a default. PDVSA may seek to delay payments due later this year, but that will require the agreement of all creditors. In graphics: A political and economic guide to Venezuela Mr Maduro now admits that Venezuela faces an economic catastrophe; he may be inching towards realism about how to confront it. On February 15th the far-left economics tsar, Luis Salas, was dismissed after just six weeks in the newly created job. His replacement is Miguel Pérez Abad, a leftist businessman who holds more moderate views. Mr Maduro followed that up by raising the price of petrol 60-fold and tinkering with exchange rates: he reduced the number of official rates from three to two and allowed one to float. The strongest rate for the bolívar has been set at ten to the dollar rather than 6.3. That still leaves Venezuela’s petrol the cheapest in the world, and the strongest exchange rate wildly at variance with the black-market rate of around 1,000 bolívares to the dollar. And it leaves Venezuela without a plan to pay its debt, apart from praying for a recovery in the oil price. In 2007 Venezuela stopped co-operating with the IMF, one possible source of assistance. It could turn to China, which has already lent it more than $50 billion and accepts repayment in oil. There is speculation that Venezuela will seek to delay the oil payments. China might agree, in return for access to Venezuela’s oil and minerals on favourable terms. With Chinese help, and a more benign oil market, it is just possible that Venezuela will avoid defaulting on its bonds. But that help may come at a high price.IN THE heart of Montego Bay, his country’s tourist capital, on the night of February 7th Andrew Holness, the leader of the opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP), was outlining his election plan to a throng of supporters when a burst of gunfire left three people dead. He and his supporters scurried for safety. Two days later, a bystander was killed and three were injured when a JLP motorcade drove through Flanker, a poor area of the town close to the airport. The police were quick to blame the killings on feuding between local criminal gangs, rather than on party rivalries. “We asked specifically that no motorcade should come through Flanker,” said the chief of the local police. Nevertheless, the gunshots were an unpleasant echo of Jamaica’s 1980 election, when gang warfare linked to cold-war ideology and a crumbling economy pitted a Cuban-influenced People’s National Party (PNP) against a pro-American JLP. The last whiffs of ideology have long since evaporated. Both of the main parties competing in the election, to be held on February 25th, are pragmatic, but the economy remains stagnant. Jamaica was once a regional powerhouse. Its income per head is now the lowest among Britain’s former Caribbean island colonies. Gang-linked gun crime continues unabated. Last year Jamaica suffered 1,207 murders, giving the island a murder rate almost ten times that of the United States. The debt-ridden economy has been in the IMF’s care for years. Under Portia Simpson Miller, the prime minister since 2012, the PNP government has doggedly stuck to an austerity programme. Peter Phillips, the finance minister, has won praise for that. The fall in the price of oil, which Jamaica imports, has given him a little wriggle room. But next month’s budget is expected to contain another round of cuts in public-sector jobs, which may be why Mrs Simpson Miller called the election for 14 months before the deadline. She is 70 but looks younger and radiates infectious energy on the stump. In the previous election, in 2011, she took 95% of the poll in the inner-city seat she first won almost 40 years ago. Mr Holness, who was briefly prime minister before losing the 2011 election, is almost 30 years younger (she once called him her “son”). He is a Seventh-Day Adventist, as are one in eight Jamaicans. His Ten-Point Plan is generous: he would exempt from income tax three-quarters of those who pay it and promises 250,000 new jobs in a country where only 188,000 are unemployed. He plays to Jamaicans’ homophobia: he wants a referendum to sustain the buggery laws. The prime minister calls Mr Holness’s plan “a Ten-Point Con”. It would certainly mean forfeiting the IMF’s support. He counters that she welshed on promises to end the tax on electricity bills and to make Jamaicans prosperous enough to eat ox tail and curried goat. That prompted a peevish Mrs Simpson Miller to threaten to sue, and to pull out of three planned debates. The PNP has been in office, with only one four-year break, since 1989. Pollsters and pundits give it a slight edge this time, too. But a big slice of voters remain undecided, or say they will not vote. Mrs Simpson Miller still has work to do.THE job of “returning happiness” to Thailand has put Prayuth Chan-ocha (pictured) in a foul mood. In January the irascible leader of the junta that seized power in May 2014 said he had resolved to “talk less, be less emotional and quarrel less with reporters.” Yet this month he was again apologising, through a spokesman, for flashes of anger at two press events. The cause of his ire was impertinent questioning about a proposed new constitution. His temper may only get worse. Mr Prayuth, a former general, this week reassured President Barack Obama at a summit for South-East Asian leaders in California that he is preparing the country for fresh elections. But first the junta wants to pass a new constitution which would keep the hands of elected politicians firmly tied. Mr Prayuth’s coup suspended the previous constitution, itself drawn up during another period of military rule following an earlier coup that also unseated a democratic government, in 2006. A draft for a new constitution that was presented last year proved too illiberal even for lackeys who sit in the army’s rubber-stamp councils. The generals ordered a rewrite. Their latest blueprint looks nearly as bad. True, it abandons much-derided plans for an army-led “crisis panel”, empowered to topple elected governments at will. But otherwise it reflects the army’s view that popular politics is a form of corruption, and that bickering politicians are the source rather than a symptom of Thailand’s deep social divisions. (The biggest one is between a wealthy, royalist establishment in Bangkok, the capital, and poorer, less deferential classes in the north and north-east.) The new draft would produce weak coalition governments, presumably in order to erode the dominance of Thailand’s most successful party, Pheu Thai, versions of which the army has twice kicked from power. The prime minister need not be an MP, a loophole that could allow soldiers to keep bossing elected politicians around. New power will also flow to watchdogs such as the electoral commission, anti-corruption outfit and courts. On the face of it, that looks good. But these bodies have traditionally reflected the interests of Thailand’s monied elites. It is progress that the draft makes the constitutional court the final arbiter in times of crisis—that role had previously fallen to King Bhumibol Adulyadej, now old and frail. But the change probably reflects fears among the Bangkok establishment that the next monarch, the crown prince, may go too easy on Pheu Thai and other perceived enemies. All this has dismayed Thais of many stripes. Politicians note that Mr Prayuth will retain his authority until the moment the next government is sworn in, perhaps allowing him to influence their election campaigns. They fret that more surprises may be stuffed into subsections which the drafters have yet to scribble (a process that may delay an election promised for mid-2017). Sensing revolt, the junta has started warning that critics of the draft will be hauled away for “attitude adjustment”. The government insists that the constitution will be put to a national referendum at the end of July. The election commission says it is already preparing plans for that ballot, an operation it has considered calling the “65m Blooming Flowers” (forgetting, presumably, that a similarly named campaign in Mao Zedong’s China ended in bloody repression). It wants penalties for people who misrepresent the draft in the media. Meanwhile, a general says cadets will be sent to polling stations to help people vote for the right outcome. It may be in vain: the few opinion polls suggest that Thais will throw the new draft out. The attitude adjusters What would happen then is anyone’s guess. Mr Prayuth insists that a general election will take place in 2017 no matter what—though the junta’s timetable for a return to elected government has shown a tendency to slip. Perhaps he will seek to resurrect a constitution from Thailand’s past (he has 19 to choose from). Perhaps he will impose an electoral system of his own making. Meechai Ruchuphan, a lawyer who led the latest drafting panel, has warned that Thais who vote to abandon his council’s creation might end up with rules they like even less. In graphics: Explaining Thailand’s volatile politics Some wonder whether the draft is designed to fail, so that the junta can remain in power. The generals are presumed to want to be around to manage King Bhumibol’s succession (he is 88). Noxious censorship laws even prevent the matter of the succession from being openly discussed—though it will be the most significant moment for the national polity in decades and seems likely to inflame the country’s smouldering class wars. Yet the longer the generals hang around, the more problems they will have to contend with. On February 12th Yingluck Shinawatra, pushed out as prime minister just before the coup, invited foreign journalists to tour her vegetable garden—an outing seemingly designed to skirt the ban on overt politicking. She is probably hoping that foreign pressure on the junta will lessen her chances of a long jail term at the end of her show trial for corruption. Perhaps more pressingly, the junta also finds itself caught up in a bitter dispute inside Thailand’s powerful religious establishment over who should succeed the late patriarch of the Buddhist faith. Thousands of monks gathered near Bangkok on February 15th, urging the government to endorse their faction’s favourite. There were scuffles with soldiers. It is a febrile mood, and no end of conspiracy theories posit what a scheming junta intends to do next. Yet the debacle surrounding the constitution may hint at something more worrying still: that Thailand’s self-chosen leaders have no real strategy at all. Nasheed and Clooney charmed Number Ten THE low-lying Maldives may be inundated by a political storm. At the centre stands the archipelago’s president, Abdulla Yameen, scion of a powerful clan. The jailing this week of a former ally, and questions about missing money, are bringing the crisis to a head. One agent of Mr Yameen’s troubles is Mohamed Nasheed, the first democratically elected president, who was ousted in what was in effect a coup in 2012. He then contested (and eventually lost) the last election, before facing overblown charges of terrorism. But foreign pressure recently secured his passage to London for medical treatment. There he has loudly highlighted his country’s democratic shortcomings. He is supported by a high-profile lawyer, Amal Clooney, who has helped strengthen the backing of Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, for the cause of Maldivian democracy. The islands’ government is furious with Mr Nasheed. Ministers have come to London to prevent the Commonwealth from suspending the Maldives’ membership and to fight off European calls for targeted sanctions unless political prisoners are freed and a deal reached with the opposition. But the 12-year sentence handed down on February 17th to Imran Abdulla, head of an Islamist party, has undone their work. He also was charged with terrorism for a speech at a rally last May in support of Mr Nasheed—even though he used it to call for calm. Officials more readily rail against Mr Nasheed than explain how $79m disappeared from the state tourism body. Mr Yameen’s former vice-president, Ahmed Adeeb, has been arrested for that, as well as for an explosion on the president’s yacht. But questions remain. It seems improbable, as ministers with a taste for flash watches insist is the case, that Mr Adeeb is the only senior politician to have benefited. The opposition alleges that Mr Yameen is implicated in the tourism scandal, as well as in an alleged money-laundering scheme involving the central bank. With outside pressure growing, the president, who denies any wrongdoing, has shrinking room for manoeuvre.Blind faith needed IN LUCKNOW they call it “evening medicine”. In Bangalore the slang is “oil”. Among Tamils it is “water”. The Indian government is less poetic. It classes the stuff as IFL, IMFL or IML, terms that stand for imported foreign liquor, Indian-made foreign liquor and Indian-made liquor. But in all its many layers the Indian government remains just as addicted to, and sometimes just as confused by, the demon alcohol as any wine-drenched Urdu bard. Most Indians do not drink at all, and per person Indians are far more abstemious than others elsewhere (see chart). Yet those who do drink show a preference for the strong stuff. By fast-growing volume India is the world’s third-biggest consumer of alcohol, and far and away the biggest consumer of whisky. Such IMFL brands as Royal Stag and Officer’s Choice, unknown in other markets, rank among the world’s top ten best-selling whiskies. Even in beer Indians exhibit a taste for the bracing. Draught beers high in alcohol make up four-fifths of the local market. Governments everywhere tax booze and control its sale, but few do so as heavily or as capriciously as India’s. It is not just that the federal government imposes a tariff of 150% on imported spirits. Local licensing fees and taxes, along with a range of gouging state controls on the alcohol trade, stick consumers with end prices that are often five or six times those at the distillery gate. Granted, cheaper, less palatable alternatives exist to real whisky. In Delhi a plastic 0.6-litre bottle of brown liquid whose wonky label proclaims “Star Deluxe 80 Proof” retails for just 140 rupees, or $2. Unlicensed hooch, widely available in India, costs a fraction of that. Sadly it sometimes also kills or blinds. In 2014, 1,700 Indians died after imbibing toxic home brew—mainly as a result of lethal methanol unwittingly being manufactured rather than ethanol. India’s 29 states and seven union territories have adopted wildly different approaches to alcohol. In the west prim Gujarat has banned it entirely since 1961. By contrast the little territory of Puducherry on the Coromandel coast earns two-fifths of its revenue from an excise tax on booze. Some states auction wholesale and retail licences, or apportion them to friends of the party in power. Others operate their own monopolies. Tamil Nadu’s state monopoly employs 30,000 people and runs more than 6,000 outlets. Officially tipplers in Mumbai need a licence to consume alcohol. A lifetime pass costs 1,000 rupees and a day ticket five rupees. In theory failing to have one can incur a five-year jail sentence. In Delhi the minimum legal age is a silly 25. Recently police, at the behest of the national government, raided a municipal official’s home to embarrass the local government with the shock discovery that he owned two bottles more than the 12 allowed by local law. In a bow to Gandhian austerity, India’s constitution lays down the aim of reducing alcohol consumption. Like America in the 1920s, many Indian states have tried prohibition before abandoning it. The odd thing is that some keep trying. Kerala imposed stiff controls last year, and Bihar plans to do so in April. But Manipur and Mizoram, hill states in the north-east, are giving up their bans. They cite rising criminality, the danger of poisonous hooch, loss of state revenues and an inability to control the flow. A continent masquerading as a country: Explore India in our interactive map Meanwhile other states are simply seeking better ways to milk India’s passion for drink. Andhra Pradesh, whose 51m people already hand over nearly $2 billion a year in alcohol taxes, recently lowered duties on the cheapest Indian-made alcohol and raised them on higher-end potions. It was a carefully calculated bid to earn more from bigger volumes. Revenues have indeed soared, not only from higher local consumption but also because of a surge of smuggling into neighbouring states. Karnataka, dependent on alcohol for nearly a quarter of state revenue and already struggling to plug smuggling from cheaper Goa, has stiffened border checks to stem this new tide. To the north, the state of Punjab actually slaps higher taxes on alcohol “imports” from the rest of India to protect its own distillers. Taken together, it is an ungainly mix of prudishness and excess, of tangled laws and hefty profits. It says much about the state of India today. In some sectors of the alcohol industry, order is beginning to prevail. For instance, after years of trying to slash a way through thickets of bureaucracy and vested interests, big multinational firms now manage the bulk of the beer industry. Yet despite promoting the idea of a unified national goods and service tax to replace India’s current plethora of federal and state taxes as a key objective of its reform programme, the government of the prime minister, Narendra Modi, has explicitly stated that alcohol will still be taxed the old way. It is too rich a brew for state governments to give up.FOR a decade, millions of Japanese have tuned in to watch Ichiro Furutachi, the salty presenter of a popular evening news show, TV Asahi’s “Hodo Station”. But next month Mr Furutachi will be gone. He is one of three heavyweight presenters leaving prime-time shows on relatively liberal channels. It is no coincidence that all are, by Japanese standards, robust critics of the government. Last year another anchor, Shigetada Kishii, used his news slot on TBS, a rival channel, to question the legality of bills passed to expand the nation’s military role overseas. The questioning was nothing less than what most constitutional scholars were also doing—and in private senior officials themselves acknowledge the unconstitutionality of the legislation, even as they justify it on the ground that Japan is in a risky neighbourhood and needs better security. But Mr Kishii’s on-air fulminations prompted a group of conservatives to take out newspaper advertisements accusing him of violating broadcasters’ mandated impartiality. TBS now says he will quit. The company denies this has anything to do with the adverts, but few believe that. The third case is at NHK, the country’s giant public-service broadcaster. It has yanked one of its more popular anchors off the air. Hiroko Kuniya has helmed an investigative programme, “Close-up Gendai”, for two decades. NHK has not said why she is leaving, but colleagues blame her departure on an interview last year with Yoshihide Suga, the government’s top spokesman and closest adviser to Shinzo Abe, the prime minister. Mr Suga is known for running a tight ship and for demanding advance notice of questions from journalists. In the interview Ms Kuniya had the temerity to probe him on the possibility that the new security legislation might embroil Japan in other countries’ wars. By the standards of spittle-flecked clashes with politicians on British or American television, the encounter was tame. But Japanese television journalists rarely play hardball with politicians. Mr Suga’s handlers were incensed. It all shows how little tolerance the government has for criticism, says Makoto Sataka, a commentator and colleague of Mr Kishii’s. He points out that one of Mr Abe’s first moves after he returned to power in 2012 was to appoint conservative allies to NHK’s board. Katsuto Momii, the broadcaster’s new president, wasted little time in asserting that NHK’s role was to reflect government policy. What is unprecedented today, says Shigeaki Koga, a former bureaucrat turned talking head, is the growing public intimidation of journalists. On February 9th the communications minister, Sanae Takaichi, threatened to close television stations that flouted rules on political impartiality. Ms Takaichi was responding to a question about the departure of the three anchors. Political pressure on the press is not new. The mainstream media (the five main newspapers are affiliated with the principal private television stations) are rarely analytical or adversarial, being temperamentally and commercially inclined to reflect the establishment view. Indeed the chumminess is extreme. In January Mr Abe again dined with the country’s top media executives at the offices of the Yomiuri Shimbun, the world’s biggest-circulation newspaper. Nine years ago, when Mr Abe resigned from his first term as prime minister, the paper’s kingpin, Tsuneo Watanabe, brokered the appointment of his successor, Yasuo Fukuda. Mr Watanabe then attempted to forge a coalition between ruling party and opposition. Oh, but his paper forgot to alert readers to all these goings-on. The media today, says Michael Cucek of Temple University in Tokyo, has “no concept of conflict of interest.” It has all contributed to an alarming slide since 2011 in Japan’s standing in world rankings of media freedom. Mr Koga expects a further fall this year. He ran afoul of the government during his stint as a caustic anti-Abe commentator on “Hodo Station”. On air last year he claimed that his contract was being terminated because of pressure from the prime minister’s office. His aim, Mr Koga insists, was to rally the media against government interference. Yet TV Asahi apologised and promised tighter controls over guests. Now Mr Furutachi is quitting too. The government is playing chicken with the media, Mr Furutachi says, and winning.Last orders WHEN, in a hissy fit, North Korea shut down the Kaesong industrial zone almost three years ago, pulling out its workers and expelling their South Korean managers, many were puzzled as to why the conservative administration of Park Geun-hye, South Korea’s president, would work so hard to restart it. A product of the “sunshine policy” of her left-leaning predecessors, the factories just north of the border kept alive a few of South Korea’s twilight industries, producing low-grade shoes and clothes with subsidies from the South and cheap labour from the North. The joint zone opened again five months later, after seven rounds of talks. But on February 10th it was South Korea’s turn to pull the plug on the complex, for the first time since it opened in 2004. Ms Park announced a complete suspension of operations. Few expect it to reopen during her presidency, which ends in December 2017. The North swiftly cut hotlines, expelled businesses and put its army in charge of the area. The last real point of contact between the two Koreas is no more. If earlier efforts to save Kaesong tried to show Ms Park’s “trustpolitik” at work—a mixture of carrot and stick to try to get North Korea to engage with South Korea—the zone’s closure suggests that this policy has been ditched. Those dismayed by the move point out that the deal in 2013 involved a pledge to shield Kaesong from lurches in inter-Korean relations. But Ms Park is no longer in the mood for appeasement. In a notable speech to the National Assembly in Seoul, she did not mince words: it had become “indisputably clear”, she said, “that the existing approach and good intentions” would “only lead to the enhancement of the North’s nuclear capabilities” under Kim Jong Un. The tests of a nuclear bomb on January 6th and a long-range missile a month later were the last straw. Since Kaesong opened, the North has conducted four nuclear tests and five long-range rocket launches. The hard currency that flowed into Kaesong from the South went straight to the state, which returned as little as a fifth to the 54,000 North Korean workers there. The flow amounted to about $130m a year—not much by South Korean standards, but a fortune for the North and enough to help underwrite its nuclear dabbling. A harder line towards the North is only one change in Ms Park’s foreign-policy outlook. Another is disappointment with China, North Korea’s only friend, largest trading partner and principal donor. It is just possible that China is now getting tougher on the North. In a recent editorial, China Daily, a state-controlled newspaper, said that new UN sanctions, currently being drafted, “must truly bite”. Yet China is unlikely to want to do anything to rock Mr Kim’s regime, for fear of the instability that might ensue. It has responded to the tests with studious restraint. That is a blow for Ms Park, who had worked hard to woo Xi Jinping, China’s president. The two have met half a dozen times. Ms Park attended a Chinese military parade in September, the only leader of an Asian democracy to do so (much to America’s irritation). Yet Mr Xi did not take a call from Ms Park for over a month after the North detonated its bomb. Downplaying the North’s tests, says Evan Medeiros, formerly a member of Barack Obama’s National Security Council, has been Mr Xi’s weakest foreign-policy step. Among other things, it has hastened South Korea’s rapprochement with Japan after a protracted spat over history. And now Ms Park has agreed to adopt an American advanced missile-defence system that China has long agitated against. So shutting Kaesong was probably also a show of determination put on for the United States. Military drills that take place annually in the spring between the two countries are planned to be among the biggest yet. And South Korea, America and Japan are likely to become more public about their three-way co-ordination against the North Korean threat. South Korea is recalibrating its foreign policy: unambiguously hugging its American ally and mending ties with Japan as those with China fray. Ms Park’s legacy may yet be made in the dusk of her presidency.ON A stage decorated with tinsel and fairy lights, Liu Changsheng is singing “The East is Red” into a microphone, wearing a yellow and grey tracksuit. For Mr Liu, the Maoist anthem of the 1960s may arouse memories more vivid than those he has of his immediate past. Now in his seventies, he has dementia, an incurable brain disease that is often revealed by a loss of short-term memory. For two years Mr Liu has lived at the Qianhe Nursing Home in northern Beijing in a facility for around 75 dementia patients. They are among the few sufferers of this condition in China who receive specialist care. Dementia has mostly been a rich-world sickness, because it becomes more common as people live longer. China is fast catching up. Life expectancy increased from 45 in 1960 to 77 now, and the population is ageing rapidly: one person in six is over 60 now; by 2025 nearly one in four will be. Factors that increase the (age-adjusted) risk of developing dementia are also on the rise, including obesity, smoking, lack of exercise and diabetes. Already about 9m people in China have some form of dementia. In absolute terms, that is more than twice as many as in America. It is also more than double the number in India, a country with a population similar in size to China’s but a much younger one. Nearly two-thirds of China’s sufferers have the form known as Alzheimer’s, cases of which have tripled since 1990. The number of Alzheimer’s patients may increase another fourfold between now and 2050. China’s government is woefully unprepared for this crisis, with a severe lack of health-care provision for sufferers. So too is the public. Despite recent public-information campaigns, many Chinese regard dementia as a natural part of ageing, not as a disease, and do not know that it is fatal. Others see it as a psychological ailment rather than a degeneration of the brain itself. It carries a stigma of mental illness, making sufferers and their relatives reluctant to seek help. This compounds the suffering caused by dementia: active management can sometimes slow its progress. Even at the Qianhe Nursing Home, where Mr Liu lives, some aspects of the care appear crude. A shared “activity” space for dementia sufferers has no games or toys to entertain them; relatives are discouraged from visiting more than once a week for fear of “disturbing” their kin (in the West, care homes encourage visits, which can be stimulating and provide a sense of warmth and familiarity). Some dementia patients end up in psychiatric wards, which cannot deal effectively with their specific requirements. There is an acute shortage of medical workers qualified to treat sufferers. One reason is that few are attracted to the work. Zhang Xiurong, 50, a care assistant at Qianhe, is paid less than 3,000 yuan ($450) a month, close to the average national migrant wage, to provide all patients’ basic needs 12 hours a day, with only four days off a month. “No Chinese parent wants their one daughter to work in a hospital cleaning bedpans,” says Michael Phillips of the Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine. In the West most patients go to a care home for the final brutal stages of the disease, which can last more than a year. In China families carry most of the burden from beginning to end. The government has long underinvested in social care, assuming that adult children will take responsibility. But this is unsustainable. Plunging birth rates since the 1970s, exacerbated by a one-child-per-couple policy, mean that the number of working-age adults per person over 65 will fall by 2050 from ten to 2.5. Migration into cities (see article) is leaving some elderly people in the countryside without family members to care for them. Need for new thinking The government has been slow to recognise the scale of the problem. It funds some dementia research, but the money goes to scientists looking for a cure, rather than to those trying to find ways of alleviating the suffering of patients who have no chance of one. “People don’t get Nobel prizes or grants for developing a strategy for community care,” says Dr Phillips. In any country care can be expensive, both for families and governments. In China the government will find itself having to spend much more as relatives prove unequal to the task. Because family members rarely understand the condition, more than 90% of dementia cases go undetected, according to a study led by Ruoling Chen of King’s College in London. Sufferers will benefit when the government at last realises it has to step in. 
