A copse in need of cops YEUNG SIU YU points to where a large, old tree has been hacked with a blade. Villagers have erected a metal fence around the trunk to prevent further attacks, but they fear there will be more: low-hanging limbs are still exposed. “The thieves will come back for this piece,” says Mr Yeung, pointing to the stump of a branch just above his head. Mr Yeung forsook city life to keep bees on the carefree (and car-free) island of Lamma, a couple of miles from the main island of Hong Kong where the territory’s government and financial centre lie. Lamma’s tropical gardens and verdant jungle are magnets for nature-lovers like Mr Yeung. They worry, however, that one of the most cherished species, the incense tree (Aquilaria sinensis), faces a growing threat to its survival. The evergreen tree is endemic to southern China. Its lightly scented timber is used to make incense sticks. When damaged, the tree’s aromatic resin may develop into a dark, dense substance known as agarwood, which is prized for its supposed medicinal properties. Trade in the tree’s produce was once so important locally that a port handling such business was named “fragrant harbour”. The British later applied that name—“Hong Kong”—to the colony they founded around the port. The commercial harvesting of incense trees ended in the territory more than a century ago. Nowadays most specimens are growing in the wild, including in woodlands preserved by ancient villages. To protect incense trees, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora restricts trading in agarwood. But Hong Kong does not single out those who destroy or damage the trees for harsh treatment. If an incense tree is on government-managed land, the maximum sentence for cutting it down is the same as it is for felling any other kind of tree on such property: a fine of HK$25,000 ($3,210) and a year in prison. Such penalties do little to deter thieves from mainland China, who are encouraged by growing demand for exotic medicines among members of the mainland’s fast-growing middle class. Professor C.Y. Jim of the University of Hong Kong reckons that in 2013 high-grade agarwood was worth $1,600 a gram on the black market. That is more than gold. According to Mr Jim, Hong Kong may be the “last refuge” of the tree, so it has become a “honeypot” for tree-snatchers. Most of the thieves work for criminal gangs based across the border in mainland China. In recent years a relaxation of restrictions on travel from the mainland to Hong Kong has made their work easier. They often pretend to be hikers, sometimes camping out for weeks while gathering the timber. A local NGO has produced a map showing about 200 sites from which it says around 500 trees were stolen in the past year. Ho Pui Han, who runs the group, says there may be only 100 mature trees left in the territory. She is incensed. Very few incense trees form agarwood, so they are often destroyed indiscriminately. On Lamma, a plaque marks a spot where three young trees were uprooted. A short scramble up a steep slope reveals a gorier scene: splintered woodchips are all that remain of an aged tree. Mr Yeung, the beekeeper, says “hunters” felled and butchered it in situ. As supplies diminish, the gangs are becoming more desperate. Thieves are raiding private gardens; some residents have begun organising patrols to frighten the thieves away. Alarms and monitoring cameras are being installed. Ms Ho says the “sacred” relationship between villagers and woodlands is a vital part of Hong Kong tradition. “Their ancestors told them they must not cut down one single tree,” she says. Several thieves have been arrested recently (including on Lamma). But conservationists say the government has to try much harder.AROUND 270m people have left China’s countryside to work in urban areas, many of them entrusting their children to the care of a lone parent, grandparents, relatives or other guardians. By 2010 there were 61m of these “left-behind children”, according to the All-China Women’s Federation. In a directive released on February 14th, the government has at last shown that it recognises the problems caused by the splintering of so many families. The document acknowledges that there has been a “strong reaction” from the public to the plight of affected children. It describes improving their lot as “urgent”. That is clearly right. There have been numerous stories in recent years revealing the horrors some of these children endure. Last year four siblings left alone in the south-western province of Guizhou apparently committed suicide by drinking pesticide. Numerous sex-abuse cases involving left-behind children have come to light. The new proposals look sensible enough: minors may not be abandoned entirely; local institutions such as schools and hospitals must do more to notify the authorities of cases of abuse or neglect; social workers should monitor the welfare of left-behind children. Sadly, however, the government’s suggested remedies will achieve little. They largely replicate recent laws and policies designed to protect children (not just left-behind ones), which have been almost universally unenforced. It is already illegal to allow minors to live alone, for example. There is no indication that the new recommendations will be made law or implemented any more rigorously. The new scheme mentions the importance of giving migrants urban hukou, or household-registration certificates, which are needed to gain access to public services such as education and health care. Most migrants leave their children in the countryside because they do not have such papers. In December the government announced plans to make it easier for migrants to gain urban hukou privileges. But few casual labourers are likely to fulfil the still-onerous conditions that must be met to qualify. A study published last year by researchers at Stanford University found that among more than 140,000 children assessed in areas such as education, health and nutrition, left-behind ones performed as well as or better than those living in the countryside with both parents. But both kinds of children lagged far behind those who grow up in cities.IT WAS by some distance the year-to-date’s biggest television event. Some 690m people in China are estimated to have watched (or snoozed through) the four-and-a-half-hour extravaganza screened nationwide on state television on February 7th, the eve of the Chinese new year. It was a stultifying procession of patriotic songs (“Forge ahead, beautiful China”; “Iron and blood loyalty”), insipid skits and bald propaganda. “Without the Communist Party, there would be no new China” is a jolly enough tune, but hardly festive fare. The gala even included a parade of soldiers strutting about the stage in combat fatigues. On the same day, 112m Americans tuned in to the Super Bowl, a big American football game with more than its share of flag-waving, too. But at least that event was bone-crunchingly exciting, and its half-time show intriguingly subversive (Beyoncé appeared in a Black Panther outfit). By contrast, the live broadcast in China was politically correct to a mind-numbing extreme. The year of the monkey was ushered in by a show that many citizens decried as a turkey. Moaning about the chunwan, as the programme is commonly called, is as much a tradition as the entertainment itself, an annual event since 1983. This year was different, however: the show was seen as having plumbed new depths. Worse, even saying so was, in effect, banned. On the state broadcaster’s account on Weibo, a microblogging service, the comments section was temporarily shut down as viewers bombarded it with complaints. Since then censors have been busy deleting posts about the surfeit of political puffery. Peidong Yang, a sociologist at the National Technological University in Singapore, who has followed the shows closely, says this year’s was more than usually full of it. Many viewers joked that it was like watching the news. What passed for new-year entertainment on television this year formed part of a revival of another of the party’s traditions: the political campaign. This never died out entirely. But under Xi Jinping, the party’s leader since 2012, it has gathered new momentum. For over a year, the press has urged people to study his obscure doctrine of the “Four Comprehensives” (getting richer, reforming the economy, enforcing the law and cleaning up the party). This featured, inevitably, in the chunwan, and also in a cartoon by the official news agency, using rap, zippy animation, Mr Xi’s own voice and even Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy” to convey the message that the Four Comprehensives will bring China close to realising the “Chinese Dream” (another of Mr Xi’s slogans). The gala was graced by vast images of Mr Xi, the object of an inchoate personality cult. This year the fawning has acquired a new feature, with references to him as the hexin, or “core”, of China’s leadership. Local leaders have taken to professing their loyalty to Mr Xi, using this word. It recalls the campaign in the early 1990s to boost the party leader at the time, Jiang Zemin, through constant references to the “third generation of revolutionary leaders”, with Mr Jiang as their “core”—ie, as Mao Zedong had been to the first generation and Deng Xiaoping to the second. Back then, Mr Jiang seemed to need the help. Unexpectedly picked to lead the party after the turmoil of the Tiananmen protests and the killings that ended them in 1989, he was seen by some as a powerless cipher for a bunch of gerontocrats who still called the shots from their bath-chairs and bridge tables. When the party managed its first smooth leadership transition to the fourth generation in 2002, that feat was also hailed as a shift to a new style of collective leadership. It became taboo to use the word hexin to describe the status of Hu Jintao, Mr Xi’s predecessor; among his party colleagues, Mr Hu was always simply known as “general secretary”. Mr Xi, however, wants to be seen as more than a first among equals. Chinese media are playing along. One of their new fads is the use of the word “Xiconomics” to describe the president’s professed zeal for “supply-side” economic reforms. That the prime minister, Li Keqiang, is notionally in charge of running the economy is conveniently ignored. Mr Xi has already succeeded in ousting his most prominent rivals and instilling fear throughout the party with his anti-corruption campaign. Moreover, by strengthening the role of high-level party committees, led by himself, he has his hands on most of the levers of power. So it is not obvious why his status needs further enhancement. One possibility is that the revived usage of “core” is a product of feverish politicking in Beijing. Next year the party will hold a five-yearly congress. According to party rules, five of the seven members of its highest body, the Politburo Standing Committee, should stand down because of their ages. Only Mr Xi and Mr Li are due to stay. So intense jockeying is already under way for the vacancies. Officials may see expressions of loyalty to Mr Xi, and acknowledgment of his supreme power, as a way of improving their career prospects. It may also be that Mr Xi demands such homage as a way of stifling resistance to his policies, his accumulation of power and his purge of the corrupt. Economic growth is slowing, and markets are turbulent. Leaders may calculate that pre-emptive repression is safer than waiting to see if China’s myriad malcontents coalesce into something resembling an opposition. Confidence tricks Repression carries costs of its own. In one deleted post on the gala, for example, Ren Zhiqiang, a property tycoon with 37.5m Weibo followers, asked sarcastically whether stopping criticism showed self-confidence. In another, Wu Wei, a liberal former official, approvingly reposted a comment that the worst thing about the gala was not how lousy it was but how the right to say so was gradually vanishing. The censorship looks petty, silly and, worse, panicky. But the party has never been as concerned with how things look as with keeping an iron grip on power. If it were a corporation, that would be its core business.IT MIGHT have been a moment of hope: an internationally negotiated ceasefire that would lead to a political deal to end a war that has probably killed nearly half a million people and turned millions more into refugees. The accord was thrashed out by America and Russia on February 12th in the wings of the annual Munich Security Conference, endorsed by the 17-nation International Syria Support Group—a cruel misnomer if ever there was one. Its chances of success were never good. Humanitarian aid to besieged towns was supposed to be the first part of the deal, followed by a “cessation of hostilities” within a week. There are some signs of the former—the UN announced an agreement with the regime on February 16th for access to seven towns, perhaps including air-drops into Deir al-Zor, a city largely held by Islamic State (IS). On February 17th some aid convoys began to roll out of Damascus. But there remains virtually no prospect of a ceasefire. Nobody should be surprised, given the cheerful assertion by Sergei Lavrov, Russian’s foreign minister, that, despite signing the agreement, Russia would continue its air strikes against those it regards as “terrorists”. That is an elastic term. Jabhat al-Nusra (JAN), al-Qaeda’s powerful Syrian arm, fights alongside many other forces, both jihadist outfits and less extreme ones supported by the West, so Russia feels justified in bombing just about any rebels it chooses. Since Russia’s intervention at the end of September, supposedly to attack IS and JAN, the dynamics on the ground have been transformed. Once close to collapse, the regime of Bashar al-Assad is now confident of its survival and intent on regaining control of more territory. Pro-Assad forces are encircling the rebel-held parts of Aleppo, once Syria’s biggest city. Why should he and Mr Putin stop now? The only puzzle is what John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, thought he could achieve through his agreement with Mr Lavrov—except, perhaps, to expose Russian cynicism. As John McCain, the chairman of the Senate armed services committee, put it: “This is diplomacy in the service of military aggression. And it is working because we are letting it.” In the few days since the Munich agreement, the war has, if anything, widened and intensified. On February 15th nearly 50 civilians were killed when missiles hit rebel-held areas of Syria. At least 14 were killed in the northern town of Azaz when missiles hit two hospitals and a school where refugees were sheltering. Missiles also struck a hospital in Marat Numan, in Idlib province, south of Aleppo (see map). In all, five medical facilities were targeted. The UN condemned the attacks as a violation of international law. Turkey’s foreign ministry accused Russia of “an obvious war crime”. The animosity between Moscow and Ankara is further fuelled by the advance of the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), an alliance of Kurdish and Arab fighters under the umbrella of the PYD, the main Syrian Kurdish force. This had been America’s most reliable ally on the ground against IS. But now, aided by Russian planes and weapons deliveries, it is fighting in tacit alliance with Mr Assad’s regime. On February 2nd the SDF severed the corridor between Aleppo and the Turkish border that is critical for rebel supplies. On February 15th it seized control of Tel Rifaat, one of the first towns to rise up against Mr Assad, squeezing the “Azaz pocket”, a rebel bastion on the border with Turkey. The rush to Rojava The Kurds want to carve out a continuous autonomous area by linking up the two enclaves they control along Syria’s border with Turkey. In the recently opened PYD office in Moscow, there is a map of a future Syrian Kurdistan, called “Rojava”. It covers a lot of territory. Turkey is determined to stop the Kurds and has been shelling them for the past week. Its prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, says that Turkey “will not let Azaz fall” and threatens a “severe response” if the Kurdish-led forces try to take the town. Tens of thousands of refugees are flowing out of Aleppo, heading both north towards the Turkish border town, Kilis, and west into mainly rebel-held Idlib. The regime seems all too happy to let the city’s population flow out through its siege lines. Noah Bonsey of the International Crisis Group, a think-tank, believes that there is nothing indiscriminate about the bombing of civilian areas and infrastructure, including schools and hospitals. Both Aleppo’s main hospitals were systematically destroyed by Russian air strikes last week. The aim is twofold: to terrify civilians into leaving, so that even more ruthless tactics can be used against the fighters who remain; and to raise the price of resistance to the point at which communities will put pressure on fighters to accept whatever ceasefire terms the regime is prepared to offer, as happened in Homs two months ago. Western diplomats accuse Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, of “weaponising” refugees to threaten Europe and punish Turkey, which supports the rebels and in November shot down a Russian plane that had crossed into its airspace. Turkey is doing everything it can to hold back the exodus from Aleppo by building big refugee camps on the Syrian side of the border. It is not yet clear whether it is prepared to defend these new camps against Russian or regime attacks. If it is, it could be the prelude to establishing an informal safe zone along the border—something the Turks have long demanded, but which America has refused to do, even when it would have been a lot less dangerous than it is now. Shooting down stray regime helicopters is one thing; risking a direct military confrontation with Russia is quite another. Syrian opposition leaders see it only slightly differently. One says: “It looks like Turkey is trying to create a humanitarian crisis. They think that maybe it could make the West finally act.” In fact, there is little prospect of Western intervention. Even if Russia and Turkey come to blows in Syria it is not at all clear that NATO, of which Turkey is a member, would be obliged to come to its aid unless Turkey’s own territory were under attack. The desperate diplomatic floundering of Mr Kerry suggests that President Barack Obama, with only a year left in office, will not adopt a more hawkish approach unless events force him to. In the absence of direct Western military intervention, most military analysts doubt that much can be done to stave off further rebel defeats. The Saudis are thinking of supplying them with shoulder-fired anti-aircraft missiles. But America rejects this idea because of the danger that they would be used by terrorists to shoot down passenger airliners around the world. None of this means that Aleppo will fall quickly to regime forces. There are about 40,000 battle-hardened rebel fighters from more than 50 opposition groups still in the city. Most have remained relatively independent of JAN. As a recent analysis by the Institute for the Study of War, a think-tank in Washington, DC, argues, they are a resilient bunch. However, the think-tank warns that the pressure of the coming siege will be used by JAN and its Salafi-jihadist ally, Ahrar al-Sham, to get moderate groups, who feel betrayed by the West, to merge with them. That would play into the regime’s account of the opposition being composed only of “terrorists”. Without Russian air support the pro-regime forces ranged against them would look a lot less formidable. There are relatively few units of the Alawite-led Syrian army left. By the middle of last year it was on the brink of disintegration. It is now being retrained and rearmed by the Russians, but it is largely deployed close to the regime’s heartland in Damascus and Latakia. Most of the forces around Aleppo are Iranian-led Shia militias, from Lebanon and Iraq, with some fighters from Afghanistan and Pakistan. Western intelligence sources put their number at about 15,000, not including around 5,000 from Hizbullah, the powerful Lebanese Shia militia. Some Russian Spetsnaz special forces are working on the ground, co-ordinating air strikes. One rebel commander said: “We can beat them on the battlefield. Our men have been fighting them for five years and this is their terrain. But the Russian bombings make the difference.” The West agonises over its self-inflicted impotence, while Turkey and its Gulf allies flail and threaten. But Mr Putin has a clear strategy that appears to be succeeding on almost every level. A newly confident Mr Assad talks about retaking the country bit by ruined bit. Vlad the victor Mr Putin’s immediate aim is to return Aleppo to government hands, allow the Kurds to create at least a semi-autonomous region in the north and then to use the suspended UN-sponsored peace process to lock in these gains. Underpinning this plan is his belief that a European Union bickering about refugees is desperate for the war to end at almost any cost, while Mr Obama has already given up trying (not very hard) to get rid of Mr Assad. As a juicy carrot, Mr Putin will hold out the promise of a genuinely concerted attack on IS in eastern Syria to bolster the apparently feeble efforts of Mr Obama’s coalition. He may get a deal; he may even be prepared to offer up Mr Assad as well, as long as he is replaced by someone Russia finds acceptable. From a wider perspective, Mr Putin’s strategy is paying dividends. His overarching reason for sending bombers to Syria, so soon after annexing Crimea and stirring up a separatist war in east Ukraine, is to force the West to take Russia seriously as a great power. In both cases the Kremlin portrays its action merely as a response to the provocative behaviour of America and its allies. In Mr Putin’s mind the revolution in Kiev in February 2014 was the result of a Western plot to claw Ukraine away from Russia. Similarly, the war in Syria was fomented by the West with the aim of dislodging Mr Assad. It is now getting its comeuppance, he believes. The flow of refugees into Europe, increased by Russian air strikes, is another bonus. Mr Putin has for several years been giving material support to populist and nativist parties in Europe that oppose the EU. They have been boosted by the union’s floundering response to the migrant crisis. A weakened EU, Mr Putin calculates, should make it easier to keep the likes of Ukraine, Georgia and Belarus within Russia’s sphere of influence. Not least, the Syrian campaign is helping to maintain Mr Putin’s approval ratings at home, which remain steady at more than 80% despite a painful recession in Russia, caused by cheap oil, Western sanctions and Mr Putin’s own misgovernment. Russian television depicts the war as an action blockbuster to cheering viewers. After Russian bombs hit hospitals in Aleppo, it shifted the blame onto America by showing footage of US Air Force A-10s allegedly operating in the skies over the city. America’s weary denial only confirmed its guilt. According to the Levada Centre, a pollster, nearly 60% of Russians support the war in Syria. Yet however successful Mr Putin’s strategy appears now, it is fraught with risk. Saudi Arabia, as the leader of a newly formed Islamic coalition, is conducting large-scale exercises, possibly in preparation for a ground campaign against IS. Turkey, to which the Saudis have recently sent planes, could become a partner. If they were to go ahead (and it remains a very big “if”), matters would be unlikely to stop there: regime forces could also come under attack, directly or indirectly. Russia would then either have to insert substantial ground forces of its own or back down, while America might have little option other than to support its allies. At best Mr Putin will have to contend with an incomplete triumph. Even with the help of Russia, Iran and Shia mercenaries, Mr Assad can at most retake the populous western end of the country. He will continue to face a large, radicalised insurgency. Mr Putin may find it as difficult to withdraw from Syria as the West has from Afghanistan. Nor will his promise of working with America to defeat IS be honoured unless Sunni Arabs are prepared to take and hold IS’s stronghold in Raqqa and the surrounding area can be taken and held by Sunni Arabs—in other words, those Russia now describes as “terrorists”. Mr Putin and Mr Assad may feel like winners for now. But in Syria “winning” and “victory” are slippery terms. THE fog of war frustrates statisticians: knowing for sure how many Syrians have died can seem as difficult as brokering a lasting peace. The last precise death toll published by the UN was 191,369 in August 2014, followed by an estimate of more than 250,000 in August 2015. But it then stopped updating the figure because of dwindling sources of good information. On February 11th the Syrian Centre for Policy Research (SCPR), a non-profit group, claimed that the true figure is now almost double that estimate at about 470,000. This number may seem large, but even the UN emphasised that its figures were conservative. It erred on the side of rigour rather than completeness, and only counted people whose names it knew and whose deaths were confirmed by more than one source. Extreme conditions have forced more approximate approaches. The SCPR divided Syria into 700 regions, and asked three local experts in each to give detailed information. If one gave an answer more than 10% apart from the others, they were replaced with two different “informants”. Rabie Nasser, an author of the report, says resampling happened in only about 10% of cases. The figure of 470,000, which comes with a 5% margin for error either side, is the sum of the average answers across regions. Relying on people to estimate the body count in large areas rent by civil war is bold. All sorts of biases could have crept in, not to mention the risk that the “informants” will have tweaked their figures to suit their own political agenda (though Mr Nasser says his team tried to find independent sources). Nonetheless, 470,000 could be close to the true figure. Since mid-2015 Russian bombs have added to the casualties. And whereas the UN figure only included deaths directly caused by fighting, the SCPR figure includes indirect deaths (about 15% of the total). The war has blasted hospitals and ruptured supplies of clean water, allowing disease to spread. Over time, Mr Nasser expects indirect deaths to climb as a proportion of the total. No one really knows how many have died in Syria; the 470,000 figure is only one estimate. The UN’s approach is that with such decay in the underlying data, it is better to be cautious than to risk losing credibility. Mr Nasser takes a different line. “If you’re in a conflict where people die, then you don’t give up.”THE Islamic Republic of Iran, as its name suggests, has been a curious amalgam of people-power and theocracy from the start. For most of its 37 years clerics have firmly dominated. But as its revolutionaries age and a new generation of leaders courts a warm relationship with the West, the theologians seem to be growing fearful about where the country’s elected politicians are leading it. In the run-up to parliamentary elections, scheduled for February 26th, they have clamped down more harshly than ever on candidates. Were the vote a straight test of Hassan Rohani’s popularity, his allies would surely win. The moderate president secured a deal with world powers last month that set aside the long crisis over his country’s nuclear programme. Crushing economic sanctions have been lifted. Iran has gained access to tens of billions of dollars of assets previously frozen overseas. Oil exports have resumed and a $27 billion contract with Airbus for 118 planes, signed when Mr Rohani visited the French president, François Hollande, at the Élysée Palace, has provided a glimpse of the potential riches on offer to a nation long isolated. Yet voters, and their representatives, also have to contend with the ruling clergy. The Council of Guardians, a constitutional watchdog of backers of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader, that vets contenders for their supposed loyalty, disqualified about 60% of the 12,000 people who came forward as parliamentary candidates, about twice the rate of previous elections. Roughly a quarter of those kicked off the list won appeals but, even so, half of those who had wanted to stand for office were prevented from doing so. Nor were the Guardians even-handed. Reformists were hit hardest. In the first cut only 30 of about 3,000 were approved, leaving large parts of the country without even a single reformist candidate. “They want an Islamic Re- without the public,” quipped one observer. The stacked vote means that Mr Rohani may have to stomach a parliament that will continue to resist his social and political programme. For almost three years he has contended with conservatives who have bridled at his outreach to the West, even impeaching one of his ministers, and have stymied his economic, political and cultural initiatives. That said, the popular Mr Rohani is not yet finished. Iran’s naysayers look more rudderless than its reformists. Pragmatic conservatives know that without finance from the West the Islamic republic could collapse. Iran aspires to be a bubbly BRIC economy, but growth was sluggish last year. The government is saddled with debt, and with a crashing oil price and weak production (down from 5.8m bpd in 1978 to 2.8m today), its budget deficit is around 2.2% of GDP and growing. Prominent conservatives, including Ali Larijani, the speaker of parliament, have promised to support some of Mr Rohani’s economic policies. “The parliament should legislate to remove obstacles to raising production and improve the business climate,” Mr Larijani told an economic conference in Qom, the country’s religious centre, on February 14th. A large number of independent candidates might sidle up to Mr Rohani, anxious to secure the funding his government dispenses. “While a pro-Rohani parliament looks in doubt, he should at least hope for one he can work with,” says a veteran Iran hand. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal That may not be enough to satisfy discontented Iranians to the left and the right. Many reformists remain bitter, not just about their electoral exclusion, but also at what they see as Mr Rohani’s failure to keep his promises. During his 2013 election campaign he held up a key, vowing to release political prisoners, including many arrested in protests that followed a disputed election in 2009. Yet they remain behind bars. Initiatives to open sports stadiums to women and execute fewer people have similarly fallen foul of conservatives. After repeated humiliations in parliament Mr Rohani has suspended political and cultural reform to focus on the economy. Also at stake in this election is the power to choose who will succeed Mr Khamenei, whose authority exceeds that of the president. On the same day that voters select MPs they will also choose members of the Assembly of Experts. This is a committee of clerics that will elect Mr Khamenei’s successor should he die during its eight-year tenure. Given that the 76-year-old is frequently said to be suffering from prostate cancer, the committee may indeed be called upon to do so. Although his succession was once a forbidden topic in Iran’s media, life after Mr Khamenei has been openly discussed in the run-up to the elections. All this has made the Guardians even more guarded than usual: they disqualified almost 80% of potential candidates vying for the 88 seats, including all the women who applied. The rejects included Hassan Khomeini, a reformist cleric who is the grandson of the founder of the revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The 43-year-old, who plays football, posts pictures on Instagram and has criticised the Revolutionary Guards for meddling in politics, was deemed unsuitable for the assembly by the conservative Guardians. Little effort has yet been made to court ordinary voters. With such a short campaign, there are as yet no billboards or signs of electioneering in Tehran. The only poster so far shows Mr Khamenei casting a ballot, signalling his desire for a strong turnout. Mr Rohani’s hopes rest in a single list called the Alliance of Reformists and Government Supporters. The group’s leader, Mohammad Reza Aref, a university professor whose withdrawal from elections in 2013 paved the way for Mr Rohani’s victory, is its main candidate in Tehran. Yet with so many candidates barred from running, voters may simply stay at home.FIRST they came for the statues. Last year students in Cape Town sparked national protests by calling on the University of Cape Town (UCT) to remove a statue of Cecil Rhodes, a Victorian imperialist who, like most Englishmen of his time, held racist views. The statue was removed but students were still angry. Many marched on South Africa’s parliament to complain about high college fees, among other things. That prompted a cash-strapped government not to raise fees after all. Protests about statues of dead racists soon spread around the world. Students demanded that Oriel College, Oxford take down its statue of Rhodes. (It refused.) The University of Texas at Austin has moved a bronze of Jefferson Davis, the Confederacy’s president, and will put it in a museum. Meanwhile, back in Cape Town, UCT students starting a new academic year after the long summer break were quick to resume protests, this time over gripes such as not having enough spaces in university dormitories. They stormed through the campus grabbing artworks and burning them. Most of the paintings they heaped on a bonfire were portraits of white historical figures. They were, declared one protester, “symbols of the coloniser”. Another protester proudly posted pictures of the bonfire on Twitter, showing flames licking at the edges of a plaque commemorating Jan Smuts, a British-educated general who was twice South Africa’s prime minister and helped write the preamble to the UN’s founding charter. The tweet accompanying it proclaimed: “Whiteness is burning”. Some of the art-burners might usefully have spent more time in the library studying South African history. Among the works they turned to ashes was a 1993 oil painting by a black anti-apartheid artist, Keresemose Richard Baholo. It was called “Extinguished Torch of Academic Freedom”, one of a series of paintings depicting protests at the university. Students defaced a statue of Smuts and a bust of Maria Fuller, one of the first four women to attend the university. She enrolled in 1886, when most courses were open only to men. She went on to play a role in opening a women’s hall of residence. She was, however, white. The protests are symptomatic of a resurgence of racial antagonism in South Africa, fanned by frustration over a slowing economy and high unemployment. More than two decades after apartheid ended black South Africans are still worse off than whites. Mostly, this is because they are less well educated, a result of apartheid’s legacy and the government’s failure to fix it. Bad education is a problem that starts long before students reach college. Among the protesters’ complaints at UCT was the implausible claim that whites were given preferential access to university accommodation. The protesters erected a corrugated tin shack on UCT’s stately grounds as a symbol of how rough life is in black townships. They added a portable loo and overturned milk crates as chairs. Some started a shisa nyama, grilling sausages and chops over charcoal. The flames spread. The small band of students refused to remove the shack, which university officials said was blocking traffic, and went on a rampage. They burned a car, a bus and the office of Max Price, the university’s vice-chancellor. “It is utterly regrettable that a movement that began with such promise and purport to be fighting for social justice matters has now deteriorated into a group that engages in criminality,” Mr Price said. Little seems left of the lofty aims that prompted students to take to the streets last October, when they garnered widespread support for their argument that high tuition fees put a university education out of reach for black students from poor families. The shortage of housing at UCT is partly due to the success of those protests: enrolment has increased thanks to lower fees and measures to reduce student debt. Also, some university rooms are still occupied by students whose exams were delayed by last year’s protests. Students arrested for damaging property at UCT included several who are not obviously poor, such as the son of the chief executive of Eskom, the state power utility. Other universities have seen violent protests, too, largely over fees and overcrowding. A student leader at Walter Sisulu University told the Daily Sun, a tabloid: “We’re going to destroy everything.”Mr Besigye, still in the back seat UGANDA’S president likes to keep people waiting. In a marquee in the grounds of a swanky hotel in Kampala, about 150 smartly dressed bigwigs were treated to a buffet breakfast. It helped pass the time until 12.30pm, when Yoweri Museveni finally turned up to launch a partly solar-powered electric bus. The Kayoola bus, designed by Kiira Motors, a state-owned firm, trundled around the hotel car park in front of a pack of cameras. Mr Museveni, clad in his trademark bright yellow shirt and wide-brimmed hat, then ambled back to the marquee to listen to tributes. The photo opportunity, two days before the country’s presidential election on February 18th, presented a contrast to events a few miles down the road the previous night. There police had fired tear gas and rubber bullets at supporters of Mr Museveni’s main electoral rival, Kizza Besigye (pictured riding pillion). One person was killed and Mr Besigye, who had been briefly detained earlier that day, was taken home before he could address a rally. Mr Museveni, who is running for a fifth term after 30 years in power, is facing what observers say is his most competitive election yet (voting was taking place as The Economist went to press). A poll released in January put Mr Museveni at 51% of the vote, exactly what he needs to avoid a run-off. Mr Besigye, the president’s doctor during the bush wars in the 1980s, was on 32%. Amama Mbabazi, a former prime minister who split with Mr Museveni over his succession plans, languished at 12%. Polls are unreliable, however, so Mr Museveni is taking no chances. Policemen are not the only ones disrupting opposition rallies: the government has recruited hundreds of thousands of unemployed young men as “crime preventers”. These militias have harassed opposition politicians and supporters, says Human Rights Watch, a watchdog. On February 13th police arrested a radio talk-show host mid-broadcast. He was charged with defacing posters of Mr Museveni. Mr Museveni and his National Resistance Movement (NRM) also have far more money to hand. The 27 billion Ugandan shillings ($7.9m) splurged on his campaign in November and December accounted for 91.6% of spending by all candidates in those months. The Alliance for Campaign Finance Monitoring, the local lobby group that collected the data, says the NRM has bribed voters with hoes, saucepans, seeds, sugar and salt. Meanwhile, Uganda’s press made much of people giving Mr Besigye cash, fruit and even cows, suggesting widespread support for his fourth campaign. Change was the watchword among the opposition leader’s blue-clad supporters on the last day of official campaigning, as his convoy inched through cheering crowds in eastern Kampala. More than one unemployed young man said he both expected Mr Besigye to win and would take to the streets to “fight” if the 71-year-old Mr Museveni triumphed. The Electoral Commission is widely viewed as subservient to Mr Museveni, along with the police, army and judiciary. It didn’t help matters by banning mobile phones from polling booths (limiting voters’ ability to document irregularities). Mr Besigye has urged his supporters to cast their votes before midday on Thursday and stay until voting closes to make sure “nobody steals your victory”. If, as is likely, Mr Museveni triumphs outright in the first round, his rivals’ supporters will probably take to the streets. If that were to happen, a heavy-handed response is likely. The police and army have not shown themselves gun-shy in dealing with protests in the past. Nor should Mr Museveni expect much criticism from Western governments, which have little leverage—Western aid has been suspended or cut in recent years after a corruption scandal and outrage over the treatment of Ugandan homosexuals. In any case Mr Museveni has new friends. He spoke admiringly of the Chinese and Soviet models of state-led development as he launched the costly state-funded Kayoola bus—which reportedly broke down shortly afterwards. A spokeswoman denied the report, saying the bus was towed away to avoid a traffic jam. Meanwhile, Uganda continues to putter along in the slow lane.FRENCH politicians are better at avoiding retirement than avoiding the courtroom, or so it sometimes seems. The race is now on for the centre-right nomination in the country’s presidential elections next year. The front-runners are a 61-year-old former president, Nicolas Sarkozy, who first won elected office in 1977, and a 70-year-old who served as prime minister two decades ago, Alain Juppé. Mr Juppé was once convicted of political corruption and banned from public office for a year. Now it is Mr Sarkozy’s turn to be hauled before the judges. On February 16th Mr Sarkozy was formally placed under investigation for breaching campaign-finance limits during his failed 2012 re-election bid. These fix the maximum a candidate can spend at €22.5m ($25.1m). Investigators are looking into whether Mr Sarkozy was aware that a system of false invoices charged to the party were in fact used for his own campaign. (He denies any knowledge of the subterfuge.) Over a dozen party officials have already been placed under investigation in connection with the affair, including Jérôme Lavrilleux, Mr Sarkozy’s deputy campaign director, who first acknowledged the false invoices. Mr Sarkozy’s new brush with the law is plainly a set-back. He is already under formal investigation in a separate job-for-favours inquiry. An investigative judge must have good reason to believe that a suspect has breached the law before placing him under formal investigation. An inquiry can then take months, if not years, before a decision is taken as to whether the suspect is sent for trial. Yet investigative judges often enough pursue cases that end up being shelved. Mr Sarkozy, for instance, was put under formal investigation in 2013 for allegedly taking advantage of an elderly donor in connection with another campaign-finance case, linked to his successful bid for the presidency in 2007. The case against him was later dropped. French voters are mindful of this, even to the point of sympathy for those ensnared by the law. Mr Juppé, who was convicted in connection with a fake-jobs scandal under Jacques Chirac at the Paris town hall in the early 1990s, is a good example. A decade ago, after a year spent teaching in Canada while he was struck off the electoral register, he returned triumphantly to politics and served as Mr Sarkozy’s foreign minister. Voters have warmed to the patrician leader, whom they once regarded as unforgivably stiff and technocratic. In 2014 Mr Juppé was re-elected mayor of Bordeaux with an ample majority. Indeed, Mr Juppé is now favoured in the presidential primary which the Republicans, the centre-right opposition party, will hold in November. Among those who say they are certain to vote, he leads Mr Sarkozy by 44% to 32%, according to Ipsos, a pollster. Mr Juppé, who has moderate views on immigration and nationality, appeals more to the centre, and to those fatigued by the frenetic former president. Yet the pugnacious Mr Sarkozy, whose recent book about his mistakes in office shot to the top of the bestseller list, retains star appeal and support from the hard-core party faithful. Among Republican voters, he leads Mr Juppé by 42% to 37%. In short, the more people turn out to vote at the primary, which is open to anybody who professes to share centre-right “values”, the greater the chance that Mr Juppé will win. The contest promises to be tough and crowded, with a scattering of outsiders now piling in. Mr Sarkozy’s fresh legal troubles will reinforce pre-existing negative views of him, says Federico Vacas, an analyst at Ipsos. But, he adds, “it would be a mistake to think that these will prompt his candidacy to collapse.”
