I think they’re closed MUSCOVITES awoke last week to scenes of destruction. Shops and cafés lay in ruins. The perpetrators were not terrorists, but the city government, which dispatched excavators to destroy nearly 100 buildings that allegedly posed a danger to the public. For shopkeepers like Stanislav, who had manned a flower shop near a metro station in central Moscow, the demolition came as a shock: “Our owners called at lunch and said, ‘Gather your things, they’re coming tonight’.” Locals dubbed it the “Night of the Long Scoops”. A city government gazette, perhaps not spotting the Hitler reference, used the phrase in a headline. Moscow’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, wants to cleanse the city of street vendors. “One cannot hide behind property papers,” he says. He claims that the businesses had obtained their title documents illegally. The owners deny that; many had successfully appealed to Moscow’s courts to recognise their leases as legitimate. The city had even allowed them to hook up to utility grids. “For 25 years, nothing, then suddenly this,” says Marzhana Gadzhieva, a saleswoman at a bakery slated for demolition later this month. Delovaya Rossiya, a business lobby, estimates the damages at around 22 billion roubles ($290m). A timeline of Vladimir Putin’s unshakeable popularity Private merchants first cropped up in the 1990s on the plazas around metro stations and in Moscow’s ubiquitous underground passageways. Over the years, their makeshift kiosks evolved into more formal pavilions. The shops were ugly but convenient, offering everything from shawarma to mobile phones, often late into the night. Mr Sobyanin, who took office in 2010, quickly cleared out the informal street vendors; last December, the city council ordered a list of formalised pavilion owners to shut down, too. But few expected the demolition crews that arrived late on February 8th. Some shopkeepers hung up portraits of Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, hoping his image would keep the excavators at bay. Critics of the mayor, such as Alexei Navalny, an opposition leader, suggest the authorities wanted to clear space for bigger businesses that can pay fatter bribes. But they also sent a message to stubborn landowners: any challenge to the government can be crushed. Property rights can be “declared ‘a piece of paper’,” writes Andrei Kolesnikov of the Moscow Carnegie Centre—hardly a good incentive to invest in an economy already struggling with sanctions and low oil prices. Only last month Mr Putin told a business forum that small and medium-sized enterprises should be “the real foundation for our country’s economic development.” On paper, Russia’s business climate has improved recently. But when paper rights meet steel scoopers, the paper tends to tear.ALBERTO MUNNO, a judge in the southern Italian city of Taranto, believes he is being oppressed by his country’s justice system. He has a rather good case. “I produce 160 verdicts per year—and the European Convention on Human Rights bans slavery,” he complains. With a backlog of over 500 cases, the overworked judge recently postponed a civil hearing by three years. The owner of the firm involved, who filed a claim for €200,000 ($220,000) in 2014, will now have to wait until 2019 to have his case heard. It takes on average 1,210 days for Italy’s judges to resolve a typical commercial dispute. Though notorious for their lethargy, Italy’s courts are not Europe’s worst offenders. Slovenia’s take even longer. Cyprus’s can take over three years, more than thrice the wait in Germany and France. Italy’s government has at least accepted that it has a problem. Matteo Renzi, the country’s energetic prime minister, has made judicial reform a priority. The European Commission is anxious to speed up Europe’s courts. During the depths of the euro crisis, it introduced rules intended to harmonise the euro area’s economies. Those included a chapter on justice. Greece’s creditors even made changing the country’s court procedures a precondition of its most recent bail-out. Dealing with cases quickly is, of course, not the only measure of a good legal system. (If it were, Russia’s courts would outperform England’s; and Islamic State’s death-penalty jurisprudence would be a model for the world.) Nonetheless, the commission is right to worry. Long delays make it harder to do business; Italy estimates that legal sloth shrinks its GDP by 1%. Delays also damage the single market. Litigation in Europe often crosses borders. In the absence of a system of federal European courts, the judges from one member state must take the lead. The thicket of rules that decide which state will take a particular case are known as the Brussels regulation. For many years, this system held that the first court to receive a lawsuit should decide whether to hear it. That gave rise to a range of manoeuvres devised by clever lawyers. One, the so-called “Italian torpedo”, involves a plaintiff filing a claim in Italy in a bid to delay proceedings. (A manufacturer might file a frivolous patent infringement claim to fend off a real one.) Even deciding to pass the case to another country could take several years. The regulations were reformed last year, and courts are now supposed to respect contracts that specify which country has jurisdiction. But where the choice is ambiguous, the torpedo may still be armed. Several things slow down European civil justice, says Giuliana Palumbo, a researcher at Italy’s national bank and the author of a paper on the subject. First, procedure matters. Slow jurisdictions, like Italy, let lawyers adduce new evidence whenever they want, allowing them to prolong a case with new submissions. Quicker ones, like France, give judges the power to impose strict deadlines. Second, how judges get promoted is important. Some countries ignore judges’ managerial prowess when deciding whom to promote. That gives ambitious younger judges no incentive to clear their dockets. A third factor is how lawyers are paid. Some countries limit the hourly fee they can charge for a given service. That can make stretching out a case the only way to earn more. Most jurisdictions have some of these problems. Italy has all three, Ms Palumbo sighs. Some remedies are both obvious and cheap. Binning the fax machines and shifting to the internet can speed up cases. Estonia lets plaintiffs file a claim, submit evidence and even appeal a court decision online. Judges and clerks should also think like managers, Ms Palumbo says. Promoting judges based on their case-management skills, and getting them involved in budgeting, can help to focus their minds. Lawyers are also to blame, though. One problem is that southern Europe simply has too many of them. Greece and Italy have almost 400 lawyers per 100,000 residents. (That is about the same outlandish ratio that prevails in notoriously litigious America.) France makes do with only 85. Jean-Paul Jean, a French judge who chairs the Council of Europe’s justice committee, notes that there is a “strange overlap” between the countries where trials take a long time and those with lots of lawyers. (Luxembourg is a notable exception.) Numerous, eloquent and organised, they form a powerful lobby in most southern European countries. That makes reform difficult. Greek lawyers showed their political muscle last month, going on strike to protest against cuts to their pensions. Since Greek courts already take more than four years to enforce a contract, the striking lawyers’ clients may not notice the difference.ONE of Turkey’s more forlorn sights is tucked down an Ankara side street inside the EU affairs ministry. At the top of a small staircase lurks a poster depicting a sprawling tree, its lower branches bereft and leafless but its top half a lush burst of greenery. A caption explains the symbolism: “Let’s bring a dynamic industry, young workforce and unique cultural diversity to freshen and revive the European Union. By welcoming Turkey.” This relic speaks of a happier time, when Turkey was confident enough in its bid for EU membership to present itself as a tonic to a tired continent. Travel around the country today, as Charlemagne did last week on a trip organised by the European Council on Foreign Relations, a think-tank, and you encounter a different mood. For many Turks opposed to the ruling Justice and Development (AK) party, the EU’s name means betrayal. In Istanbul liberals lament that Europe turns a blind eye to the authoritarian habits of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, a president with a penchant for beating up journalists and tampering with the judiciary. Refugees in Gaziantep, near Syria, do not understand why Germany worries more about the migrants reaching rich Europe than the hundreds of thousands of Syrians facing death at the hands of Bashar al-Assad and his Russian enablers. Kurds in the south-east say that Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, ignores the plight of towns like Cizre, besieged by Turkish troops. Little wonder they feel let down. Turkey’s south-east is a simmering cauldron of violence. Since last summer Turkish forces and young rebels affiliated with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) have been locked in a spiral of violence that has left hundreds of civilians dead. Cities are in lockdown; in Diyarbakir the air is thick with tear gas and the crump of artillery. Locals warn of further escalation in the spring, when battle-hardened fighters of the PKK leave their winter redoubts in northern Iraq. Elsewhere Mr Erdogan continues his authoritarian march. Beset by allegations of corruption in AK and opposed by former allies, he is single-mindedly pursuing a constitutional change that would extend the powers of his presidency. Terrified journalists censor themselves before government goons do it for them. Public contracts reward friends; foes are fined for supposed tax violations. Turkey’s political and ethnic cleavages grow ever wider. Meanwhile the region is aflame. The fighting around Aleppo (see article), over the Syrian border, has created a fresh stream of refugees. Desperate to stop Syrian Kurds from expanding their territory along the border, Turkey has begun shelling their positions. Russia’s escalation, and its alliance of convenience with the Kurds, has weakened Turkey’s hand. Mr Erdogan’s war of words with Vladimir Putin is dangerously heated. Meanwhile America, a NATO ally, rejects Turkish demands that it disown the Syrian Kurds, who are useful in fighting Islamic State (IS). A car bomb which killed at least 28 people in Ankara on February 17th showed that the violence is spreading to Turkey’s heartland. It is easy to see why Europe’s refugee problem might not be at the top of Turkey’s in-tray. Europeans optimistically say that Turkey’s troubles present them with an opening, for Mr Erdogan needs friends. But that misreads the view from Ankara. In Syria Mr Erdogan wants to smash the Kurds and hold the line against Mr Assad; at home he seeks to consolidate his rule and squeeze the opposition. The EU is not able to help him achieve these goals. And so, while leaders like Mrs Merkel (rightly) praise Turkey for welcoming 2.5m Syrians onto its soil and express sympathy for its strategic predicament, Mr Erdogan responds with insults and threatens to bus millions of refugees to Greece and Bulgaria. The Europeans will have to accept such tough talk in their bid to secure Turkish help to reduce the migrant flow. The EU’s promise of visa-free travel for Turks in exchange for a cut in the number of migrants, agreed on late last year, is a genuine prize for the Turks (“Visiting Germany is harder than buying land in heaven,” says one). But Europe is in a rush, and Mr Erdogan is not. Hence Mrs Merkel’s endless meetings with Turkish officials. Hence the EU’s willingness to overlook Mr Erdogan’s excesses. And hence the sense of betrayal among his domestic antagonists. “We need pressure from outside,” says Firat Anli, the co-mayor of Diyarbakir. “Otherwise we see where the state’s reflexes lead.” An insincere invitation In this telling, the Europeans might be able to blunt Mr Erdogan’s sharper edges if only they were brave enough to shed their hypocrisies. Certainly the EU was once a force in Turkish politics. In the early years of AK rule it was a useful anchor for Mr Erdogan’s economic and legal reforms, and an ally in his battle against Turkey’s old secular elite and their friends in the army. Yet the EU lost its clout years ago. Soon after membership talks began in 2005, Turkey fell victim to the sharp tongue of Nicolas Sarkozy, a former (and possible future) French president who once dismissed Turkey as part of “Asia Minor”, and the veto-wielding Cypriot government, which was let into the EU before solving its own Turkish problem. When Turkish citizens realised that accession was going nowhere, they lost interest. And once Mr Erdogan had got what he wanted from the process, he discarded it and moved on. Pro-EU Turks were left adrift. They have not lost hope. Support for membership is climbing as Mr Erdogan tightens his grip, and at least Turkey and Europe are talking again. Turkey’s local troubles have left it more dependent on EU markets and investment. Even the stand-off on Cyprus may be near a solution. Had Europe pledged a decade ago to allow Turkey’s application to go forward, and convinced Ankara (and itself) that membership was a realistic prospect, it might not find itself so helpless today. Last year’s deal may have been grubby and it may turn out to be pointless, but by the time it was signed, the EU had nothing left to lose. It is hard to think of a stronger indictment of Europe’s foreign policy.IT IS nearly 20 years since Wales was granted its own National Assembly, a historic devolution of power from London that the then British prime minister, Tony Blair, later said had given “a lead to the rest of the UK—and to Europe”. Since that reform, triggered by a referendum in 1997, further rounds of devolution have given Welsh politicians control over policy areas including housing, health and education. Yet today in Ebbw Vale, a former steel town in the country’s deep south, few locals seem enthusiastic about their national government. “It’s a waste of money and a waste of time,” says Wayne Grist, a butcher, who is among the more diplomatic of the government’s critics. Undeterred, the Conservative government plans to devolve more powers from Westminster to the Welsh capital, Cardiff. It is part of a promised “devolution revolution” in which English cities will get more powers over transport, planning and, in some cases, health care, and Scotland will, from next year, get the right to set some taxes and welfare payments (the result of panicky promises made by English politicians ahead of a referendum on Scottish independence in 2014, which at the time looked too close to call). In Wales the latest proposed round of devolution has proved no more enticing than previous ones. Its unpopularity hints at why devolution there has, so far, not been a huge success—and how other places could encounter similar problems. Independence has never set Welsh hearts beating as it does Scots’. Only half the electorate voted in the referendum of 1997; the measure to create a National Assembly passed by a margin of just 0.3% of the vote. Another referendum in 2011, to give the Assembly more powers, was passed with a turnout of 35%. The latest proposals, which were put before the Assembly in October and must later be passed by Parliament, would change from a “conferred powers” model, where the areas in which the Assembly can legislate are laid out, to a “reserve powers” model, where the areas in which the Assembly cannot legislate are listed, as in Scotland. That would mean Welsh ministers getting control of a few more policy areas, including transport (regulating ports, setting road speed-limits, licensing taxis and so on) and marine licensing. The bill would formally declare the Assembly to be permanent. And it would create a “funding floor” for Wales, at 115% of comparable spending per head in England, its richer neighbour. It has been roundly criticised by Welsh politicians, many of whom suspect the new settlement could end up being more restrictive than the current one. The “reserve powers” list is longer and more complex than Scotland’s, and details over tax devolution and the funding floor are vague. Carwyn Jones, the Labour first minister of Wales, has warned that it could create an “English veto” by requiring the Assembly to get permission from Westminster to pass certain laws that until now it has been able to pass freely (the British government disputes this). Although the bill has fired up Welsh politicians, few ordinary people are interested. A poll by ICM in 2015 found that only 40% thought the Assembly should have more powers, down from 49% the previous year (at the time of the Scottish referendum). Fully 13% thought the Assembly should be scrapped and Wales governed from Westminster. Partly this reflects the piecemeal approach of Welsh devolution, which could put off even the most diehard constitutional nationalist. “It has been a string of pretty comprehensive failures in terms of constitution-building,” says Richard Wyn Jones of Cardiff University. But is also reflects the fact that many of the policy areas under Welsh control have fared rather badly. Health care is one. A report from the Nuffield Trust, a research group, found that in 2012-13 patients in Wales waited about 170 days for a hip or knee replacement, compared with 70 days in England and Scotland. One reason is that spending on health was not protected, as it had been in England. Indeed, it fell in real (inflation-adjusted) terms by 4.3% between 2009-10 and 2012-13. Wales has also done less than England to increase competition between health providers. People in Ebbw Vale complain of a “postcode lottery”; some cross the border to England in order to get a better service. Education is similarly mediocre. Welsh schools’ poor results are partly explained by the country’s relative poverty, but not entirely: looking only at those children who qualify for free school meals (a measure of poverty), 26% of those in Wales get five good GCSE qualifications at age 16, compared with 38% in England. Some believe that Wales’s opting out of the “academies” programme, under which most English schools have been made independent of local authorities, has held them back. And although many hoped that subsidising university for all would encourage more youngsters to apply, that does not seem to have happened: Welsh entry rates this year were 32%, compared with 37% in England, where rich students pay steep fees in order to subsidise the poor ones. Part of the problem is a lack of political competition. Apart from a brief surge of support for the nationalist Plaid Cymru in 1997 and some Conservative backing in better-off areas, Wales overwhelmingly votes Labour. The party holds half the Assembly’s 60 seats (and would hold more, were it not for the Assembly’s proportional voting system). Polls suggest it may lose a few seats in elections in May, but there is no danger of it failing to come top. The resulting governments have distanced themselves from English Labour and the Tories alike, without coming up with many innovations of their own. “They say you could put a donkey up here [for Labour] and it would get elected,” says a retired schoolteacher in Ebbw Vale. This presents a paradox for the “devolution revolution”. Often the areas keenest to take on new powers are those with entrenched, well organised local politicians—and often this means they are dominated by one-party politics. Many of the English cities preparing to take on new powers, for instance, are as solidly Labour as Wales is. Some are itching to experiment and innovate. But, as Wales shows, devolution can also be used to keep things standing still. There isn’t an app for that A VISIT to the London Trocadero was once the highlight of many a tourist trip to Britain. Opened in 1896 just off Piccadilly Circus, it was one of the largest and grandest restaurants in the world. After a long decline it closed in 1965 and was gutted, before its formerly palatial interior was filled with tacky video arcades and tourist shops selling cut-price knick-knacks. Yet soon the Trocadero will be on the London tourist-map once again: surrounded in construction hoardings, a 583-room hotel is under development behind the grand frontage. It is a symbol of the hotel boom currently under way in the capital. The number of hotel rooms has risen from 129,000 in 2013 to 149,000 today, according to PwC, a consultancy. There is still no sign of overcapacity. Last year occupancy rates reached their highest in a decade and average prices were higher than ever. The hotels’ resilience is surprising, given the onslaught from sharing-economy websites and apps that allow people to rent out their spare rooms to travellers. According to researchers at Boston University, Airbnb, the biggest such service, has forced down hotel revenues in some American cities by as much as 10%. By comparison, the impact of room-booking apps has been muted in London, says Marie Hickey of Savills, an estate agent. Only 0.5% of Londoners advertise their properties on Airbnb, compared with 2.4% of Parisians. One reason is that there is a shortage of reasonably priced residential stock near London’s main tourist attractions, which are hemmed in by offices and mansions. And according to a recent report by Citi, a bank, the growth of Airbnb listings in London and other big European cities is already slowing, meaning that Londoners’ spare rooms are unlikely to be able to soak up much more demand. Hotels have also benefited from a change in the type of visitor coming to Britain. Whereas the strong pound has persuaded many tourists to divert to cheaper destinations (€1 now buys about 15% fewer Princess Diana postcards than it did five years ago), business travellers cannot avoid London so easily. So while tourist spending stagnated in 2015, businessfolk splashed out 7% more in Britain than the previous year, according to the Global Business Travel Association, an industry body, which forecasts further growth of 6% this year. Unlike budget-conscious holidaymakers, who are willing to book a room in a stranger’s home on Airbnb to save a few pounds, most businesspeople are travelling on expense accounts and happy to splash out. Meanwhile their employers, citing a duty to ensure safety, remain wary of booking spare rooms, which they fear conceal slippery stairs, dodgy electrics and other hazards. This suits hoteliers nicely. But not all of them. Business travellers may not yet be switching to Airbnb, but they are trimming their costs. More than half the new rooms built in London this year will be operated by two- or three-star budget brands. Even the once-glitzy Trocadero cannot escape that trend. Having made its name a century ago selling nine-course meals to the aspiring upper classes, in 2017 it will re-open—but as an Ibis budget pod hotel.Independent’s day: the founding fathers IN ITS heyday the Independent, Britain’s youngest national newspaper, was a scrappy place to do journalism—a startup before there were startups. Young reporters worked long hours, drank hard and engaged occasionally in physical tussles that, as one alumnus puts it, were somehow not at all “career-limiting” (unless one counts moving on to The Economist, as did several, including one of the Independent’s founders). At its peak in 1989, three years after its founding, it had a daily circulation of more than 420,000 and turned a healthy profit. Those days are gone. A price-war started by Rupert Murdoch’s Times in the early 1990s claimed many of the Independent’s readers; lately the internet has tempted more away. On March 26th the last print edition of the newspaper will roll off the presses, its circulation down to a loyal rump of 55,000. Its Sunday sister’s last run will be on March 20th. More than half the titles’ roughly 200 journalists will lose their jobs as the Independent becomes a digital-only publication. The most profitable bit of the company, the i, a millennial-oriented cheapsheet spun off from the Independent in 2010, is to be sold to the Johnston Press, a regional publisher, for £24m ($35m). Fifty or so Independent hacks are expected to move with it. The i’s success, establishing a circulation of more than 200,000, had put the Independent closer to breaking even. But its owners, a Russian KGB-man turned banker, Alexander Lebedev, and his son, Evgeny, came to see paid-for, general-interest daily print titles as a losing proposition. In the long run, such newspapers are “toast”, says Amol Rajan, the Independent’s editor. The data support that grim view. The total circulation of British newspapers has fallen by 36% since 2009, and their share of the national advertising market has dropped even more sharply, from 25% in 2009 to less than 10% last year, according to Jim Chisholm, a media consultant. Since 2005 the country has lost more than 200 local newspapers. The survivors are banking on the web. The online editions of the Daily Mail and the Guardian are among the world’s most popular English-language news sites. But digital ad revenues have yet to make up the steep declines in print-ad sales. The Guardian’s owner said in January that it expected to post a loss of £53m in the year to March 31st; it is aiming to cut costs by 20% in order to break even within three years. The Guardian and other titles are trying to increase revenue from innovations like dating sites, events and sponsored content. The Times is trying another tactic. It maintains one of the strictest online paywalls in journalism, and has managed to stabilise its daily paid circulation at more than 400,000. As a result it is a virtual nonentity online, a seemingly precarious position (Mr Murdoch’s tabloid, the Sun, dropped its paywall in November). A few prestigious and specialist dailies, such as the Financial Times, can get away with charging online readers, most often via a “metered” paywall that allows a few free clicks. (The Economist does this too.) By contrast, general-interest news sites struggle to extract money from their readers, who can easily find free news elsewhere, notably from the licence-fee funded BBC. Mr Rajan believes a lean, advertising-supported model can work. He will stay on as editor-at-large of the Independent’s digital operation, with a staff of 75. The Independent is a startup once more.STUDENT accommodation has changed beyond recognition in the past decade. As the number of people in higher education has risen, private providers of purpose-built digs have stepped in to make up the shortfall in housing, tempting students away from crumbling halls of residence by offering en-suite bathrooms, fast Wi-Fi and modern decor. But the new flats are not cheap and, as universities raise rents in their old halls, too, poor students, especially in London, are being squeezed. A little over one in four students lives in purpose-built halls of residence. In 2006, 82% of them were in halls owned and run by a university or college, according to Unipol, a non-profit provider of student housing. Now, following a rise in the number of fancier private halls, the figure is 59%. Partly because they tend to have a longer letting year—that is, they charge students rent during the holidays as well as during term time—private halls are a pricey option. They charge about 40% more than university-run halls, which means, on average, an extra £2,200 ($3,100) a year. As with anything to do with housing, London is in a class of its own: average weekly rent in halls in the capital was £220 last year, over 50% more than the average rent in halls outside the capital, according to GVA, a consultancy. Landlords report that students are pickier than they used to be. The tripling in 2012 of the maximum tuition fees for undergraduates to £9,000 a year has contributed to rising expectations among students of both their courses and their living conditions, believes Martin Blakey of Unipol. “The rite of passage of living in a dump is over,” he says. Nonetheless, many balk at the prices on offer. On average, private halls have increased their rents by one-fifth since 2012. For one-quarter of students, the new rite of passage is spending the university years living with mum and dad. That option is not available to overseas scholars, whose numbers have risen by one-third in the past decade. They are a big part of the market for private halls: in London, more than half the students living in halls owned by Unite, the largest private provider, are foreign. Even those halls run by universities are getting more expensive. Many have increased their rents to pay for modernisation in order to keep up with the private sector. This has provoked rent strikes in some places. Students at University College London, who are withholding rent, say it has risen by 56% since 2009 (UCL puts the figure at 40%). The university says it ploughs rent into upkeep of the buildings. Meanwhile, investors continue to pile in to private student housing. It was once part of an asset class called “alternatives”, which includes hotels and health care. But investment in private halls jumped from around £1.5 billion in 2014 to at least £4.5 billion last year—more even than in the far bigger (though more mature) American student-housing market. “It’s not ‘alternative’ any longer: it’s core,” says Philip Hillman of JLL, a property adviser. The growth may slow, especially if student numbers start to plateau. Last year a cap on the number of students able to attend British universities was lifted, with the government expecting an extra 60,000 students a year. But in September only 20,000 more enrolled, and applications for next year have hardly risen at all. Nonetheless Nick Hillman of the Higher Education Policy Institute in Oxford thinks the market for new student digs will continue to grow. “There is no developed country where demand for higher education has fallen,” he says. “In Britain, even tripling the tuition fees didn’t dent it.”FANS of Liverpool Football Club are a loyal bunch. So it caused a stir when around one-quarter of the 44,000 people in Anfield stadium on February 6th left with 15 minutes of the game to go, in protest against high ticket prices. (Liverpool promptly lost their two-goal lead.) Many have since spoken out in support of the exodus. “Football is not an elite sport for VIPs like polo or even golf. Football is the people’s sport,” said Slaven Bilic, manager of West Ham United, a London club. The protest scored its goal: Liverpool abandoned a plan to charge £77 ($110) for its most expensive tickets. It also spooked others. Sunderland said it would cut season-ticket prices; the Football Association reduced prices for the final rounds of the knockout FA Cup. Supporters’ clubs will gather on February 19th to decide whether to organise wider protests. Daily Chart: The world's richest football clubs Ticket pricing is tricky for clubs. Supporters say a multi-billion-pound television deal coming next season should allow clubs to cut prices. But growing television revenues have inflated players’ wages and transfer costs. And with strong demand for tickets—last season 96% of Premier League seats were sold, a higher percentage than in any other big football league—there is little reason to make them cheaper. Clubs have something of a monopoly, says Michael Brunskill of the Football Supporters’ Federation: “I’m not going to go and support someone else just because my team decides to put their prices up.” Given this, some fans get a rather good deal. Season-ticket prices at Manchester United have been frozen for the past five seasons, and those at several other clubs have risen slower than inflation. Some other sports’ tickets are much dearer: American-football fans, for instance, frequently pay over $100, a price very few Premier League sides ask. “Dynamic” pricing, which rises and falls with demand, has been resisted so far by clubs in England. Why don’t they charge fans more? A noisy home crowd confers an advantage (last season clubs were 50% more likely to win at home than away), which a more genteel clientele might reduce. In 2013 falling away-attendances prompted seven clubs to introduce perks for travelling fans, including drink tokens and even subsidised tickets. Leaving in the 77th minute won Liverpool fans some concessions. Not turning up in the first place would have more impact still.Doing swell ALMOST all economies are influenced by the seasons. Britain’s GDP tends to grow faster in the final quarter of the year than in the first, as people splurge on Christmas shopping and hit end-of-year deadlines. But Cornwall’s economy is notoriously up and down. After its mining industry was exhausted—the last tin mine closed in 1998—the south-western county came to rely more on its beaches, which pull in more overnight tourists than anywhere in Britain outside the capital and its surroundings. But this emphasis on tourism had a cost: as bellboys and barmaids lost their jobs in the bleak midwinter, unemployment would soar (see chart). Few parts of Britain were so afflicted by seasonal worklessness. Recently, though, things have been looking up. In the three months to December, when few would dare attempt a British beach holiday, the unemployment rate in Cornwall was about 4%, below the national figure of 5.1%. More surprising, it is barely higher than it was in the summer. Unemployment among 18- to 24-year-olds, the group most likely to work in tourism, is lower than it was six months ago. As seasonal unemployment has become less acute, so annual earnings have risen. Though it is still one of Britain’s poorest areas, in 2003-13 Cornwall’s disposable income per person was the fifth-fastest-growing in the country. What explains the turnaround? St Ives, a picturesque coastal town popular with artists, is hardly bustling on a rainy Thursday in February, but locals insist that winters are nowhere near as dead as they used to be. The arrival of a branch of the Tate art gallery in 1993 has drawn tourists in the winter; an extension will open in May. Padstow, a fishing village that has become a seafood Mecca with the help of a TV chef, attracted more than 50,000 visitors to a food festival in December. The Eden Project, a cluster of giant tropical domes which opened in 2001, keeps visitors warm in winter; nearly 1m come each year. In recent years the difference between summer and winter spending in Cornwall by British tourists seems to have narrowed, and more foreigners are braving the cold months: in the first quarter of 2015 spending by overseas visitors in the south-west was 15% higher than two years before. People do still lose work in the winter, says Ron Tulley, a local councillor; but with the proliferation of part-time and temporary work in recent years, many Cornish now hold two or three jobs in the summer. Those people may simply work less in the winter months, rather than not at all. Another factor in ironing out the seasonal imbalance is demography. Lots of people retire to Cornwall: 22% of its population is over 65, compared with 16% across the country. Britain’s oldies are a well-heeled bunch (after subtracting housing costs, their incomes are higher than those of working folk), and in Cornwall their spending has boosted the economy. Together with rich out-of-towners looking for second homes, they have pumped up the property market, which has generated about one-fifth of the increase in the county’s gross value added (a measure of economic activity) since 2003. The council has allowed builders to respond to the demand. It approves a higher proportion of planning applications than the average planning authority, helping Cornwall’s housing stock to grow by about 5% since 2008, a rate above the national average. In the summer a converted tin plant was put on the market for £700,000 ($1m). The council does not just cater to rich folk, though: besides a couple of London boroughs, in the past four years nowhere has put up more “affordable” housing, defined as those sold or let below market rates. Cornwall is still one of the poorest parts of the country, and so it benefits from largesse from Brussels. In 2000-13 the European Union ploughed £750m into the county. The money went towards things like improving internet connections and transport. Some industries seem to have benefited from these upgrades: the pharmaceuticals business, for instance, has been on a spurt. Still, an official report found that £200,000 of investment was required to create a single additional job in “research and development”, hardly a good return. Cornwall’s half-million residents are thinly scattered: the biggest town, St Austell, has 35,000 souls, scarcely enough to fill a football stadium. This makes it hard for the county to develop a hub of economic activity. Mobile-phone reception is often poor and there are no motorways. And although the high-rolling pensioners help to boost spending, an exodus of youngsters makes it hard for firms to hire new talent. All this means that Cornwall will struggle to develop a sophisticated economy. But for a place long seen as good only for bucket-and-spade holidays, the past few years have been pretty good.
