A plan comes together TO DEFEAT the enemy, you must first know the enemy. In the immune system, that job is done by T-cells, which recognise the molecular signatures of threats to their owner’s well-being. This week, at the AAAS conference, researchers explained how turbocharging these cells can boost the immune system’s ability to fight cancer, and possibly other illnesses, too. The technology they use merges gene therapy, synthetic biology and cell biology. First, a batch of T-cells is extracted from the blood. A custom-built virus is used to implant them with new genes. The modified cells are then returned to the body, where their new DNA gives them a fresh set of targets to attack. Stanley Riddell, at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre in Washington state, creates cells that target a molecule, called CD19, that is found on the surfaces of some cancers. A firm called Juno Therapeutics is exploring whether the technique can be used to treat cancers that affect B-cells, another part of the immune system. Dr Riddell has meanwhile been refining the technology. He told the meeting of his attempts to isolate and modify certain types of T-cells that are known to respond best to a given disease. In a trial of 31 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), that approach brought about a complete remission in 93% of cases—something Dr Riddell described as unprecedented. Another refinement has been dealing with the toxic effects that these treatments can trigger. Sometimes, boosted T-cells can prove too eager for their owner’s good. As their numbers double, roughly every 12 hours, they can trigger a runaway immune reaction called a cytokine storm. This can be fatal: two of the patients in the ALL trial died in that way. The biggest cytokine storms, though, seem to come from the patients with the most advanced cancers. Dr Riddell’s solution is to give the sickest patients the lowest dose. This means that the T-cells multiply more slowly, reducing the chances of an immune-system overreaction. Although the ALL results are impressive, it is difficult to expand the approach to other cancers. To prime a T-cell to attack, it needs to be given precise co-ordinates. Otherwise it may lock onto, and destroy, something else in the body. But besides CD19, which is found in only a few cancers, scientists know of no other chemical target that is specific to cancer alone. In a paper published on January 28th in Cell, Kole Roybal and his colleagues at the University of California, San Francisco propose a solution: tweaking cells to attack when they sense two different target chemicals instead of one. In isolation, neither target may be unique to cancer cells—but the combination might be. That could allow the immune system to be unleashed on tumours whilst sparing healthy tissue. It is a long way from the lab to the clinic. But the technology is moving fast, and researchers hope that, one day, engineered T-cells might be used to treat a wide range of diseases, including HIV, immune deficiencies, and autoimmune disorders. Besides the elegance of the idea of boosting the body’s own defences, the technology offers another big advantage over traditional drugs: once they have done their job, the engineered T-cells stick around in the body. That could offer protection against re-infection or the recurrence of a cancer. Chiara Bonini, of the San Raffaele Scientific Institute in Milan, told the meeting she had found that some modified cells were so durable that they might be able to protect their owners for a decade or more.“IT HAS not escaped our notice”, wrote James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, “that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism.” What they had discovered was the structure of DNA and the way its halves matched up. It was a classic of understatement, for what they had noticed would revolutionise biology. With similar self-restraint, results published in Science, in 2012, noted “considerable potential for gene-targeting and genome-editing applications”. In fact, the study revealed a simple method allowing scientists to tinker, at will, with the genomes of animals and plants. It threw open the doors to a new and egalitarian era of genetic engineering—a way to tackle problems ranging from pest control to drug design to the undoing, with military precision, of harmful mutations. What remains to be determined, however, is who can claim to have discovered it. The CRISPR-Cas9 approach, as it is known, consists of a protein that can cut DNA and a short string of RNA that identifies where to do the cutting. It won two of the authors of the Science paper—Jennifer Doudna, of the University of California, Berkeley, and Emmanuelle Charpentier, of the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, in Germany—a $3m Breakthrough Prize in 2014. This week, Dr Doudna told a packed house at the AAAS meeting how it worked. She recounted how a serendipitous discovery about a bit of biochemistry, borrowed from a bacterium, led her team to a transformative technique that is already being put to use. In parallel, however, a nasty patent dispute has been unfolding. Although Dr Doudna and her colleagues were the first to file a patent on CRISPR-Cas9, they were not awarded the rights to exploit it commercially. That privilege was granted in 2014 to Feng Zhang, of the Broad Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), both in Cambridge, who also claim to have discovered the technique. This decision has been challenged, and in January the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) said it would begin a process to decide which side could claim ownership. Cutting questions The nub of the Broad’s argument is that what Team Doudna did is not gene-editing but rather little more than a study of the properties of a purified protein in a test tube. Robert Desimone, head of the McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT, has written that their work “involved no cells, no genomes and no editing”. Team Zhang, by this account, really put CRISPR-Cas9 to work by showing it functioned in mammalian cells. This view was reflected in a hackle-raising paper in January in Cell, by Eric Lander, head of the Broad, outlining a history of gene-editing that elevated the work of Team Zhang while marginalising that of Team Doudna. Supporters of Dr Doudna and her colleagues argue differently. Although CRISPR-Cas9 is by far the simplest gene-editing technique, it is not the first; others that rely on different nucleases, which do the DNA snipping, have been in use for a number of years. There is a pattern in the development of these other, trickier techniques: the substantive innovation, the one that ultimately leads to a functioning gene-editor, has been the ability to cut DNA at specific locations, something Dr Doudna did in fact show—in a test tube. The forthcoming USPTO proceedings must therefore determine who knew what and when. Although these days patents are granted on a simpler “first to file” basis, the dispute will be settled under the older, “first to invent” standard, which was in place when both applications were made. The question for the USPTO in its hearings, which start on March 9th, is which party made the discovery in the lab first—something that is as yet not clear. Team Zhang will be the “junior party” in the dispute, so the burden of proof lies with them. To win, Dr Zhang will need to show that he discovered CRISPR-Cas9 editing long before Dr Doudna’s paper in 2012. The Broad may even use as evidence work that was carried out in test tubes. None of this seems to have slowed commercial activity surrounding the technique. Editas, a company that currently holds the disputed patent, has said it will go public this year. Firms such as Caribou Biosciences, CRISPR Therapeutics and Intellia Therapeutics are also pursuing commercial applications of the approach; these either hold or license a patent filed by Dr Doudna that is pending. Whoever ultimately lays claim to the power over genomes that CRISPR-Cas9 represents, its “considerable potential” will be realised. But some things—including more prizes, and possibly a Nobel—do hang in the balance. When Dr Doudna took questions from the press at the AAAS meeting, there was more interest in legal, rather than scientific, issues. Asked how she was dealing with the furore, Dr Doudna said: “Fortunately there are people who are way above my pay grade dealing with that.”IN THE West naturalistic portraiture began in classical times. Well-stocked museums in Europe and America are full of busts depicting recognisable individuals. Painting, though, is a more precarious art form. Paint peels. Wood and canvas backings rot. Frescoes crumble and fall. Few painted portraits survive from the classical period, but arid desert conditions have preserved one set: the funerary mummy pictures of the second century AD, from Tebtunis in Egypt. These portraits, affixed to mummies’ bandages, depict the defunct in fresh and lifelike detail. Though neglected when they were rediscovered just over a century ago, they are now subject to intense scientific scrutiny. One of the scrutineers, Marc Walton of Northwestern University, in Illinois, told the AAAS meeting what he and his colleagues have found. One conclusion is that they can assign groups of portraits to particular artists. The three shown, for example, seem to be by the same hand. Dr Walton’s method here is to map each picture’s contours by illuminating it sequentially from many directions, building a relief map from the resulting patterns of light and shade. This reveals both the size of the bristles of the artist’s brush and the order in which he has composed the elements of the portrait. For these three, the bristles were 60 microns across, ruling out their being from cattle (160 microns), pigs (120 microns) or cats (30 microns). The best guess is that the artist used squirrel-tail bristles, which are about the right size. On top of this, spectroscopy suggests that in two of the portraits, one mixture of pigments used came from the same batch. This scientific analysis is supported by an artistic one which shows, for example, a way of painting hands that is shared by all three pictures. At the very least, then, the portraits came from the same workshop. It seems most likely, though, that the same artist painted all of them. These studies also reveal the extent of trade in the Roman empire. The paintings contain haematite and goethite from Keos, in the Aegean Sea, and red lead from Rio Tinto, in southern Spain. The lime-wood plaques on which the portraits are painted are from central Europe. The painter was also a shrewd businessman; he mixed indigo and madder to replicate the effect of the period’s most expensive pigment, Tyrian purple, which was extracted from sea snails and worth more than its weight in gold. Determining whether he told his customers of this economy is not, however, within the range of Dr Walton’s instruments.The Romanovs: 1613-1918. By Simon Sebag Montefiore. Weidenfeld & Nicolson; 745 pages; £25. To be published in America by Knopf in May. RULING Russia was not a tempting prospect in 1613, when the first Romanov reluctantly took the throne. Over the next three centuries the shrunken, war-torn principality of Muscovy became a colossal empire, though at a huge cost to the Romanovs’ long-suffering subjects—and to the family itself, where the currencies of dynastic politics included murder, torture and betrayal (sexual and otherwise), as well as habitual cruelty. Simon Sebag Montefiore’s story starts with the miserable, melancholic Michael, dragged to the smouldering ruins of the Kremlin by feuding boyars who were desperate for unity in the face of defeat by mighty Poland. It features the greats: Peter, manically debauched, and Catherine, the “regicidal, uxoricidal German usurper”; and also dismal failures such as Alexander III, who ruled Russia as a “curmudgeonly landowner”. It concludes with the pathetic Nicholas II, the last tsar, deposed and hurriedly murdered alongside his wife and children (pictured) by the Bolsheviks in 1918. His ill-starred reign was redeemed only by the “grace, patience, humour and dignity” which the doomed royal family showed in their captivity. The system rested on the idea that only “an all-powerful individual blessed by God” had the clout (the author prefers “effulgent majesty”) to run such a vast state, while also personifying the sacred mission of Orthodox Christianity. The key was delegation. Peter and Catherine, for all their whims and tyrannical ways, were superb at this: Catherine’s favourite, Grigory Potemkin, was an outstandingly gifted administrator; Alexander Suvorov an equally impressive military commander. The other monarchs mostly tried to run Russia themselves, with results ranging from the indifferent to the disastrous. The author’s many fans will find much to please them. As with his previous books, notably on Stalin, Mr Sebag Montefiore, a British historical writer, has an eye for the telling detail which lifts an unfamiliar narrative. His mammoth history of Russia’s royal dynasty features many such vivid, amusing and surprising particulars. Indeed it is startlingly lubricious and gory. The abundant mutilations, executions and other horriblenesses which the principal characters inflicted on each other and their subjects are described in nightmarish detail. In particular, the private passions of the Romanov court, preserved in letters and diaries, are on public parade. A fortuitously placed wart on the penis of the “mad monk” Rasputin, whose scandalous behaviour and bad advice helped bring about the dynasty’s downfall, is cited as a possible reason for his success with aristocratic women. Gore and sex aside, the author’s pen produces reams of fluent, sometimes sparkling prose. Many of his reflections on the Romanov era apply well to Vladimir Putin’s domains now: the “Russian pattern of behaviour”, he writes, is “servility to those above, tyranny to those below.” The Russian court was an entrepot of power: its role as a broker allowed participants to amass wealth and bonded them in shared loyalty. But it also allowed them to compete without resorting to civil war or revolution. That sounds pretty much like the modern Kremlin. However, the complexity of the material is still daunting. Most readers will need to make full use of the family trees and cast lists placed helpfully at the start of each chapter. A great many names make very brief appearances. The colour illustrations help fix the main characters in the reader’s mind; a few more maps might have helped illustrate the ebb and flow of nations. The focus is tightly on the intrigues of the court, and on the Romanovs’ role in European high politics. Economics, business, society and culture get only the skimpiest treatment. That is a pity. Alexander Etkind, an émigré historian, has argued that the root of Russia’s misfortunes is its natural wealth, which encourages its rulers to plunder the country, like colonial masters, rather than develop it. Yet despite its mostly dreadful rulers, the vast land did begin to modernise. The tragedy is that the later Romanovs were too scared, and in Nicholas II’s case also too out of touch, to start the reforms that could have saved them. That dilemma is as familiar as it is ancient. The Civil Wars of Julia Ward Howe. A Biography. By Elaine Showalter. Simon and Schuster; 243 pages; $28. HISTORY remembers Julia Ward Howe as the author of perhaps the most stirring song America has ever produced. In 1861, at the dawn of the civil war, she awoke with the lyrics to the “Battle Hymn of the Republic” almost fully formed in her head. Every American schoolchild knows the opening: “Mine eyes have seen the glory…” The anthem was sung at Winston Churchill’s funeral in 1965, at his request. Yet Howe was far more than a shooting star across America’s literary landscape, as Elaine Showalter makes clear in this delightful biography. She wrote poetry, plays and books, including an unfinished novel about an androgynous character who attracts the love of both men and women. Entitled “The Hermaphrodite” and written in the 1840s, it was vastly ahead of its time. Later, Howe emerged as a tireless speaker for feminist causes, notably women’s right to vote. Her life intersected with Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, the Brownings, Louisa May Alcott and Henry James. Howe’s letters and journals may hold the greatest fascination. These recorded with astonishing frankness her often bitter relationship with her husband, Samuel, whom Julia called Chev. The chief source of tension was that he wanted her to concentrate on the family and not a career. “Chev’s sourness of disposition becomes so dreadfully aggravated by any success of mine,” she wrote to her sister Annie. The tension could also emerge in her poetry: “Between us the eternal silence reigneth / The calm and separation of the tomb.” She published some of her writings behind his back. Howe, who bore six children, felt suffocated by the enforced focus on family. Early on, she realised that Chev would stay away from her bed when she was breast-feeding, so she extended her nursing, which helped with birth control. She was, she wrote to her sister Louisa, in “a state of somnambulism, occupied principally with digestion, sleep and babies…God only knows what I have suffered from this stupor.” Men, she complained, “think it glorification enough for a woman to be a wife and mother in any way, and upon any terms.” These are relatable sentiments, and the author wisely lets them carry the book. However, at times the account feels one-sided. Ms Showalter, a feminist literary critic and professor emeritus at Princeton University, relies heavily on Julia’s perspective, leaving little room for her husband to make his case. Samuel plainly limited Julia, but he was also a committed abolitionist (as was Julia) and a strong if flawed advocate for the blind. Ms Showalter notes Chev’s achievements and acknowledges that he had his defenders, yet still leaves the impression of a tyrant. Perhaps that is inevitable; marriage gripes did not flow prolifically from his pen. The “Battle Hymn” itself, which Howe wrote to a tune that Union soldiers were already humming, occupies only a handful of pages. Crucially, however, “its renown gave her the power and the incentive to emancipate herself,” Ms Showalter writes. Samuel died in 1876. Julia lived nearly 35 more years, finally able to embrace the cause of women’s liberation in full. A decade after she died, and thanks in part to the suffrage groups she led, women were able to lay claim to the ballot box.Movers and Shakers Paradise Now: The Story of American Utopianism. By Chris Jennings. Random House; 488 pages; $28. UTOPIANISM in politics gets a bad press. The case against the grand-scale, state-directed kind is well known and overwhelming. Utopia, the perfect society, is unattainable, for there is no such thing. Remaking society in pursuit of an illusion not only fails, it leads swiftly to mass murder and moral ruin. So recent history grimly attests. Although true, that is just half the story. Not all modern Utopians aim to seize the state in order to cudgel the rest of the world back to paradise. Plenty of gentler ones want no more than to withdraw from the mainstream and create their own micro-paradise with a few like-minded idealists. Small experiments in collective living swept America, for example, early in the 19th century and again late in the 20th. Most failed or fell short. None lasted. All were laughed at. Yet in this intelligent, sympathetic history, Chris Jennings makes a good case for remembering them well. Politics stultifies, he thinks, when people stop dreaming up alternative ways of life and putting them to small-scale test. Though with occasional glances forward, Mr Jennings focuses largely on the 19th century. At least 100 experimental communes sprang up across the young American republic in the mid-1800s. Mr Jennings writes about five exemplary communities: the devout Shakers, Robert Owen’s New Harmony, the Fourierist collective at Brook Farm, Massachusetts, the Icarians at Nauvoo, Illinois, inspired by a French proto-communist, Etienne Cabet, and the Oneida Community in New York state practising “Bible communism” and “complex marriage”. The Shakers’ founder was a Manchester Quaker, Ann Lee, a devout mother worn out by bearing dead or dying children. In 1774 she left for the New World, determined to forswear sex and create a following to share her belief. An optimistic faith in human betterment, hard work and a reputation for honest trading helped the Shakers thrive. At their peak in the early 19th century, they had perhaps 5,000 members scattered in some 20 villages across eight states. They counselled celibacy, to spare women the dangers of child-bearing, made spare, slim furniture, now treasured in museums, and practised a wild, shaking dance that was taken as a sign of benign possession by the Holy Spirit. Robert Owen, a British mill-owner and reformer, treated private property, along with organised religion and marriage, as a social scourge. In 1825 he bought land for a farm-and-factory commune in Indiana. It attracted farmers, artisans and intellectuals. Tools, food and housing were free. The commune had mixed-sex schools and a library. It sponsored scientific research. Without a shared faith or purpose, however, the members split into competing groups. By 1827, Owen’s secular community had disbanded. The difficulty of pursuing micro-communism in a capitalist society also dogged Cabet’s American followers. His New World Icarians split into several rival groupings. Shakers, Owenites and Icarians focused, each in their own way, on duties. They sought to tame human selfishness. Gloomy as he looked in portraits, the Frenchman Charles Fourier concentrated on fun. His writings inspired the Brook Farm commune near Boston and, less directly, Oneida. Fourier wanted to free people’s instincts so that everyone, especially women, might lead a life of varied enjoyments and sensual delight. Stripped of emphasis on sex, Fourier’s message that a good life was a cultivated life, not one of striving and work, appealed to New England intellectuals who formed Brook Farm’s core. “Paradise Now” is more than a record of failed hopes. Some ideas spread to the mainstream. Fourier’s feminism is a good example. Fourierist communes foundered across the New World and Old; his ideas about gender equality lived on. No society could improve, Fourier believed, until women’s lot improved. “The best countries”, he wrote, “have always been those which allowed women the most freedom.” That is a common thought today. It was radical when Fourier wrote it in 1808. Women more generally are at the centre of the Utopian story. Some communes he writes about were democratic, some authoritarian. None was patriarchal. Mr Jennings’s book is rich in fond hopes and improbable ventures. Rather than nudging readers to mock, which is easy, the author reminds them instead to remember that the maddest-sounding ideas sometimes become motherhood.Damascus Diaries: Life Under the Assads. By Peter Clark. Gilgamesh; 393 pages; £12.50. My House in Damascus: An Inside View of the Syrian Crisis. By Diana Darke. Haus; 282 pages; £9.99. WHAT is being lost as Syria bleeds? Not just lives, but a tradition of pluralism and tolerance, all too rare in the Middle East, and a rich cultural treasure-house. That is the message of these two very personal books by Britons who have lived in Syria and fallen in love with it. Peter Clark ran the British Council in Damascus for five years in the 1990s. His diaries—quirky, digressive, indiscreet—chronicle his attempts to build cultural relations in a police state filled with fear, corruption and red tape. Even friendly officials are wary of the ruling Baath party. When he starts English classes, they are infiltrated by the secret police. He persists, organising an exhibition of photographs of Syria by Freya Stark, a travel writer, in the 1920s and 1930s—and then, more ambitiously, an Anglo-Syrian production of Purcell’s opera “Dido and Aeneas”, which, against all odds, is a great success. In the midst of all this, he somehow finds time to translate a novel by Ulfat Idilbi, a spry old Syrian feminist in her 80s. There are political insights into the persecution complex of the Alawites, the heterodox religious minority, historically poor and marginalised, which has come to dominate the ruling civil and military elite. There is a chilling encounter with the president, Hafez al-Assad, whose “cold grey eyes” seemed to “look into your soul”. But the principal characters are the author’s Syrian friends—the writers, lawyers, bank managers and university professors with whom he eats, drinks, dances and gossips. He relishes the odd details of Syrian life: the old khan (or caravanserai) that used to be a lunatic asylum, the tea Syrian migrants have brought back from Argentina, the delightful word gommaji (an amalgam of Italian and Turkish), meaning a man who repairs punctures. Diana Darke’s book is set in the Syria of Bashar al-Assad, who succeeded his father in 2000. Ms Darke is a journalist and travel writer, and much of her early time in Syria was spent walking its hills and exploring its mosques, churches, monasteries and fortresses. But in 2005 she took the bold decision to use her life’s savings to buy an 18th-century Ottoman house in the Old City of Damascus. Her book, now in an enlarged third edition, tells the remarkable story of how she did so, despite a succession of legal and bureaucratic obstacles, and the onset of civil war. As with Mr Clark and his opera production, Ms Darke’s British and Syrian friends thought she was mad. Like him, she persevered. Interwoven with the story of how she renovated the house are asides on an array of issues—education, women’s rights, Islamic art—and on the Assads, whose regime she clearly detests. When the war forced her to leave, she turned the house into a refuge for Syrian friends escaping the violence. Both authors cling to the hope that Syria with its mosaic of communities and traditions, and its unique history and archaeology, will somehow rebuild itself. In the meantime their books serve as moving tributes to the Syria that has been lost.The look of love SOME artists never live to enjoy acclaim. Vincent Van Gogh died in obscurity, having sold only one painting. Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun, a French portraitist working in the decades before and after the French revolution, had the opposite problem. For much of her life she was celebrated and sought out by the rich around Europe; she charged such high fees that few could afford her. Her contemporary, Jacques-Louis David, praised one of her paintings as better than his own. However, after her death in 1842 at the age of 86, she began to be overlooked. Only one previous show in America, at the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth in 1982, has paid tribute to her evocative, graceful artistry. Vigée Le Brun is now being given her due. A new show of her work has travelled from the Grand Palais in Paris to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and will make its final stop at the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa. The exhibition offers two parallel narratives. One is the evolution of Vigée Le Brun’s stellar career, which was launched after she began painting France’s queen, Marie Antoinette, when they were both 23. The other is the turmoil of French politics, which changed dramatically over the course of the artist’s long life. The revolution of 1789 caused an exodus among the country’s nobility. Vigée Le Brun painted a few of them when they were in exile abroad. Her paintings, imbued with lightness and luxury before the revolution, took on a subtly sober tone in the years afterwards. Rarely is one afforded such an intimate view into the life of the rich in pre-revolutionary France, but Vigée Le Brun’s luscious paintings suggest how good the living was. She became expert at rendering fur, silk, ribbons and lace. The daughter of a hairdresser and a minor portraitist, Vigée Le Brun received no formal art training, but her innate talent helped her stand out early on, as did the support of the queen, who intervened on her behalf to make sure she would be accepted to the exclusive Royal Academy. Membership was capped at four women at a time; in its 150 years, just 15 women were admitted to the Academy, compared with 550 men. A life-size portrait of Marie Antoinette is on loan from Versailles, the first time it has travelled outside France. Although Vigée Le Brun made her name painting the queen, these stately works can feel more stiff than her others. A better picture is of Charles Alexandre de Calonne, the finance minister, who sits on a red chair, holding a letter marked “for the king”. The exhibition suggests how small the world of the French ruling class was during this period. Calonne’s portrait is placed next to one of the Countess du Barry de Cérès, his lover. When the revolution broke out, Vigée Le Brun worried that her relations with the monarchy would put her in danger and sought refuge in Italy. Leaving was an astute choice. One of her contemporaries, Adélaïde Labille-Guiard, stayed in France but received few commissions and had one of her best paintings destroyed. “Most artists lost a decade of work that they could have done because of the revolution,” says Katharine Baetjer, a curator at the Met. However, Vigée Le Brun remade her career several times while abroad, painting the nobility in Italy, Austria and the Russian empire. She was beautiful, socially gifted and an astute businesswoman. Few artists had such a global career and managed to overcome the sexism that hampered women’s artistic rise. Seeing Vigée Le Brun’s work assembled, it is clear that her early work was her best. She is gifted at painting children, including her daughter, Julie (pictured), to whom she was very close until their relationship shattered in adulthood. Her Russian paintings lack the subtle, introspective humanity of her portraits in France and Italy; many boast dramatic landscape backdrops and mythological elements. The most interesting work of her later years is a self-portrait, shorn of the frills and beauty of her youth. The contrast between it and an earlier, ebullient self-portrait she painted in 1790 for the Uffizi Gallery in Florence is striking. She had thought then that she might soon return to France, but it would be 12 years before she did. In all, Vigée Le Brun produced more than 600 paintings. The Met has about 80 on display; it is half the size of the show at the Grand Palais. This is partly because there are no pictures in the exhibition from Russian museums as a result of a long-standing legal dispute that has raised fears that any loans to America may be seized. But the Met also felt that a new and perhaps untutored audience would have the patience only for a smaller, more tailored show. Those seeing Vigée Le Brun’s work for the first time will be impressed by her skill and sensibility and wonder why they have not met her sooner.IF YOU were bold enough to ask Antonin Scalia questions, you had to be precise. Otherwise the bushy black brows would furrow, the chin would crumple and the pudgy, puckish body would start to rock, eager to get at you. Wasn’t he violently opposed to Roe v Wade, the abortion ruling? “Adamantly opposed, that’s better.” Did he have any guilty pleasures? “How can it be pleasurable, if it’s guilty?” Lesser lawyers who were vague in oral argument faced a barrage of sarcasm or, if he agreed with them, constant chiding to do better. (“That’s your strong point!”) Dissenting colleagues at the Supreme Court had their opinions described as “argle-bargle”, “jiggery pokery” and “pure applesauce”. Words had meaning. He revered them and used them scrupulously, even in insult. The law was written in words, and those ideally laid down bright lines for everyone to follow. As a committed textualist, he wasted no time looking to legislative history, the purported purpose of a law or the comments of some egregious congressman. It meant what it said. As for America’s constitution, speaking as the court’s originalist-in-chief, all that mattered was what its words meant when it was framed. He was in love with it; he was in awe of the men who wrote it; the late 18th century was a time when genius burst forth on the eastern seaboard, as it had in Periclean Athens. But for him the founding document was not “living”, not some organism endlessly adaptable to society, as Justice William Brennan, a distressingly liberal predecessor, used to think. It couldn’t be found suddenly to contain newfangled “rights” to privacy, as in Roe. It was dead! Dead! (Or perhaps, to be more tender and precise, “enduring”.) Its business was to block change, not advance it, and if it thereby obstructed something he himself, as a very conservative fellow, disliked, so much the better. Death-penalty cases he dismissed in minutes: the penalty was clearly constitutional. Church-and-state cases took no longer: the Framers had built no wall between them, and anyway, didn’t government get its authority from God? He would go home, to a Martini and a large dinner, and sleep like a baby. The beloved document, however, never promised perfect outcomes. In 1989 he found himself ruling (joining Brennan!) that it didn’t stop sandal-wearing bearded weirdos burning the American flag. (Personally, he would have clapped them all in jail; he longed to mark his opinion loudly with a rubber stamp, “Stupid but Constitutional!”) In several cases the constitution enhanced, rather than curbed, the rights of criminal defendants and terrorists. He did what he had to do. This made him a less predictable justice than many supposed. More often, the document said nothing at all about some modern obsession: torture, abortion, discrimination. But then such matters, as Justice Scalia kept saying, were never meant to be settled by an unelected committee of nine; they were meant to be resolved by the people, through legislation. If he were a king, as his swagger and opera-singing occasionally suggested, he would stretch the constitution any way he wanted. In fact, as he admitted with a grin, it handcuffed him. Not nearly enough, some people thought. His colleagues quailed when, in 1986, he first sat on the court as a brash 50-year-old whose experience had been mostly as a combative government lawyer: a justice who, in that sanctum of columns and deep judicial silence, was suddenly firing questions like grapeshot. (As the product of a Jesuit military academy, as well as an originalist, he loved to evoke cannon and muskets, and much enjoyed duck-shooting; he talked of tracking truth like a hunter in the forest, and was pleased to rule, in District of Columbia v Heller, that the Second Amendment did indeed mean that individuals had the right to bear handguns.) Though he was not the only New Yorker on the bench, he was the only spoiled-rotten Italian kid brought up proud and scrapping in Queens and familiar with rude Sicilian gestures. “Come right back at you!” was his motto, robed or not. Family-fond (nine children!), gregarious and funny, he got on with his colleagues, and made a surprising best buddy of the court’s chief liberal, Ruth Bader Ginsburg. But he spared no ammunition in dissent. As early as 2003, when Lawrence v Texas struck down sodomy laws, the majority had “signed on to the…homosexual agenda”. In 2015, when the court narrowly saved Obamacare, “We should [call] this law SCOTUScare.” He never tried for consensus, not rating it anyway, and increasingly sat with the minority, though always the most colourful and quotable. Facing down the Devil He spent three decades on the court, relishing every minute, and liking it even better when he could kick shins in public. Looking back, what pleased him most was to see more attention paid to text, legislative precedent sliding out, and far more questions from the bench: all his doing. He could detect, though, no fading of the fashion to force the constitution ever further into modern life. After abortion and same-sex marriage, why not assisted dying? The stalwart Catholic in him was revolted at the thought. He knew for certain, though, that the Framers were on his side; the Devil was on the other; and that heaven was his portion, for he was always right.  Dig deeper: Antonin Scalia’s death starts a political battle
