After protracted negotiations that ran into the night, David Cameron declared victory in obtaining “special status” for Britain in the European Union. He promptly set a referendum for June 23rd to ask voters if they want to stay in or leave the EU. But London’s mayor, Boris Johnson, attacked him for scaremongering and declared allegiance to the leave campaign. Some cabinet members also took a different position to their leader, including the ministers for justice (Michael Gove), pensions (Iain Duncan Smith) and Northern Ireland (Theresa Villiers). The prime minister will have to rely on the opposition Labour Party to help persuade the public; MPs in his own party are split down the middle. See here and here.  The potential for an exit from the EU spooked markets, sending sterling into a spiral. The pound dropped from $1.44 to below $1.39 and also tumbled against the euro. The migrant crisis sweeping Europe is likely to get worse rather than better, as new figures from the International Organisation for Migration showed that arrivals in Greece and Italy have already breached 110,000 this year. It took until June last year before 100,000 arrived. Greece is bearing the brunt. In February alone nearly 43,000 had arrived, as many as in the whole of 2014. Hungary called a referendum on whether or not it should be forced to take in refugees under a resettlement scheme. Viktor Orban’s government has mounted a legal challenge against the relocation of migrants across Europe. A number of countries are restricting the numbers of refugees who cross their borders. After two months of deadlock in Spain, the Socialist party agreed to form a government with the centrist Ciudadanos party. However, the parties only make up 130 seats in the 350-seat parliament. This means that the support of either the conservative People’s Party or the far-left Podemos movement will still be needed to form a majority. In France trade unions opposed the Socialist government’s proposal to reform the country’s notoriously rigid labour laws. The government wants, among other things, to clarify redundancy rules and weaken the 35-hour work week. The proposal will officially be presented next month and will require the support of the right-wing opposition. Thanks, but no thanks  Bolivians narrowly voted against a referendum proposal to allow the left-wing president, Evo Morales, to run for a fourth term. Mr Morales, the country’s first president of indigenous descent, has been in office since January 2006. If he had been allowed to contest the next election in 2019 and won he would have stayed in power until 2025. Police in Brazil arrested João Santana, who managed the successful election campaigns of the president, Dilma Rousseff. They say they have evidence that he received money paid in bribes by firms that won contracts with Petrobras, the state-controlled oil giant. Mr Santana says the charges are “baseless”. The electoral court is investigating allegations that bribes were funnelled towards Ms Rousseff’s campaign in 2014. Jats your quota Rioting by Jats, a caste-like community, in Haryana state threatened the water supply to Delhi, the capital of India. The local government promised to grant “backward” caste status to the fairly prosperous group, guaranteeing Jats a quota of government jobs. See article.  America and China said they had made progress in their discussions about a UN resolution in response to North Korea’s recent nuclear and missile tests. After meeting in Washington, China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, and America’s secretary of state, John Kerry, said they had agreed on a draft proposal. Mr Kerry hinted that, if passed, the resolution would “go beyond” previous ones, which have imposed economic sanctions on North Korea. Not a vote for change Iran was due to hold a parliamentary election on February 26th. Thousands of moderate candidates have been excluded, but hardliners could still take a beating if voters want to show their appreciation of the nuclear deal that has led to many sanctions being lifted. See article.  A ceasefire in Syria was ready to come intoeffect, though Russian and American strikes on Islamic State and the al-Qaeda-linked group Jabhat al-Nusra will continue. Chances are not high that the ceasefire will hold. See article.  Ibrahim Sharif, a prominent Bahraini opposition figure, was sentenced to a year in prison for insulting the Gulf state’s monarchical system. Saudi Arabia and Bahrain warned their citizens not to travel to Lebanon, and the United Arab Emirates said it was banning its nationals from visiting the country. This was in response to Lebanon’s failure to condemn an Iranian attack on Saudi Arabia’s embassy in Tehran last month. Oh Jeb! Jeb Bush dropped out of the presidential race after finishing a distant fourth in the Republicans’ South Carolina primary. He had outspent all his rivals and a year ago was the favourite to become the party’s candidate, but a lacklustre campaign left him way behind Donald Trump and most of the others. After Mr Bush pulled out Marco Rubio picked up more endorsements from party bigwigs as the candidate best placed to beat Donald Trump, who chalked up another handsome victory, in Nevada. On the Democratic side Hillary Clinton won the party’s caucuses in Nevada. The candidates face a big test on March 1st, Super Tuesday, when a dozen states will vote. Barack Obama renewed his call on Congress to close the Guantánamo detention centre, which still houses 91 suspected terrorists. Congress is unlikely to oblige the president, especially as he didn’t say where the prisoners should be relocated. Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee dashed hopes of holding hearings to confirm a replacement for the late Antonin Scalia on the Supreme Court. Every one of them signed a letter saying it was their “consensus view”. It is unlikely that this will stop Mr Obama from exercising his constitutional right to nominate someone. Reports suggest he is considering Brian Sandoval, the Republican governor of Nevada.The London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse hoped it would be third time lucky, as the pair confirmed they were in advanced talks about merging. The London and Frankfurt exchanges tried to integrate in 2000 and 2005, but their overtures were rejected by shareholders. Times have changed since then. Only 10% of the LSE’s and Deutsche Börse’s revenues now come from trading in equities; both have expanded into derivatives, clearing houses and other financial services. See article.  Deposed from office China’s government ousted Xiao Gang as head of the securities regulatory commission for failing to prevent the bubble, or manage the bust, in the country’s stockmarkets, which fell sharply again this week. Mr Xiao’s replacement is Liu Shiyu, the chairman of Agricultural Bank of China and a former deputy governor of the People’s Bank of China. See article.  China, including Hong Kong, has surpassed America as the country with the most dollar billionaires, according to Hurun, a publication, and is home to 568 billionaires compared with America’s 535. The figures for China were based on share prices in January, and take account of tumbling stockmarkets. India came third on the list with 111 billionaires. Britain and Germany were joint fourth with 82 each, followed by Russia on 80. Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, again dampened expectations of an interest-rate rise this year when he told a committee in Parliament that, on the contrary, he wasn’t ruling out cutting the bank’s benchmark rate to zero if the British economy worsened. Focus on Asia A fall in profit in its Asian business helped push HSBC to an $858m quarterly pre-tax loss (pre-tax profit for all of 2015 came in at $19 billion). It also had to put aside money for legal costs as American regulators have now added HSBC to the list of banks they are investigating for employment practices in Asia. Standard Chartered made an annual loss of $2.4 billion, its first since 1989. Saudi Arabia’s oil minister surprised energy markets by reiterating that he would be happy to see oil prices fall to $20 a barrel to squeeze out “inefficient, uneconomic producers”. The minister’s remarks somewhat undermine the kingdom’s pact with Russia to freeze oil production in order to boost prices (though only if other big producers do the same). BHP Billiton joined the list of mining giants to publish dismal earnings on the back of the slump in commodity prices, when it reported a $5.7 billion six-month loss. Andrew Mackenzie, the Anglo-Australian company’s chief executive, said the mining industry was in a “new era” and needed “a different dividend policy to handle that”. BHP duly slashed its dividend by 74%. A proposal that would have seen a Chinese tech company take a stake in an American one fell apart after the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, a government body, said it would open an investigation. The $3.8 billion deal would have given Tsinghua Unigroup, which is linked to Tsinghua University in Beijing, a 15% holding in Western Digital, which is based in Irvine, California. Sharp, a struggling Japanese electronics company, said it had agreed to a takeover from Foxconn, a Taiwanese firm that assembles the iPhone in China. But Foxconn announced a delay to sealing the bid because Sharp had inserted new terms into their agreement. Foxconn had bid for Sharp against a fund backed by the Japanese government. Sysco, an American company that is the world’s largest supplier of catering food, agreed to buy Brakes Group, a food-services firm in Britain with operations in other European countries, in a deal valued at $3.1 billion. Brakes supplies food to pubs as well as hospitals, restaurants and schools. The rhetoric intensified between the FBI and Apple over a legal order to get the company to unlock an iPhone used by one of the attackers in last December’s terrorist attack in California. A Department of Justice filing claimed that Apple’s argument—that unlocking the phone would weaken its encryption protections—was a marketing ploy to strengthen its business model. Tim Cook, Apple’s boss, said that what the FBI was asking it to do was the “software equivalent of cancer”. Last year’s must-have America’s consumer-safety commission deemed that no brand of hoverboard (self-balancing scooters that don’t actually hover) currently on the market is safe. The agency said it had received 52 reports of fires caused by batteries overheating in hoverboards in the past few months, which in two cases caused homes to burn down.More KAL's cartoonsIN A week’s time, the race for the Republican nomination could be all but over. Donald Trump has already won three of the first four contests. On March 1st, Super Tuesday, 12 more states will vote. Mr Trump has a polling lead in all but three of them. Were these polls to translate into results, as they have so far, Mr Trump would not quite be unbeatable. It would still be possible for another candidate to win enough delegates to overtake him. But that would require the front-runner to have a late, spectacular electoral collapse of a kind that has not been seen before. Right now the Republican nomination is his to lose. Worse, it might not stop there. Polls show that 46% of Americans of voting age have a “very unfavourable” opinion of Mr Trump, which suggests his chances of winning a general election are slight. But Mr Trump’s political persona is more flexible than that of any professional politician, which means he can take it in any direction he wants to. And whoever wins the nomination for either party will have a decent chance of becoming America’s next president: the past few elections have been decided by slim margins in a handful of states. When pollsters ask voters to choose in a face-off between Mr Trump and Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner wins by less than three percentage points. Mr Trump would have plenty of time to try to close that gap. An economy that falls back into recession or an indictment for Mrs Clinton might do it for him. That is an appalling prospect. The things Mr Trump has said in this campaign make him unworthy of leading one of the world’s great political parties, let alone America. One way to judge politicians is by whether they appeal to our better natures: Mr Trump has prospered by inciting hatred and violence. He is so unpredictable that the thought of him anywhere near high office is terrifying. He must be stopped. The world according to Trump Because each additional Trumpism seems a bit less shocking than the one before, there is a danger of becoming desensitised to his outbursts. To recap, he has referred to Mexicans crossing the border as rapists; called enthusiastically for the use of torture; hinted that Antonin Scalia, a Supreme Court justice, was murdered; proposed banning all Muslims from visiting America; advocated killing the families of terrorists; and repeated, approvingly, a damaging fiction that a century ago American soldiers in the Philippines dipped their ammunition in pigs’ blood before executing Muslim rebels. At a recent rally he said he would like to punch a protester in the face. This is by no means an exhaustive list. Almost the only policy Mr Trump clearly subscribes to is a fantasy: the construction of a wall along the southern border, paid for by Mexico. What would he do if faced with a crisis in the South China Sea, a terrorist attack in America or another financial meltdown? Nobody has any idea. Mr Trump may be well suited to campaigning in primaries, where voters bear little resemblance to the country as a whole, but it is difficult to imagine any candidate less suited to the consequence of winning a general election, namely governing. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar With each victory, the voices trying to make peace with Mr Trump’s hostile takeover of the Republican Party grow louder. He has already been endorsed by some Republican congressmen. Some on the left point out that he is less conservative on social and economic questions than some of his rivals (while privately hoping the Republicans nominate him so that Mrs Clinton can give him a shellacking). Some on the right argue that Mr Trump is merely playing a role, blowing chilli powder up the nostrils of the politically correct, and that in essence he is a pragmatic New York property developer who likes to cut deals. Were he to win the nomination, their argument runs, he would be privately intimidated and would appoint sensible advisers to whom he would defer. This is wishful thinking by those who want their side to win at any cost. There is nothing in Mr Trump’s career—during which he has maintained close control of the family business he runs, and often acted on instinct—to suggest that he would suddenly metamorphose into a wise chairman, eager to take counsel from seasoned experts. For those who have yet to notice, Mr Trump is not burdened by a lack of confidence in his own opinions. Republican in name only For too long, the first instinct of Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, the leading alternatives to Mr Trump, has been to avoid criticising the front-runner in the hope of winning over his voters later. The primaries may at times resemble a circus, but they also provide a place to test candidates for leadership and courage. So far both men have flunked that test. Republicans need to take Mr Trump on, not stand transfixed by what is happening to their party. More than 60m people voted for Mitt Romney in 2012. A big majority are decent, compassionate, tolerant people who abhor political violence, bigotry and lying. Thoughtful conservatives will be heart-broken if asked to choose in November between a snarling nativist and a Democrat. If The Economist had cast a vote in the Republican primaries in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina or Nevada we would have supported John Kasich. The governor of Ohio has a good mixture of experience, in Congress and in his home state as well as in the private sector. He has also shown bravery, expanding Medicaid in Ohio though he knew it would count against him later with primary voters, as indeed it has. But this is not Mr Kasich’s party any more. Despite his success in New Hampshire, where he came second, Mr Kasich is the preferred choice of less than 10% of Republican voters. If the field remains split as it is now, it is possible for Mr Trump to win with just a plurality of votes. To prevent that, others must drop out. Although we are yet to be convinced by Mr Rubio (see article), he stands a better chance of beating Mr Trump than anyone else. All the other candidates—including Mr Cruz, who wrongly sees himself as the likeliest challenger—should get out of his way. If they decline to do so, it could soon be too late to prevent the party of Abraham Lincoln from being led into a presidential election by Donald Trump.THE battle is joined, at last. David Cameron has called a referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union for June 23rd, promising to campaign hard to stay in. What began as a gambit to hold together his divided Tory party is turning into an alarmingly close contest. Betting markets put the odds that Britons opt to leave at two-to-one; some polls suggest the voters are evenly split; several cabinet ministers are campaigning for Brexit. There is a real chance that in four months’ time Britain could be casting off from Europe’s shores. That would be grave news—and not just for Britain. A vote to leave would damage the economy, certainly in the short term and probably in the long run. (As financial markets woke up to the prospect, the pound this week fell to its lowest level against the dollar since 2009.) It would imperil Britain’s security, when threats from terrorists and foreign powers are at their most severe in years. And far from reclaiming sovereignty, Britons would be forgoing clout, by giving up membership of a powerful club whose actions they can influence better from within than without. Those outside Britain marvelling at this proposed act of self-harm should worry for themselves, too. Brexit would deal a heavy blow to Europe, a continent already on the ropes. It would uncouple the world’s fifth-largest economy from its biggest market, and unmoor the fifth-largest defence spender from its allies. Poorer, less secure and disunited, the new EU would be weaker; the West, reliant on the balancing forces of America and Europe, would be enfeebled, too. Dreams, meet reality The Brexiters’ case is that Britain is held back by Europe: unshackled, it could soar as an open economy that continued to trade with the EU and all round the world. That is possible in theory, but as our briefing (see Briefing) explains, it is not how things would work in practice. At a minimum, the EU would allow full access to its single market only in return for adherence to rules that Eurosceptics are keen to jettison. If Norway and Switzerland (whose arrangements with the EU many Brexiters idolise) are a guide, the union would also demand the free movement of people and a big payment to its budget before allowing unfettered access to the market. Worse, the EU would have a strong incentive to impose a harsh settlement to discourage other countries from leaving. The Brexit camp’s claim that Europe needs Britain more than the other way round is fanciful: the EU takes almost half Britain’s exports, whereas Britain takes less than 10% of the EU’s; and the British trade deficit is mostly with the Germans and Spanish, not with the other 25 countries that would have to agree on a new trade deal. To some Eurosceptics these hardships would be worth it if they meant reclaiming sovereignty from Europe, whose bureaucrats and judges interfere with everything from bankers’ bonuses to working-time limits. Yet the gain would be partly illusory. In a globalised world, power is necessarily pooled and traded: Britain gives up sovereignty in exchange for clout through its memberships of NATO, the IMF and countless other power-sharing, rule-setting institutions. Signing up to treaties on trade, nuclear power or the environment involves submitting to regulations set jointly with foreigners, in return for greater gains. Britain outside the EU would be on the sidelines: notionally independent from, but in fact still constrained by, rules it would have no role in formulating. It would be a purer but rather powerless sort of sovereignty. One exception is immigration, the area over which many Eurosceptics most long for control. Half of Britain’s migrants come from the EU, and there is little the government can do to stop them. If Britain left the union, it could. But doing so would have a double cost. Gaining the right to stop immigration from the EU would almost certainly mean losing full access to the single market. And reducing the numbers of immigrants would hurt Britain’s businesses and public services, which rely on French bankers, Bulgarian builders and Italian doctors. A global concern The longer-term costs would go beyond economics. Brexit might well break up the United Kingdom itself. Scotland, more Europhile than England, is again agitating for a divorce; if Britain decides to leave Europe, then the Scots may at last have a point. Brexit could also dangerously unsettle Northern Ireland, where the peace process over two decades has depended on the fact that both Ireland and Britain are members of the EU. The Irish government is among the most vocal foreign supporters of the campaign for Britain to stay in. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Ireland is not the only country that would suffer. European leaders know Brexit would weaken a club already in deep trouble over such issues as migration and the euro crisis. And Europe would be poorer without Britain’s voice: more dominated by Germany; and, surely, less liberal, more protectionist and more inward-looking. Europe’s links to America would become more tenuous. Above all, the loss of its biggest military power and most significant foreign-policy actor would seriously weaken the EU in the world. The EU has become an increasingly important part of the West’s foreign and security policy, whether it concerns a nuclear deal with Iran, the threat of Islamist terrorism or the imposition of sanctions against Russia. Without Britain, it would be harder for the EU to pull its global weight—a big loss to the West in a troubled neighbourhood, from Russia through Syria to north Africa. It is little wonder that Russia’s Vladimir Putin is keen on Brexit—and that America’s Barack Obama is not. It would be shortsighted for Eurosceptics to be indifferent to this. A weakened Europe would be unambiguously bad for Britain, whose geography, unlike its politics, is fixed. A lot thus rests on the tight race now under way. For those who believe, as this newspaper does, in free trade and freedom of movement, the benefits to Britain of its membership of the EU have never been in much doubt. What more sceptical sorts must now recognise is that Brexit would also weaken Europe and the West. The stakes in Mr Cameron’s great gamble are high; should he fail, the losses would be widely felt.AN INDONESIAN trade minister, Rachmat Gobel, once wanted to ban the import of secondhand clothing because, he said, it could transmit the HIVvirus. He also restricted imports of beef to promote the dubious goal of self-sufficiency; the result was not rendang in every pot, but soaring beef prices, butchers’ strikes and protests. Mercifully, Mr Gobel was shown the door last August, and his replacement, Tom Lembong, seems to believe that a country’s trade ministry should facilitate rather than impede free trade. But Mr Gobel’s views remain all too common in Indonesia, and Mr Lembong’s all too rare. The world’s fourth-most populous country is blessed with a natural bounty of coal and oil under ground and, above it, forests and plantations producing rubber and palm oil. But its huge potential in other areas is still unrealised (see our special report in this week’s issue). As with many resource-dependent economies, protectionism and rent-seeking have flourished. The government shields large domestic players at the expense of consumers. In 2007 Indonesia expanded the number of industries in which foreign investment is barred or restricted from 83 to 338, making it South-East Asia’s most hostile country to foreign capital. When commodity prices were high and China was buying, this model appeared to work reasonably well. Indonesia’s economy grew, and if foreign companies wanted what was in Indonesian mines they had to play by Indonesian rules. Now that commodity prices have plummeted, output is sputtering and Indonesia’s weaknesses are apparent. Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president (pictured above), who is widely known as Jokowi, came to power promising reform. He has said a lot of sensible things about boosting infrastructure, reducing subsidies and attracting foreign investment, particularly the sort that brings high-value manufacturing and service jobs. But the kinds of firms that produce these jobs are choosy. If Indonesia does not create the right conditions, they will not invest, and Jokowi’s promise to return Indonesia to 7% growth—a tall order at the best of times—will go unkept. Unfortunately, his record has fallen short of the reformist rhetoric. He got a few big things right after taking office, cutting wasteful fuel subsidies and introducing a one-stop shop for business licensing, which simplified a notoriously Byzantine process. More recently he has trimmed Indonesia’s negative investment list, removing barriers to foreign investors in 30 areas of the economy, including cold storage and warehousing, which should help stabilise food prices and help fishermen sell their catches. The other Jokowi Alas, these reforms have been countered by other policies that smack of the old protectionism. Even as Jokowi lowered some restrictions, he increased barriers to foreign investment in 19 other industries. In July he unveiled a law requiring that at least 30% of components in tablets and smartphones sold in Indonesia should be made in the country—despite lacking the industrial base to produce them. This balance-sheet is not good enough. If Jokowi is to be the man to lead Indonesia to sustained prosperity, he needs to toughen his reformist mettle—and quickly. The to-do list is a long one, starting with slashing the negative-investment list and lifting restrictions on agriculture that keep rice prices high. None of this will be easy in a country where powerful vested interests have ensured that protectionism has predominated for decades. But it is not impossible. Indonesians have shown great bravery in their revolutions for independence and freedom. Now the economy needs to be unchained.CITIES are the world’s economic engines—and the bigger they are, the better. Middle-aged ones like London and New York are booming, and would be doing even better if they were not constrained by green belts, zoning and other NIMBYism. But the real giants are in the emerging world. Fast-growing metropolises like Lagos and Manila, with populations of more than 15m, perform an amazing alchemy by turning poor rural migrants into better-educated, wealthier urbanites. Unfortunately, these engines can barely run. Megacities are seizing up. Surveys of São Paulo suggest that half of all adults spend at least two hours a day travelling. Lagos has such epic traffic jams that an army of street hawkers plies the roads, selling peanuts, Christmas trees and puppies to a captive market of drivers. Last autumn the chairman of Manila’s transport authority was an hour late for a live television interview. He was stuck in traffic, of course (see article). Residents shake their heads and blame corruption, potholes, undisciplined drivers and growing affluence for the jams. They are partly right, especially about the affluence. More urbanites with more money means more wheels on the road: new-car sales in the Philippines jumped by 91% between 2013 and 2015 alone. But the main reason the megacities are stuck is that their governments are doing almost nothing to reduce traffic, and quite a lot to make it worse. Some continue to fix fuel prices at artificially low levels. Others have cut subsidies, although oil prices have been so low that consumers are yet to be convinced that governments will allow costly fuel. And governments favour drivers in other ways. Most megacities have minimum parking rules, which specify how many parking spaces must be provided whenever a new shop, office or block of flats is built. Lagos insists on one parking space for every 40 square metres of “worshipping area” in a church. These laws greatly encourage driving and, in effect, impose a tax on non-drivers, because businesses pass on the cost of building the spaces to all their customers. Even megacities that try to force drivers out of their cars often achieve the opposite. The modish method, which is used to tackle air pollution as well as traffic, is to ban cars from the roads on specific days, determined by the last digit of their number plates. Beijing was an early adopter. Delhi tested an odd-even scheme in January and will have another go in the spring. But the history of these schemes, in Mexico City and elsewhere, suggests that they do not cut traffic for long. Instead they are a boon to carmakers: any family that can afford it simply buys a second car with a different number plate. Inching forward Many big cities are now building “rapid bus” networks, with dedicated lanes. If well designed, these are a cheap, effective form of public transport. But governments that invest in public transport while retaining the inducements to drive are mostly wasting their money. Ideally, all would follow London, Singapore and Stockholm in charging drivers to move around the city at congested times. But cutting subsidies would be a good start. So hats off to the great cities of Latin America, which are doing more than those in Africa or Asia to reform. São Paulo has abolished parking minimums; Mexico City has quietly allowed its number-plate scheme to fade, while building a large rapid-bus network. These cities are still stuck, but the road ahead is clearing.
