HAD you visited the squatter slums of Kai Tak in Kowloon, Hong Kong, in the 1950s, a curious sight might have met your eyes. Among the thousands of tiny dilapidated wooden huts, crammed with refugees from newly communist China, threaded with muddy paths where adults clopped in wooden sandals and children splashed in storm-drains, a prim Englishwoman would be picking her way with care. Her fair hair was brushed in an immaculate shape, her flowered dress suitable for Cheltenham; a large handbag was on her arm. Her large eyes and prominent teeth gave her a look of keen concern. Her name then was Elsie Elliott. Later she was Elsie Tu. Under both names she was a formidable advocate for the rights of the downtrodden in Hong Kong, shaming and tormenting the police, the Legislative Council and successive British governors for more than 30 years. Wherever second-class citizens—that is, Chinese—lacked transport, housing, education, fair wages or a voice, she would be there, on their side.  This transformation surprised even her. She had arrived in the colony in 1951 as a meek missionary’s wife from the north of England, ready to support her husband, Bill Elliott, in the saving of souls. The merry notes of her piano accordion rang out then over the huts of Kai Tak, inviting everyone to be washed in the blood of the Lamb. Otherwise she made no noise, for women in the Plymouth Brethren were consigned to silence. But gradually, surrounded by such privation, she grew restless. Eventually she left both the Brethren and her husband. Christian witness, to her, meant being “good and useful”, the motto she had adopted as a timid, studious schoolgirl. It meant speaking out, too—even, as her pacifist father had hoped, getting into politics. Hong Kong in those days had no social welfare. It was run by British officials and rich businessmen for themselves alone. The poor Chinese who wandered into her tiny church had boils from malnutrition and fungus-encrusted feet; she set up a clinic to treat them. Children, desperate to learn, sat in the street devouring cheap comics; in 1954 she set up Mu Kuang Middle School, which grew from a 30-desk army tent, flapping in winds and summer downpours, to a seven-storey block with 1,300 pupils by 2015. Buying land and buildings, hurdling regulations and dealing with the Education Department introduced her to Hong Kong’s subculture of corruption, in which the ba wong, or triads, extorted protection money from every hut-dweller and even from street hawkers; in which everyone expected backhanders; and where the police were up to theirkhaki shorts in the narcotics trade. Her relentless exposure of the police, in reports and letters to the South China Morning Post (her favourite, “restrained” modus operandi), became an all-out war, especially when after 1963 she sat on the Urban Council. In 1966, when she campaigned against a fare rise on the Star Ferry linking Hong Kong island and Kowloon, the police accused her of inciting violence among the protesters; she proved them liars and became wildly popular, as well as later winning the CBE for her anti-corruption efforts. To her backers she was invaluable, a British gadfly with pretty good Mandarin and passable Cantonese, who could intercede easily with those in power and could neither be silenced nor deported. Love and politics The authorities themselves, in the governor’s office and on the Legislative Council (where she also sat, from 1988 to 1995), were less certain what to make of her. She had no stated ideology, beyond “justice for the people”, but was scornful of the favours shown to Taiwanese and would not censure China. In the run-up to the handover of the colony to China in 1997 she attacked the “disgraceful” reforms belatedly introduced by the British, and belittled the self-styled democrats who attacked the Basic Law agreed on, with some input from her, with the Chinese. In 1995 she lost her seat at the age of 82 to a “pro-democracy” candidate whose hand she refused to shake. Her motivations were in fact rather simple. She hated colonialism, believing that it brought out the worst sort of arrogance in the British. She championed the Chinese because, to her, they were its victims. But she embraced them, too, because she fell in love with—and, in 1985, married—a Chinese patriot from Inner Mongolia, Tu Hsueh-kwei. He had joined her church and co-founded her school; they had taught each other their respective languages. She called him “Andrew” after the apostle who cared for the needy. Through him she absorbed the philosophy and poetry of China, the songs of the Beijing Opera, the habit of patience and an enhanced sense of racial injustice. In return he supported her in every way he could—except publicly, which might have meant deportation. With him she experienced a strange reversal of her first role in Hong Kong. Then, as a missionary wife, it was she who had been silent and second-class, reduced to making the refreshments at meetings. Now it was Andrew who would greet her, after another rowdy day on the Legislative Council, with a cup of tea just as she liked it. But then, reverting to the natural shyness she always felt she had, she would say “Thank you, husband,” and sip demurely, as if the order of things were not inverted; and as if she posed no threat to anyone.Saudi Arabia executed 47 people on terrorism charges, including Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr, a prominent Shia Muslim cleric. Many Shias around the world reacted angrily. In Iran protesters stormed the Saudi embassy. The Saudi government, along with allies in Bahrain and Sudan, cut diplomatic ties with Iran, although it said talks this month on the Syrian civil war would not be affected. In Yemen Saudi fighter jets intensified their bombardment of Iranian-allied Houthi forces. Iran said they had bombed its embassy in Yemen. Burundi’s government refused to join peace talks with the opposition. Sporadic violence continued in the capital, Bujumbura. Around 400 people have been killed since April, when President Pierre Nkurunziza said he would seek a third term in office. Two former prime ministers were set to face off in the second round of a presidential election in the Central African Republic. The first vote on December 30th was peaceful, but militias still control most of the country, which has suffered Christian-Muslim violence since 2012. Another poke in the eye North Korea claimed to have detonated a thermonuclear, or hydrogen, weapon underground. It was the rogue country’s fourth nuclear test since 2006, though international experts questioned the claim, arguing that it may have been a smaller “boosted-fission” explosion instead. Reports that the North had fired a missile from a submarine for the first time also surfaced. China, North Korea’s supposed ally, expressed anger at the test. In Bangladesh the Supreme Court upheld the death sentence for Motiur Rahman Nizami, who heads Jamaat-e-Islami, the largest Islamic party. He was convicted last year for war crimes committed during the independence war against Pakistan in 1971, when he helped the Pakistani army identify and kill pro-independence activists. Critics claim he did not receive a fair trial. A French journalist left China after the government refused to renew her press credentials. She was the first foreign journalist resident in China to be forced to leave the country since 2012. The government objected to her reporting on the suppression of ethnic Uighurs, a mostly Muslim minority in the west of China. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, said his government was very concerned about the disappearance of Lee Bo, the owner of a shop selling books about Chinese politics. There are widespread suspicions that he was abducted from the territory by mainland Chinese agents. Four others connected with the shop disappeared last October while visiting Thailand and mainland China. China announced it was building an aircraft-carrier entirely from domestic technology. It has only one such ship, which was built in the Soviet Union. A terrible start to the year Gisela Mota, the mayor of Temixco, a town south of Mexico City, was murdered less than a day after her inauguration. The killers are thought to have links to Los Rojos, a drugs gang. See article.  Police in Guatemala arrested 18 former military and government officials on charges that they committed human-rights abuses during the country’s civil war, which lasted from 1960 to 1996. Prosecutors said that the accused commanded forces that were responsible for massacring civilians. Venezuela’s newly elected parliament, the first to be controlled by the opposition to the country’s populist regime in 16 years, was sworn in. Four MPs were barred from taking their seats pending the outcome of an investigation into electoral fraud. The opposition Democratic Unity alliance defiantly swore three of them in, restoring the two-thirds majority it won in December’s election. The new head of the National Assembly called for the removal of President Nicolás Maduro within six months. See article.  Bad tidings Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, vowed to prosecute the men who formed mobs that molested women during new-year celebrations in Cologne. Over 100 women filed complaints claiming they had been groped, robbed and in one case raped. Police described the perpetrators as having “north African or Arab” appearances, further inflaming tensions over Germany’s acceptance of over 1m Middle Eastern refugees. See article.  Sweden introduced border controls on the Oresund bridge that links it to Denmark as part of an effort to slow down the influx of Middle Eastern asylum applicants. Denmark responded by bringing in checks at its border with Germany. Business leaders warned that the controls threaten to undo the region’s economic integration. Catalonia’s president, Artur Mas, announced that he will schedule new elections, after failing to form a government to carry out his programme of declaring independence from Spain. The far-right government in Poland passed a media law that dismisses the heads of the public broadcasters and puts them under the control of the treasury minister. It is the latest in a series of steps by the Law and Justice party to gain control over the country’s courts, intelligence services and public media. David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, confirmed that the government will take a clear position in a referendum, expected this year or next, on whether to leave the European Union, but that he would let ministers hold a “different personal position”. Jeremy Corbyn, the leftist leader of Britain’s opposition Labour Party, tightened his grip on the party in a reshuffle of the shadow cabinet, promoting an opponent of Trident nuclear weapons to defence. The big surprise was that Hilary Benn, who gave a stirring speech in favour of air strikes in Syria, to the obvious displeasure of Mr Corbyn, kept his job in foreign affairs. Tears, it seems, are not enough Citing the long list of mass shootings in America Barack Obama said he would use his presidential powers to bypass Congress and ensure that most people who sell guns are registered. Even this very limited gun-control measure was met with stiff resistance from the National Rifle Association. Gun sales are expected to soar, as they have each time Mr Obama has spoken of gun restrictions.  Global stockmarkets started the new year with a bad hangover, induced by more turbulence in China’s markets. The Shanghai and Shenzhen Composite index fell heavily during the week, causing trading to be automatically suspended at least twice, after the release of more dismal data on manufacturing and other gloomy economic news. Investors were also unnerved by the looming end of a ban on share sales by big investors; the authorities quickly drafted permanent restrictions on such sales. How low can it go? Oil prices also weighed on market sentiment. Brent crude traded at under $35 a barrel, the lowest in more than a decade, after figures showed oil stockpiles increasing in America. Any lingering expectations that OPEC would agree to cut production in order to raise prices were dashed by the diplomatic row between Saudi Arabia and Iran.  Annual headline inflation in the euro zone remained unchanged at 0.2% in December. Markets had expected it to rise after months of stimulus policies that the European Central Bank had brought in to try to lift inflation to its 2% target.  In Sweden, which is also battling persistently low inflation, the board of the central bank gave the governor the power to intervene directly in currency markets if the krona continues to strengthen. The Riksbank has already lowered its benchmark interest rate to -0.35% and expanded its quantitative-easing programme. Some MPs in Britain’s Parliament called for a hearing into the decision, announced on New Year’s Eve, by the Financial Conduct Authority to drop its inquiry into banking pay and culture. The regulator said that rather than pursue an industry-wide investigation, it would work with individual banks to promote “the delivery of cultural change”. The FCA’s critics claim it has bowed to pressure from the government. Vroom! Vroom!   Carmakers sold 17.47m light vehicles in the United States in 2015, their best year ever, beating a record that had stood since 2000. This was driven mostly by surging sales of light trucks at the expense of mid-size and compact cars, in part because the lower price of petrol has reduced the cost of running larger vehicles. The car industry is confident that 2016 will be another record year, though with so many changes afoot in the business some wonder if sales will now hit a plateau. Underlining how incumbent carmakers are having to adapt to the challenges posed by new technologies, General Motors said it was investing $500m in Lyft, a ridesharing firm and Uber’s main rival. GM and Lyft will work together on projects to develop self-driving taxis and to create hubs across America where people who want to work for Lyft as drivers can rent a car from GM. Tesla Motors had its best quarter in the last three months of 2015, delivering 17,400 cars to customers, some of whom had placed orders three years ago. However, the electric-car company’s share price fell sharply, mainly over worries that it will not be able to ramp up production to meet the growing backlog of orders for its new Model X. Volkswagen’s troubles deepened in America, where the Justice Department filed a civil lawsuit seeking damages for its installation of software in cars designed to cheat emissions tests. The penalties from the various complaints lodged in the suit potentially amount to $48 billion. See article.  Sainsbury’s, a British supermarket chain, revealed that it had made a takeover offer for Home Retail Group, but had been rejected. HRG owns Argos, which used to sell its wares primarily through a hefty shopping catalogue but has beefed up its online and same-day delivery business. Those operations would benefit Sainsbury’s as it and others face increased competition from Amazon’s entry into Britain’s online groceries market. It is considering whether to pursue its bid. Marc Bolland said he would step down as chief executive of Marks & Spencer. He has spent six years in the job trying to turn around the struggling British high-street retailer, which had a bleak Christmas trading period. Twitbook Twitter’s share price dipped amid reports that it is contemplating extending the maximum limit of characters in tweets from 140 to 10,000. The Twittersphere lit up upon news of the possible change, with many tweeters griping that it would end the short, pithy comments for which Twitter is known and turn the service into something more akin to Facebook. That may be what Twitter’s executives are hoping for as they look for ways to boost revenue.More KAL's cartoonsFOR years Saudi Arabia seemed inert, relying on its vast oil wealth and the might of its American patron to buy quiet at home and impose stasis on its neighbours. But oil prices have tumbled, America has stood back from leadership in the Middle East, the region is on fire and power has shifted to a new generation—notably King Salman’s 30-year-old favoured son, Muhammad bin Salman. A sandstorm of change is rousing the desert kingdom. The visible result is the brutal treatment of dissent at home and assertiveness abroad that has just been on chilling display. On January 2nd Saudi Arabia executed 47 people. Most of them were terrorists linked to al-Qaeda but some, including a prominent Shia cleric, simply called for the fall of the ruling House of Saud. After Iranians set fire to the Saudi embassy in Tehran in protest, the kingdom cut diplomatic, trade and air links, a grave and foolish escalation in a febrile region. Away from the headlines, however, a different assertiveness could prove equally consequential. Prince Muhammad has drawn up a blueprint designed to throw open Saudi Arabia’s closed economy and government—including, he says, the possible sale of shares in the national oil firm, Saudi Aramco. Coupling geopolitical swagger with sweeping economic change is a gamble. The outcome will determine the survival of the House of Saud and shape the future of the Arab world. What is Arabic for Thatcherism? The plunge in the price of oil, from $110 a barrel in 2014 to less than $35 today, was partly because Saudi Arabia seems determined to protect its share of the oil market. Nevertheless, low prices are a time-bomb for a country dominated by oil and a government that relies on it for up to 90% of its revenues. The budget deficit swelled last year to a staggering 15% of GDP. Although the country has $650 billion of foreign reserves, they have already fallen by $100 billion. When oil prices fell in the 1990s, the Saudis simply borrowed heavily. They were saved when China’s boom sent commodity prices soaring again in the 2000s. This time no one, including the Saudi rulers, expects a return to triple-digit oil prices. Instead, they acknowledge that the economy must change. Speaking to The Economist this week (see Briefing), Prince Muhammad laid out a blueprint for reform that amounts to a radical redesign of the Saudi state. The first step is fiscal consolidation. The goal is to eliminate the budget deficit in the next five years, even if the oil price stays low. Though there is much flab to cut, that is still a perilous undertaking which means dismantling the system according to which petro-cash, not taxes, pay for free education and health care as well as highly subsidised electricity, water and housing. More than money is at stake: this largesse has disguised how far the economy is chronically unproductive and dependent on foreign labour. It has been too easy for Saudis to avoid working, or to snooze away in government offices. The new leadership has made a start. Spending cuts in the last months of 2015 stopped the deficit from soaring to more than 20% of GDP. The 2016 budget includes steep rises in the prices of petrol, electricity and water (though they remain heavily subsidised). The prince pledges to move to market prices by the end of the five-year period. He is also committed to new taxes, including a value-added tax of 5%, sin taxes on sugary drinks and cigarettes, and levies on vacant land.   Recalibrating taxes and subsidies is only the first step. Roughly 70% of Saudis are under 30. At the same time, two-thirds of Saudi workers are employed by the government. With the workforce projected to double by 2030, the country will prosper only if the sleepy statist economy is turned on its head, diversifying from oil, boosting private business and introducing market-driven efficiencies. The government plans to do this by getting the state out of all but its essential functions. From health and education to state-owned companies, the new Saudi leadership is looking for privatisation and the private provision of public services. It has plans for charter schools and an insurance-based, privately provided health-care system. It is looking at the complete or partial privatisation of more than two dozen agencies and state-owned companies, including the national airline, telecoms firm and power generator. The biggest fish of all is Aramco, a national icon and almost certainly the world’s most valuable firm. The prince favours floating a minority stake in Aramco and opening its books to the world. He is urging his team to come up with a plan within months (see article). Could such a blueprint become reality? Words are cheap and the obstacles huge. Saudi Arabia has promised reform before, only for its efforts to fizzle into insignificance. Its capital markets are thin and the capacity of its bureaucracy thinner. The investment that it needs in its young people, its non-oil industries, its tourism infrastructure and much else will not come cheap. It will not happen unless investors believe in the country’s future. That confidence will be hard to build. The best-laid plans One reason is that austerity on an almost Greek scale will be difficult and unpopular (though the examples of Syria and Libya are a deterrent against outright rebellion—see page 41). The state has provided generously partly to make up for the lack of political rights. Yet the royal family is reluctant to open the pressure valves that might make cuts more palatable. For all its economic urgency, the new regime shows no interest in political reform. Recent elections in which women were allowed to vote and to stand for (largely powerless) municipal councils were the idea of the late king. Nor is there a sign that the religious absolutism Saudi Arabia shares with its enemy, Islamic State, will soften. Even before the latest round, executions were at a 20-year high. Prince Muhammad waxes lyrical about the new generation. But he has little appetite to take on the conservative clergy over, say, the ban on women driving. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts The other obstacle is geopolitics. As Iran has become more assertive, the Saudis have stepped in as the champion of Sunni Muslims. They have confronted Iranian-supported allies such as the Houthis in Yemen and Bashar al-Assad in Syria, as well as Shia malcontents at home and in neighbouring Sunni-ruled countries like Bahrain. The new leadership argues that stability requires it to send a signal to terrorists (hence the executions). It feels obliged to defend its interests by resisting Iran which, it says, is bent on recreating a Persian empire. The argument is flawed: Saudi Arabia instead risks leading one side in a Muslim sectarian struggle it can neither win nor afford. The war in Yemen is a morass; support for Egypt and other Sunni allies is a drain. Defence and security already take over 25% of government spending and will eat up a growing share of a shrinking budget. Regional tensions will also deter private investment. Who would put trillions into an isolated economy in a region in turmoil? The new regime seems to regard boldness at home and abroad as signs of a strong Saudi Arabia. Yet, though a muscular foreign policy plays well among Saudis, the economy will not thrive if the royal family ends up inflaming its region and blocking social reform at home. If Prince Muhammad is to remake his country, not wreck it, he needs to understand that. Correction: The original version of this article stated that the country had 29m-plus Saudis. This has been corrected.THE declaration on January 6th that North Korea had detonated its first hydrogen bomb was met with a show of joy on the streets of Pyongyang, its capital, and with despair in most others. America, Japan, South Korea and even China protested. Outsiders picked up the magnitude-5 earthquake caused by the blast, and put its epicentre at Punggye-ri, site of an underground complex in the north-east, near China, where three previous tests, in 2006, 2009 and 2013, took place. A fourth nuclear test had been expected. But most experts dismiss the claim that this was a hydrogen bomb of the sort found in advanced nuclear arsenals. Thermonuclear weapons, far more powerful than the atomic kind, are almost certainly beyond the North’s know-how. The explosion was roughly as big as the atom bomb detonated in 2013; even a failed detonation of an H-bomb would be more powerful. At a push, the North may have tested a “boosted-fission” weapon that uses a fusion additive to achieve a bigger bang. If so, it would mark a next step in the North’s nuclear programme—and a serious one. Come on, China, change North Korea A second nuclear test only four years into the rule of Kim Jong Un, the odious young head of the mafia family that controls North Korea, is a sobering reminder of the progress that three generations of Kims have made in expanding their nuclear capability—despite outside efforts to curb it. This week South Korea suggested that the North had also tested a submarine-launched ballistic missile in December. Such developments pose little immediate threat to the outside world. Few think that North Korea has yet managed to miniaturise its nuclear weapons to fit them onto missiles. But the indications are that its capabilities are growing faster than outsiders expected. The UN Security Council rushed to meet this week, condemning the test. Prodded by America, it is expected to pass a resolution calling for a fresh round of sanctions. Many will think this is just for show. After all, earlier sanctions following tests have hardly deterred a regime that seems set on possessing nuclear weapons. Indeed, they have allowed the Kim regime to claim that North Korea needs nukes to defend itself against enemies, led by America, that are bent on its destruction. The North’s state news agency said this week that the test had “guaranteed the eternal future of the nation”. When dealing with North Korea, it is easy to despair. Dramatic remedies, such as trying to remove Mr Kim by force, are off the table because the risk is too great. Barely 50 kilometres from North Korea, 25m South Koreans live in greater Seoul, one of Asia’s most dynamic megalopolises. On the other side of the border are 1m North Korean troops and countless artillery pieces, with which the North has threatened to turn the southern capital into a “sea of fire”. Even so, fresh sanctions should be just the start in confronting North Korea’s nuclear-tipped threats. Not enough has been done to stem the flow of hard currency to a regime that even uses its diplomats to ferry illicit cash to Pyongyang. Financial sanctions can be made to bite deeper by more closely monitoring banking transactions. And the Vienna convention should not give cover to envoys engaged in criminality. Peninsula of provocation: A timeline of clashes between North and South Korea Under Barack Obama, America has let its North Korea policy drift. But the country that can do most is North Korea’s big neighbour and supposed friend, China. Its banks are the main conduit for North Korean money. More worryingly, China does next to nothing to stop the flow of nuclear technology between rogue states and North Korea. China’s sway over its neighbour is sometimes exaggerated, yet it is an economic lifeline, providing the regime with aid and trade. China is unhappy at the prospect of a nuclear-armed North Korea; but it is even more worried that the regime might collapse, possibly leading to a takeover by South Korea and America and the flight of millions of desperate North Koreans across its border. Ideally, China would abandon the murderous Mr Kim. But even if it is unwilling to go that far, it can use the billions in aid and subsidised trade that it gives North Korea to press change upon the young dictator. Some may argue that squeezing the subsidies could hurt the poor, many of whom go hungry; it would also undermine the country’s budding class of private traders and entrepreneurs, who are its best hope for the future. But the aid and subsidised trade it has extracted have mainly enriched the Pyongyang elite and financed the nuclear programme. They would be the main victims of Chinese pressure—especially if the elite could no longer travel to China. For decades North Korea has been adept at shaking down outsiders: first the Soviet Union, sometimes America and now China. Before it is too late, Beijing should stop subsidising a vile dynasty that gives nothing but headaches in return.FEW words raise as many hackles in America as “bail-out”. To left and right alike, it speaks of waste and corruption: the exploitation of hardworking taxpayers by the rich and the feckless. That is bad news for Puerto Rico, a small, broke American territory in the Caribbean which missed payments on some of its debt this week (see page 33). Barack Obama wants Congress to amend its laws to let Puerto Rico declare bankruptcy and to stump up some money to help it through a transition that will inevitably be painful. Righteous lawmakers harrumph that this sort of bail-out would reward the island’s profligacy. Its tattered accounts stem in part from a bloated public sector, unaffordable pension promises, unduly restrictive labour laws and a tax code that is full of holes. They fret, too, that it would set a bad precedent. Many of America’s 50 states have big debts and even bigger unfunded pension liabilities. There is no bankruptcy procedure under American law either for states or for territories like Puerto Rico. If Congress throws Puerto Rico a lifeline, the theory goes, spendthrift places like Illinois will soon request one. These arguments are unfair. Congress itself lumbered the island’s economy with its biggest burdens. It is Congress, after all, that imposed America’s minimum wage on Puerto Rico, even though local workers are less productive than those on the mainland. Congress has also set some welfare payments at relatively high levels. And, again, Congress imposed costs on Puerto Rico by banning foreign vessels from carrying goods between American ports, making it unnecessarily expensive to ship anything to or from the island. The rights and wrongs of write-downs Opponents’ arguments are also impractical. One way or another, the federal government will end up on the hook for the disarray in Puerto Rico. In the past decade the territory’s economy shrank by 14%. Employment is down by 12%. Workers have responded by moving to the mainland, where jobs are easier to find. Over the past decade the population has dwindled by 9%, and the exodus is accelerating. The big spending cuts and tax rises still needed to balance the books would lead even more Puerto Ricans to emigrate, shrinking the tax base yet further. A write-down, accompanied by measured spending cuts and reforms, would right the island’s finances. Yet unless Congress allows both the territory’s government and its agencies to declare bankruptcy, that will almost certainly not happen. The island’s constitution, which Congress can override, guarantees that certain categories of bonds will be paid in full. Meanwhile, the constitution also protects government pensions—a potential contradiction. Without Congress’s help, a long and messy court battle, accompanied by worsening economic conditions, widespread hardship and mass emigration, seem inevitable. At some point, the federal government would surely have to step in. As for the argument about precedent, it is not clear that Congress has the power to create a bankruptcy regime for states, which are sovereign entities. Puerto Rico’s laws, by contrast, are more at Congress’s disposal. Changing them would not just spare the island’s economy grievous harm. An orderly bankruptcy would allocate some losses to bondholders—as should happen when a jurisdiction cannot pay its bills—but might still enable them to recover more money than a protracted legal wrangle. And it would save Congress from shelling out more in federal aid later.“LOVE is like war: easy to begin but very hard to stop,” observed H.L. Mencken, an American writer. Less poetically, he might have added market meddling to the mix. China had planned this week to dismantle some of the rescue measures put in place when the stockmarket crashed last summer. That prospect helped to spook investors: stocks fell by 7% on January 4th, the first trading day of 2016, their worst-ever start to a new year. Chinese regulators are once again wading in, however haplessly—on January 7th, shares dropped by another 7%. So what, you might ask. The unruliness of China’s stockmarket is not news. And for all the headlines generated by its tumult, it is a poor indicator of the economy’s health. Growth was already slowing early last year when share prices raced to vertiginous heights. Parts of the economy—the property market and consumer spending—have actually improved since stocks cratered by more than 40% during the summer (although manufacturing remains weak). Companies raise little financing from the market and savers store little wealth in it. Yet the stockmarket is the clearest expression of the fragile state of financial reform in China. The government has declared that it will relax its grip on the economy and give more sway to market forces. Doing just that, first in agriculture and then in manufacturing, is an important reason for the remarkable growth of the past 35 years. But in finance, the desire for the more efficient allocation of capital clashes with the Communist Party’s reflexive instinct for control. It seems that a falling stockmarket sends too transparent a signal of negative sentiment for officials to bear. The fingerprints of the “national team”—a motley crew of state-owned financial institutions—were all over the buy orders that swooped in when the market tumbled. The regulator was supposed to end a ban this week on share sales by big investors. Now it has drafted permanent restrictions, in effect telling investors that they are welcome to buy shares, but not to sell. It would be hard to conceive of a better plan for scaring money away. The poor design of circuit-breakers, trading halts ostensibly designed to calm the market, has added fuel to the fire. Daily dispatches: China's stockmarket mess The tension between reform and control is also evident in the currency market. The central bank has started to back away from obsessive management of the yuan’s exchange rate. But the more leeway that it creates for trading the currency, the bigger its headache. The central bank judges that the yuan is more or less at fair value; the market disagrees and has pushed it steadily lower. Selling dollars to prop up the yuan so as to make for an orderly depreciation, China has run down its foreign-exchange reserves by some $300 billion over the past half-year. The government still has a plump cushion, but its reserves are not limitless. Accepting more volatility, even if that means a sharper depreciation now, would be better. Control peak The government’s hunger for control is now clouding the broad economic picture. Burdened by the mountain of debt that it has accumulated over the past decade, China needs to begin deleveraging. That in turn means tolerating slower growth, at least for a while. Instead, all indications are that the government will set its annual growth target at 6.5% for the next five years in a plan to be unveiled in March. That is above what most analysts think it can credibly achieve without piling on yet more debt and bringing closer a real economic crisis. China has reached a point in its development where it needs to move faster in ceding power to the market—over shares, its currency and the growth rate. Unless the government gives up more control now, it risks some day losing it altogether.
