A good system, but overwhelmed “THE animals die first” is a common refrain from many Ethiopians living in Tigray and Afar, two northern states, as the country experiences its worst drought in decades. Crop production in these regions has dropped by 50% or more in some areas, and failed completely in others. Hundreds of thousands of domestic animals are reckoned to have perished. The rapidly changing skylines of Ethiopia’s modernising cities notwithstanding, about 80% of its population still live off the land. Yet despite the drought there are not yet scenes reminiscent of the famine of 1983-84 when as many as 1m people died. That reprieve may not last. Those working for NGOs, which are now scrabbling to raise funds for relief, point out that in previous dry spells, hunger intensified from April onwards because by then people have eaten through their last food stocks or what little was harvestable. “The present situation here keeps me awake at night,” says John Graham, the country director for Save the Children, a charity. Unlike in 1983, when brutal government policies increased the number of deaths, Ethiopia’s present rulers have done much to mitigate the impact. Their Productive Safety Net Programme provides jobs for about 7m people who work on public-infrastructure projects in return for food or cash. There are also a national food reserve and early warning systems throughout the woredas, local-government districts. Ethiopia even managed to accelerate the building of a new railway line—the country’s only one—to bring food supplies from Djibouti on the coast of the Horn of Africa. But the country’s ability to help itself may soon reach its limit. Estimates of the number of people affected by drought doubled between June and October in 2015 to 8.2m, and are now pushing beyond 10m (of a population of about 100m). The government faces criticism for not acknowledging sooner that it needs help. Ethiopians—both official and lay—are sensitive about their ancient, diverse country’s persistent association with misery and pestilence, while equally proud of its economic turnaround. There is also a sense that the government has not been found wanting with this drought; rather that it has simply encountered events beyond its control. The El Niño phenomenon is causing unusually heavy rains in some parts of the world and drought elsewhere. Herein lies a challenge for Ethiopia: it is competing for international funds with other grave humanitarian crises, such as the wars in Syria and Yemen, and the international migrant emergency. Moreover, the international system’s cogs started turning late, after the government initially tried to go it alone. Ethiopia may also be up against donor fatigue. The estimated $1.4 billion needed to combat the drought’s impact remains less than half funded. Further concerns stem from the possibility that El Niño will also affect Ethiopia’s next rainy season. The UN reckons such a situation could result in more than 15m Ethiopians suffering food shortages, acute malnutrition or worse by mid-2016.PEACE in our time or a cynical diplomatic fudge? The best that can be said of the provisional agreement on a “cessation of hostilities” between at least some of the warring parties in Syria, hammered out (again) on February 22nd between John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, and Sergei Lavrov, his Russian opposite number, is that it appears to have slightly more solid foundations than a similar attempt earlier this month. The agreement, which is due to come into force on February 27th, was endorsed by Vladimir Putin in a rare television address after he conferred by telephone with Barack Obama. As The Economist went to press, details of how it would be implemented were still being worked through. It looks likely that at least one of the requirements of the UN peace plan outlined by the UN Security Council late last year may be fulfilled: the lifting of sieges of rebel-held towns by government forces and the delivery of humanitarian aid to their starving populations. Some aid convoys began to roll from Damascus last week and more will follow. Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s president, has also promised to hold (meaningless) parliamentary elections on April 13th. Just about everything else remains unclear. The Russians have given themselves and Mr Assad plenty of latitude in the way they wish to interpret the agreement. The Syrian regime refuses to describe it as a ceasefire, instead referring to a mere suspension of combat operations. In practice, it may not even amount to that. Islamic State (IS) and Jabhat al-Nusra (JAN), al-Qaeda’s Syrian affiliate, are officially designated as terrorist groups by both Moscow and Washington, and are thus explicitly excluded from the agreement. But JAN, intermingled with other rebel groups, is active on almost every front in the civil war, from Daraa in the far south of the country to Aleppo in the north. JAN is also the leading player in a rebel alliance that includes Ahrar al-Sham, a powerful Salafist outfit, and other less extreme groups. It controls most of Idlib province to the west of Aleppo. Having largely completed the encirclement of Aleppo, the regime’s next priority is to cut off and squeeze Idlib. Fabrice Balanche of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy argues that if Russia continues air strikes against JAN, as the agreement entitles it to, it will be impossible for other groups fighting alongside it to respect the ceasefire. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts Before the assault on Idlib can begin in earnest, regime forces will need to lock in the gains of the Russian-backed assault of the past few weeks. The offensive has retaken swathes of rebel-held territory and cut off supply lines to Aleppo from Turkey with the help of Syrian-Kurdish YPG fighters, whom the Americans regard as their principal ally on the ground against IS. Such has been its speed that Mr Assad’s forces are in need of a breather. The timing of the ceasefire will thus be very convenient if it allows them to construct defensive lines against possible counter-attacks and foments division between those of their enemies abiding by the agreement and those ignoring it. Mr Putin’s willingness to use hard power, and the West’s fear of confronting him, are allowing him to call the shots. A ceasefire on his terms, at a moment of his choosing, looks uncomfortably like a version of the Minsk 2 agreement struck a year ago to bring an end to the fighting in eastern Ukraine. Soon after, the town of Debaltseve fell to Russian-backed separatists after a devastating artillery assault. Since then there have been thousands of ceasefire violations by pro-Russian forces. Around 1,000 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed. As things stand, the ceasefire meets all of Mr Putin’s diplomatic and military requirements. It confirms the survival of Mr Assad’s regime, potentially divides the rebels, puts Turkey on the back foot and panders to Western concerns by promising a more concerted effort against IS and the possibility of a political settlement that helps staunch the flow of refugees into Europe. From the perspective of Moscow and Damascus, what’s not to like?Cleopatra married her brothers MAHA SAAD ZAKI, a professor of clinical genetics, ushers Ahmed, Fatima and their family into her room at Egypt’s National Research Centre. At least three of their six children have a rare neurological illness that manifests itself around age four, causing mental retardation, loss of the use of their limbs and, later, death. The couple’s nine-year-old daughter slumps, twitching. This congenital illness has appeared because, as well as being husband and wife, Ahmed and Fatima are also first cousins (their names have been changed). Cases like these are all too common in the Middle East and north Africa. Marrying a close relative markedly increases the chance that both parents are carriers of dangerous recessive genes, which can then cause disease when a child inherits a copy of the gene from both parents, as will happen in 25% of cases. The gamut of such illnesses runs from known ones such as microcephaly (in which children have unusually small heads) cystic fibrosis and thalassaemia, a blood disorder, to wholly new disorders. “Ninety percent of the cases I see are caused by consanguineous marriages,” says Ms Zaki. Statistics on the prevalence of marriages between close relatives today are scarce. Once common practice in Western societies, estimates suggest the Middle East, along with Africa, continue to have the highest levels in the world. In Egypt, around 40% of the population marry a cousin; the last survey in Jordan, admittedly way back in 1992, found that 32% were married to a first cousin; a further 17.3% were married to more distant relatives. Rates are thought to be even higher in tribal countries such as Iraq and the Gulf states of Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Kuwait. Today the first reason men and women look to wed within the family is because they know a lot about their relatives: who they are, what they earn, any past blunders. And large families mean they have lots of them. “People are looking for ethics and manners,” says Atef al-Shitany of Egypt’s health ministry. Tying the knot within also ensures property remains in the family. In Upper Egypt, a rural farming area, rates are the highest in Egypt. Unlike in the West, there is no social stigma; quite the opposite. A 38-year-old Egyptian woman, who has two sons with micro-syndrome (which causes cataracts, small genitalia and learning difficulties) due to her marriage to a cousin, says relatives nonetheless criticise her for allowing her 18-year-old daughter to get engaged to a “stranger”—the fiancé is not a relation. Many wrongly think that maternal cousins are not blood relatives. Prevailing Islamic belief reinforces intermarriage, although it happens among Christians too. The Koran allows marriage to anyone but parents, siblings, aunts and uncles, nephews and nieces. Indeed, Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad, married her cousin, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, notes Ahmed Mamdouh of Al Azhar, an Egyptian university. Many in the region, though, simply do not know of the risks of marrying a family member. A small survey in Saudi Arabia found that participants were 50% less likely to view marrying a cousin positively when warned of the problems. “We wouldn’t have married if we had known,” says Ahmed. To reduce genetic disorders, some countries have made blood tests mandatory for fiancés, which have helped reduce incidence of diseases such as sickle cell anaemia. In Tunisia, the government mandates premarital counselling for all those betrothed to a relative. In Egypt, where education is often rudimentary, there is much more work to be done. Couples that do know of the risks often believe—sometimes because their doctor tells them so—that basic blood tests rule out the risk of any genetic illness. “The only way to avoid the suffering is not to marry relatives,” says Ms Zaki. “But that will be impossible to achieve here.”ON FEBRUARY 23rd, a committee of Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, began debating a new law which will allow it to suspend its own members for “expressing support for terrorism”. While the law is not specifically directed at any political faction, its thrust is clear. It was tabled by the government in response to a meeting three weeks ago between three Israeli-Arab Knesset members and the families of a number of Palestinians who had been killed while attacking Israelis. The members of Balad, an Arab-nationalist party, also took part in a moment’s silence in memory of the young Palestinians. By calling them “martyrs”, the MPs enraged many Jews who regard the killers as terrorists; in one incident, assailants killed two Israelis on a bus. While the meeting was undoubtedly provocative, the move by the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, to adopt powers to banish the Arab MPs from parliament is seen by his critics as an assault on Israel’s democracy and an attempt to disenfranchise Israel’s Arab minority, who make up 20% of the population (excluding Palestinians in the territories occupied in 1967). The law has been criticised by Israel’s president, Reuven Rivlin, a member of Mr Netanyahu’s right-wing Likud party, who made a rare intervention in the legislative procedure on February 15th, saying that the law “sins against the meaning of the Knesset…. it sins against the voting public.” Mr Netanyahu is surely aware that the law is unlikely ever to pass all the necessary legislative stages of the Knesset; if it does, it is liable to be struck down by the Supreme Court; and even if it gets past the court it is unlikely ever to be used because it requires a three-quarters majority of the Knesset to agree to any suspension. Yet it is part of a verbal campaign Mr Netanyahu stands accused of waging against Israel’s Arab minority since last year’s general election. In a message broadcast on election day, Mr Netanyahu warned right-wing voters that “Arab voters are flowing in droves to the polls.” He later expressed regret over that message but recently he linked an attack in Tel Aviv, in which an Israeli Arab murdered three Israelis, to “lawlessness” in Arab towns. He also instructed two conservative ministers to draw up a list of tough conditions that Arab local councils must adhere to in order to get money from a $3.8 billion programme designed to improve conditions in the Arab sector. The complete, complex and convoluted history of Israel's Knesset, in one graphic Most Israelis take great pride in their democracy, which is committed to equal rights for Jews and non-Jews, and features the representation of Israeli Arabs in such bodies as the Supreme Court. Some argue that the suspension law undermines this; as does another law being proposed by the Netanyahu government, which will force NGOs that receive most of their funding from foreign governments to say so prominently in all their publications. This, too, is ostensibly a community-blind law, but in reality targets human-rights and pro-Palestinian groups, as they tend to be the ones receiving such funding. Settlers’ groups are also often funded from outside Israel, by Jewish philanthropists and evangelical Christian movements; but the law will not affect them, as their money does not come from governments.Protest vote? IRAN’S holiest city, and also its second-largest, has long been a conservative bastion. In parliamentary elections in 2012 Iran’s most right-wing party, the Paydari or Stability Front, won all of Mashhad’s five seats. In local elections the year after it won an outright majority and left the reformists with none. But after the nuclear deal and the lifting of sanctions, reformists backed by the city’s businessmen are attracting packed audiences to their hustings for elections due on 26th February. The conservatives may have expanded the complex around the shrine of Reza, Shia’s eighth imam, but only the reformists can attract the foreign investment the city needs to fill it. Their demands include a new railway to halve the time of travelling the 900 kilometres (560 miles) from Mashhad west to Tehran, the capital; highways designed to turn the city into Central Asia’s conduit to the Middle East; and leisure centres to diversify a rigidly spiritual form of tourism. Some suggest promoting the city not just as Imam Reza’s burial place, but also Harun al-Rashid’s, the eighth century caliph who presided over the golden age of Sunni Islam. “We have to replace the anti-Westerners,” says a businessman who says the conservatives blocked his joint venture with an Italian company, worth €400m ($440m), for a theme park. Economic demands often turn cultural. Several female candidates are campaigning for an end to the glass ceiling on senior government posts. “Stop sanctions on happiness,” cries a local economics professor and reformist candidate, vowing to fight a ban on concerts, upheld by Ayatollah Ahmad Alamolhoda, the city’s main preacher. One rally ends with a band with a female drummer performing renditions of Hafez, the most revered Persian poet, on stage. The more daring supporters don green veils or T-shirts (under jackets they can quickly zip up), harking back to the mass protests, or Green Revolution, that followed a rigged presidential election in 2009. Either as a reminder of or a precaution against a repeat of the violence, organisers distribute sticking-plasters which supporters wear on their index fingers. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal The conservatives have struck back, casting doubt on the reformists’ patriotism and mocking the support they have received from the BBC’s Persian service. “Don’t vote for Britain,” read posters hanging from Mashhad’s lampposts, underlining the widely-held view that perfidious Albion continues to scheme. But in Paydari’s campaign office, the mood is more sombre. A campaign manager insists that, post-sanctions, hardliners also favour foreign investment. He fears the perception, even among the party’s traditional constituency, is that they are out of step with the times.AS RECENTLY as two years ago the Kurds of Iraq were riding high, at the peak of a well-deserved social and economic recovery following decades of hardship and isolation under Saddam Hussein. The region seemed an island of stability even as the rest of Iraq was convulsed by violence following the American invasion and overthrow of the Iraqi leader. But the Kurdish miracle is dissipating. The Kurds have suffered a triple blow: the freezing in 2014 of their take of the federal budget, which constitutes 95% of the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG)’s overall budget; the emergence of Islamic State (IS) which took control of Mosul, just 85km (50 miles) from the capital, Erbil, making travel to Kurdistan’s oil facilities slower and more hazardous; and a steep drop in oil prices. Today the skeletons of unfinished buildings and half-empty watering holes bear witness to those once-high hopes. The residents are increasingly unhappy. Although the 70% drop in oil prices or the war against IS could not have been predicted, the severity of the crisis could surely have been mitigated. History has been harsh to the Kurds, scattered across several countries without their own state. In the 1980s Saddam used poison gas against them; in the 1990s, though they were protected by a Western no-fly zone, he was determined to cripple them financially. UN sanctions following his invasion of Kuwait had harmed the whole country; and a three-year civil war between Kurdish political factions left them drained. But in 2003, following the removal of Saddam, a Kurdish renaissance began and lasted a decade. Even in Iraq’s darkest years, 2006 and 2007, when al-Qaeda battled the Americans in the Sunni heartlands, Kurdistan’s impressive 10% annual growth rate set it apart. Foreign and domestic investment rose. The oil industry and property boomed; tourism, though still small, picked up; and the number of expatriates rose. Foreign businesses flocked to Erbil. Yet during this time, opportunities were squandered. “They entered into the financial crisis with a regional economy that was structurally weak and overwhelmingly reliant on high oil prices,” says Patrick Osgood, Kurdistan bureau chief for Iraq Oil Report, a subscription news service. Some 60% of Iraqi Kurdistan’s population is dependent on the public payroll, and most of them have not received their full salaries for months. Though Kurdish officials blamed Baghdad’s budget freeze (which has since been relaxed), the KRG’s inability to make up for it through increasing oil sales played a role. A feather-bedded public sector has also limited the development of a more vibrant private one. The relative security of working for the government has made it much less attractive for public employees to move to the private sector—a carefully crafted strategy, many reckon, by government parties keen to buy loyalty. “No party pushed for private-sector development because it was not in their interest,” said Roger Guiu, a research fellow at MERI, a Kurdish think tank. “It’s not a matter of firing people from the public sector, it’s making employment in the private one more attractive.” Less reliance on the public jobs might have led to less dissatisfaction and ultimately prevented the social unrest now rippling through the region as the government has run out of money. In the cities of Erbil and Sulaymaniyah, and in other smaller towns, residents have in recent weeks taken to the streets to rail against both government corruption and unpaid salaries. New austerity measures have angered many after the KRG announced in January that it would cut high wages by 75% and lower ones by 15%. Meanwhile official estimates report that the poverty rate has risen to 12%, up from 3% three years ago. A 30% increase in the population brought about by Syrian refugees and internally displaced Iraqis has also caused problems, including an unmanageable increase in demand for water and electricity. The continuing war against IS means that despite the collapse of oil revenues and Baghdad’s freezing of the federal budget, military spending has increased, though officials refuse to give numbers. Peshmerga soldiers on the front lines have been exempt from the austerity measures and still supposedly get their full salary. But even Kurdish soldiers have suffered from salary delays—with predictable results. Some fighters are exchanging the front line for boats from Turkey to Greece, in striking evidence of just how depleted the West’s strongest ally in Iraq has become. Deserting soldiers are just some of the 37,000 Kurds who have left Iraq for Europe since 2014. Most of them cite government corruption and financial hardship as their reason for migrating. As the battle against IS nears its third year, exasperation is increasing and expatriates are trickling away. The government is offering no reforms that look likely to revive the economy. It does not help that the region is also in constitutional crisis: the president of the KRG, Masoud Barzani, served two terms that came to an end in 2013, and was then granted a two-year extension by the Kurdish parliament. That prolongation expired last August, and yet he remains in office—in the 11th year of an eight-year term.HIS sleeping bag around his shoulders, Khaled, a 28-year-old truck driver, sits in a corner of Victoria Square, a gathering point for migrants in central Athens. He is waiting for a smuggler to help him cross Greece’s northern border with Macedonia, closed since February 21st to Afghan migrants like him. Across the square, Mahmud, a restaurant manager who has come from Aleppo with his wife and three children, fears that the route to Germany may soon close for Syrians too. “We mustn’t get stuck in Greece,” he says firmly. That may be hard to avoid. Last week Austria restricted arrivals to 3,200 per day, of whom 80 may apply for asylum. Macedonia, Serbia and Croatia are clamping down too. By February 23rd a backlog of 4,000 migrants had gathered at the Greek-Macedonian frontier; Greek police turned back dozens of buses carrying new arrivals. On February 24th ten countries along the migration route met in Vienna to discuss further steps. Greece was not invited. At the port of Piraeus, where ferries bring the migrants who arrive in Greece’s Aegean islands, aid workers urged Afghans to remain in government-run reception facilities rather than attempt the journey north. For months experts have warned that if northern Europe restricts refugee flows without an overall plan for handling migration, Greece faces disaster. The United Nations predicts 1m arrivals this year. Alexis Tsipras, the prime minister, worries that Greece will become “a black box” for migrants. As razor wire goes up across the Balkans, his fears may be about to come true. The crisis could hardly have come at worse moment for Mr Tsipras. His left-wing Syriza government faces a revolt by lawyers, doctors and farmers against reforms demanded by Greece’s international creditors. Farmers angry at moves to raise their income taxes to the same level as other Greeks blocked highways with their tractors, closing border crossings with Bulgaria and Turkey. A meeting on February 22nd with Mr Tsipras proved fruitless. Two days later the supreme court prosecutor threatened to investigate protest leaders; the blockades were quickly removed. While the farmers’ rebellion may have been crushed, lawyers are on strike over a new pension scheme, which they say would force them to pay more than 30% of their income in employee contributions. George Katrougalos, the labour minister, wants to raise employers’ contributions instead, claiming that pensions are among the last income sources for Greek families hit by the country’s long recession. But Greece’s creditors from the EU and International Monetary Fund say the pension system is on the verge of bankruptcy. They want an across-the-board benefits cut of at least 10% before releasing the next tranche of funding from the €86 billion ($95 billion) bail-out Greece concluded last year. That leaves the Greek government on the edge of insolvency as the migrant crisis is about to explode. Two decades ago Greece comfortably absorbed almost 1m economic migrants from the Balkans. This time, after six years of recession, the unemployment rate is above 25%. Mr Tsipras’s inexperienced government has struggled to take care of migrants in transit, let alone provide facilities for those who stay longer than a few days. It took a threat of immediate expulsion from the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone before Greece fulfilled its obligation to provide “hotspots” on five islands where migrants could be processed according to EU regulations. With local mayors raising “not-in-my-backyard” objections, nothing happened until the defence ministry took over; army contractors built the facilities in less than a month. Greece has already agreed to host up to 60,000 asylum-seekers who enter an official programme to relocate them to other EU countries. So far most have ignored the offer and pressed on with the journey. In any case, according to current plans, EU countries would take in only 13,000 migrants from Greece in the next six months. Some in Syriza used to argue that providing poor facilities for migrants would encourage them to move along. But thousands of Tunisians, Moroccans and Pakistanis blocked at the Macedonian border earlier this month are now settling in. Greece cannot afford to deport them. One priority, says a Syriza official, is to keep migrants as far as possible from tourist resorts. In Kos, an Aegean island popular with German holidaymakers, summer bookings have collapsed because of fears it will be overrun. Sports facilities and disused military camps on the mainland are being refurbished as temporary refugee camps. But the country’s total capacity is no more than 70,000 (see chart), and more than 2,000 migrants are arriving daily in Piraeus. The numbers will rise as the weather improves. If the northern border closes, Greece will fill very quickly.Willkommen this ANTI-MIGRANT violence in Germany has become so severe over the past year that it is a miracle that no refugee has yet been killed. In one case, inebriated thugs threw a Molotov cocktail through a window into a room where an 11-year-old refugee would have been sleeping, had he not crept into bed with his mother in another room. Another xenophobe fired a gun into a refugee home and hit a Syrian man in the leg. Elsewhere, someone lobbed a hand grenade into a processing centre for asylum seekers. It did not go off. There were 13,846 “right-extremist” crimes in Germany in 2015, according to preliminary estimates, about 30% more than in 2014. Of those, 921 were violent. This year the pace has accelerated, especially in the former East Germany. On February 18th about 100 people in Clausnitz, in the eastern state of Saxony, tried to block a bus carrying 20 refugees, including children. In another Saxon city a cheering crowd interfered with firefighters dousing flames in a building being converted into an asylum home. One police chief warns of a “pogrom atmosphere”. Fears of a xenophobic backlash in otherwise-tolerant societies have been rising since the refugee crisis began, and not only in Germany. Right-wing populism is also growing in the Netherlands, as well as in Sweden, which like Germany entered the crisis with liberal asylum policies that are now being tightened. But Germany has taken by far the most refugees, with 1.1m arriving last year alone. And because of its history, Germany is extra-vigilant about extremism on the far right. The supreme court will soon consider an attempt by the 16 federal states to ban the NPD, a party that looks and smells like a neo-Nazi party. Germany also has a small subculture of violent, explicitly neo-Nazi networks. When it comes to less extreme populism on the right, however, Germany is an exception in the European Union: it has no far-right party as firmly established as France’s National Front or Austria’s Freedom Party. Germany’s political mainstream long seemed to have been inoculated by the Nazi past. As recently as 2014, a biannual survey of right-wing attitudes in Germany found that xenophobia, chauvinism, anti-Semitism and authoritarian longings were declining. Rightist worldviews were held by just 2.4% of the population, down from almost 10% in 2002. Yet even at the time, Andreas Zick of the University of Bielefeld, a co-author of the study, said the middle was fragile: xenophobia could increase again in a crisis. It probably started growing in 2014, even before refugee numbers surged, when the “Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the Occident” movement, or Pegida, began weekly marches through Dresden. After waning last spring, it has waxed again with the refugee crisis. Meanwhile the populist Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, founded in 2013 to oppose euro-crisis bail-outs, has veered to the xenophobic right. Pegida and the AfD have similar supporters. Pegida marchers tend to be older middle-class men anxious about social decline and cultural alienation, says Hans Vorländer, co-author of a new book on the movement. Pegida and the AfD have not merged, he says, only because their leaders loathe each other. But the AfD has ridden the anti-refugee backlash to score more than 10% in national polls. It is likely to do well in three regional elections on March 13th and to enter the federal parliament in 2017. Mr Zick thinks it has a potential voter share of 20%. Germany seems at last to be like the rest of Europe in having an entrenched populist party on the right. Worse, the data Mr Zick is collecting for his next study, due in May, suggest that the middle of society is becoming radicalised. This is most evident in the rise of verbal aggression. A leader of the AfD recently suggested that border guards should “make use of their firearms” to keep refugees out. Facebook and Twitter are abuzz with hate speech. This “radicalisation of rhetoric blurs the boundaries between physical and verbal violence,” says Mr Vorländer. Heiko Maas, Germany’s justice minister, is worried. He has invited his counterparts in the 16 states to a summit on March 10th to think up strategies against extremism. But as refugees continue to arrive, Germany’s tolerance and moderation are being tested as never before in its post-war history. The firewall it has built between respectable conservatism and the extreme right may be breaking down.WHEN Liu Wang, the European head of the Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), opened its branch in Madrid in 2011, he probably did not imagine that he would one day return to the city as a prisoner. Yet on February 19th Mr Wang was arrested and jailed without bail. He is one of six of the bank’s executives accused of funnelling dubious cash deposited by Chinese expatriates back to China. Some of the money allegedly came from smuggling and illegal exploitation of workers. ICBC said it always respected the law, and threatened to sue “malicious slanderers”. The case has parallels with one in Italy involving the Bank of China, which also denies any wrongdoing. Judges in Florence are due to decide next month whether to indict almost 300 people alleged to have illegally sent more than €4.5 billion ($4.9 billion) to China between 2007 and 2010. Much of the money came from businesses in Prato, a textile city in Tuscany, which has a population of around 40,000 Chinese. Many are in Italy illegally and work in semi-clandestine sweatshops. Because so many Chinese enter Europe irregularly, guided by traffickers known as “snakeheads”, it is hard to estimate their numbers. A study three years ago concluded that Italy and Spain had the European Union’s third- and fourth-biggest Chinese communities, at 330,000 and 170,000 respectively. Each had grown almost five-fold since the late 1990s. Most Chinese in southern Europe work above-board. But others are caught up in a cycle of systematic illegality. At its origin is the importation or smuggling of cheap, often counterfeit goods from the Far East. These are then sold without VAT at prices local firms cannot match. Prato’s sweatshops turn imported cloth into cheap garments with “Made in Italy” labels, easy to sell throughout the EU. The bulk of the proceeds are dispatched to China in defiance of anti-money-laundering controls. Not only Chinese are involved. Police in Italy have investigated locals who help supply premises and transfer profits. In Spain police allegedly took gifts from Chinese suspects. The profits are immense: in 2012 police broke up an operation in Fuenlabrada near Madrid, Spain’s best-known Chinatown, claimed to have laundered profits of €200m-300m a year. That sort of money inevitably attracts other types of criminal organisations. Already, in 2003, American researchers found evidence of Chinese gangs in southern Europe involved in extortion, prostitution, document forgery, cigarette smuggling and illegal gambling. The same report said Chinese criminals in Naples appeared to have a deal with the local mafia, the Camorra. But later investigations, surprisingly, have uncovered few proven links to Italian organised crime. And how much of a role Chinese mobsters still play is unclear. “Western law-enforcement agencies face immense linguistic and cultural barriers when they try to investigate crime committed by Chinese,” notes Wang Peng, an expert on China’s mafias at the University of Hong Kong. Detectives investigating a spate of murders in Prato’s Chinatown in 2010 complained of a total lack of co-operation from the Chinese community. A sweatshop fire in 2013 that killed seven Chinese workers may have marked a turning point. Since then several Chinese have reported their employers to the police, and on February 6th around 2,000 staged an unprecedented demonstration in Prato against lawlessness. Bearing torches and carrying Chinese flags alongside Italian tricolori, the protesters were implicitly demanding protection from their own compatriots. Yet the biggest threat to Chinese living abroad who skirt the rules may come from China itself. Officials are starting to enforce a rule that expatriates must pay tax on their entire overseas earnings. It may still be lucrative for Chinese to engage in shady moneymaking schemes in Europe. But sending the gains back to the homeland is becoming trickier.
