EUROPEANS can sometimes seem like a miserable bunch. The continent has produced downbeat writers such as Jean-Paul Sartre (“hell is other people”) and philosophers such as Slavoj Zizek (“What does love feel like? Like a great misfortune”). But although there are many reasons for Europeans to feel gloomy at present—from a migration crisis stretching from Greece to Germany to the possibility that Britain, one of the fastest-growing economies in Europe, may leave the European Union—many, instead, seem to be becoming ever cheerier. Most Europeans are, on average, at their happiest since the financial crisis. In 2008 76% of EU citizens said they were satisfied with their lives. That number is now 80%, according to the Eurobarometer survey, which has tracked self-reported happiness for over four decades. Those in northern European countries, such as Denmark and Sweden, are consistently the most content. But some countries have bucked the trend. According to Ruut Veenhoven, a professor at Erasmus University in Rotterdam who has been analysing data on happiness for decades, people in Greece and Portgual have become gloomier over the past three decades (although they have started to perk up over the past few years). Some general themes stand out. According to Eurostat, the EU’s statistical office, the only metric consistently correlated with European happiness is relative income. Moving one step up the income ladder increases happiness in every country in the EU; the difference in happiness between the bottom quintile and the second quintile is the largest. European men tend to be slightly happier than women, though not in Britain or Denmark. Those who go to university tend to be happier (not controlling for income). But some big differences also emerge. Europeans are generally happier when they are younger. However, richer countries see an uptick of joyfulness in old age: Germans are happier when they are over 75 years old than when they are between 25 and 34, and the Swiss are happier when they are over 75 than when they are teenagers. (Britons, Swedes and Danes are happiest when they are between 65 and 74.) The Portuguese seem to have the worst mid-life crises, whereas Greeks, Bulgarians, Romanians and Slovenians all become glummer as they get older. Where and how Europeans live also determines their happiness. In all countries, people are least happy if they live on their own. By the same token, in most countries those with children tend to be happier, with the exception of Britain, Denmark, Ireland and Switzerland, where people tend to be happier when childless. Overall, Europeans tend to be most content if they live in towns or suburbs as opposed to cities or rural areas. Northern Europeans tend to be cheerier the farther they are from cities (and hence from other people). In most parts of southern and eastern Europe, however, the opposite is true. What makes city-dwellers happier varies from one city to the next. According to the most recent data from Eurobarometer, most city-dwellers have become slightly happier (see map). The highest correlation with life satisfaction in cities is a feeling of safety. But in Stockholm, Amsterdam and Vienna it is those who think foreigners are well integrated who tend to be happiest. Parisians and Berliners who rate their cities’ cleanliness highly are the most content. In Reykjavik, curiously, the telltale sign of happiness is being satisfied with the public transport system. Those places which are happiest appear to have good governance. This may suggest a lesson to politicians: reducing unemployment and boosting wages will undoubtedly increase happiness. But clean pavements are important, too.OLD habits die hard. So it proved with David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, after his mini-victory at last week’s European Union summit in Brussels. Bounding energetically to the press-conference lectern after two gruelling days of talks over the terms of Britain’s EU membership, Mr Cameron opened his post-summit remarks not by trumpeting the emergency brake on euro-zone integration he had just secured, nor by crowing over his success in denying benefits to EU migrant workers. Instead, he highlighted the carve-out he had won for Britain from the EU treaty commitment to “ever-closer union”, a golden oldie that has infuriated British Eurosceptics for decades. Like a vestigial piece of junk DNA in the genome, this phrase has survived every change to the EU treaties, exerting no influence on its host today but providing a window to its past. The ambition of fostering “ever-closer union among the peoples of Europe,” inserted into the preamble of the 1957 Treaty of Rome, the EU’s founding document, speaks to the post-war need for reconciliation in a scarred continent. Its deliberate ambiguity—defining a journey, not a destination—is well suited to a club that prefers debating the scope of its power to exercising it. Defending the phrase is the last test of the classical Euro-federalist. Chief among this dwindling crowd is Belgium, which has long seen a federal Europe as an antidote to its own national and linguistic divisions. Charles Michel, the Belgian prime minister, feared that a British exemption to ever-closer union could kill the idea for the rest, and vowed to defend it to the hilt. Messrs Cameron and Michel therefore disagreed on whether ever-closer union was a good thing, but very much agreed that it mattered. (Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, joked that Mr Michel would be better off pursuing an “ever-closer Belgium”). That their theological struggle was quickly solved shows how Europe has changed. Once, Britain would have joined an almighty battle against the perfidious federalisers, as several of Mr Cameron’s predecessors did. Today he is happy for the rest to get on with the job, so long as Britain is left out; indeed, Mr Cameron acknowledges that the euro zone must integrate further to guarantee its survival. Thus did Mr Michel win his tweaks to the text and Mr Cameron his special dispensation for Britain (and a promise that the exception would be inserted into a future EU treaty). Some old-timers wrung their hands to see a founding European principle jettisoned so easily, if only for one troublesome member. But the debate left other European leaders confused, and rightly so. “Ever-closer union” has never been more than the weathervane of the European project, whipped about by the prevailing political winds. The grand projects of integration, such as the single currency or the passport-free Schengen area, have sprung from the ambitions of leaders and the mood of the times, not from any mystical force of treaty language. If lofty phrases have never driven Europe’s integration, they can scarcely slow its unravelling. The migrant crisis has tugged at European unity like nothing before, and the treaty provides little protection against unilateral border closures or the failure of some European countries to accept refugees from others. It is this, rather than a trio of fine words in an increasingly threadbare document, that should trouble the federalists. Instead, we are left with two peculiar phenomena. The Belgians cling to the comforting maxims of yesteryear just as events render them obsolete. And Mr Cameron brags, as he did to the House of Commons this week, that thanks to his deal Britain will never become part of a “European superstate” that no one is trying to build. Back in the real world, the migrant crisis has exposed differences between European countries that will linger long after the immediate danger has passed. The bonds of trust that hold together projects like Schengen have frayed. Governments no longer merely disagree; some seem unable even to understand each other. That could jeopardise the traditional instruments of solidarity inside the EU, such as transfers from rich countries to poor. Retreat to the core In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union All is not lost, say optimists. There is an old maxim in Brussels that the European project advances only in times of crisis. And such is the despair that the German notion of Kerneuropa, or “core Europe”, is resurfacing, in which those countries willing to forge ahead should not be hamstrung by the reluctance of others. “It has become impossible to work together at 28 [member states],” says one EU diplomat. “Perhaps we have to think about smaller groups.” The foreign ministers of the six original signatories to the Treaty of Rome met recently for a discussion on Europe’s future, and further such gatherings are planned. Some think a departure of the foot-dragging Brits could hasten a process of tighter but smaller integration—although a Brexit seems at least as likely to embolden Eurosceptics elsewhere. In any case, the appetite for big steps seems diminished. The euro zone is an obvious candidate for integration. Worries over wobbly lenders, especially in Italy, highlight the need to complete the half-built banking union (although there remain big differences over a common European deposit-insurance fund). There are plenty of other ideas, from a tougher central fiscal authority to common debt instruments. But many are incompatible with one another, and creditor countries like Germany have no desire to increase their liabilities. The migrant crisis, which has made a mockery of borders, looks tailor-made for a common European approach on interior as well as foreign policy. No one wants Schengen to die. But for now those countries affected by the flows are unable to co-ordinate their response and those that are not see no reason to trouble themselves. So crises may present opportunities for Europhiles, but they are still crises. Instead of the hoped-for integration and stability, the EU’s troubles might just lead to exhaustion and collapse.MINISTERS frequently reverse decisions taken by their predecessors, sometimes wisely, often not. But it usually happens after an election has produced a change of government. What is remarkable about the justice ministry since last May is that the new Tory Lord Chancellor, Michael Gove, has been systematically undoing many signature policies of his Tory predecessor, Chris Grayling. The two are now allies in the campaign to leave the European Union (see article). But on matters of justice they seem to disagree on almost everything. The latest example was Mr Gove’s decision to scrap a second round of cuts in legal aid for criminal cases. Mr Grayling wanted to reduce the number of firms of solicitors paid to offer 24-hour help at police stations to suspects from 1,600 to just 527, and to trim legal-aid fees in criminal cases by a further 8.75%. Lawyers fearing a loss of business complained loudly and threatened to sue. Mr Gove has shelved both measures. In December he scrapped a mandatory criminal-courts charge that Mr Grayling, arguing that criminals should help pay for the administration of justice, had imposed on guilty defendants. Over 50 magistrates quit, complaining that they were unable to waive the charge even when defendants were unable to pay. Worse, they claimed that in some cases defendants were encouraged to plead guilty even when they were innocent, to avoid the risk of incurring a higher court charge. The House of Commons justice committee condemned the charge for similar reasons. Last autumn Mr Gove cancelled a £5.9m ($9m) contract for the justice ministry’s commercial arm to advise Saudi Arabia’s prison authorities. Indeed, he went further, scrapping the commercial operation set up by Mr Grayling, on the grounds that it was allowing prison and judicial systems in authoritarian countries to claim a British seal of approval. He also abandoned plans by Mr Grayling to build a new secure college for teenage prisoners. And he overturned a ban pettily introduced by his predecessor on books for prisoners. What is going on? In part Mr Gove’s reversals may reflect some easing of the pressure for more public-spending cuts. But more important is that Mr Gove has taken a less confrontational attitude to the judiciary and the legal profession than did the hardline Mr Grayling, who was the first non-lawyer to be Lord Chancellor in over 400 years (Mr Gove himself is the second). Mr Grayling seemed to go out of his way to make himself unpopular. In contrast Mr Gove has been readier to listen to grumbling by judges and lawyers. The changes over the past six years of Tory-led government have been substantial. Judges’ pay has been frozen and their pensions cut, prompting some to sue the government. In spite of Mr Gove’s relative leniency, the legal-aid budget has been slashed by over one-third in real (inflation-adjusted) terms, from over £2.2 billion in 2010 to £1.6 billion in 2015. In many areas, especially of civil and family law, legal aid is no longer available. One result has been a big rise in the numbers choosing to represent themselves, clogging up courts that are ill-designed for litigants in person. Meanwhile spending on the court system has been reduced, many have been closed and court fees have increased. Not surprisingly, practitioners have squealed. Last year Justice, a lobby group, pronounced that “our justice system is in crisis”. In his annual report in January the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Thomas, declared bleakly that “our system of justice has become unaffordable to most”. He added that judges’ morale was low, their workload had hugely increased and they were concerned over the adverse effects on access to justice of the recent changes. The justice ministry counters such pessimism by pointing out that the legal-aid system in England and Wales is still one of the world’s most generous. Other countries are said to consider the British system to be among the fairest and best of all. But Mr Gove also has an agenda, not of further spending cuts but of something that is more urgently needed: reform. The ministry says it is spending over £700m to modernise the courts and tribunal services. As the Centre for Justice Innovation, a think-tank, has put it, “Walking into a court today, it can still feel like the communications revolution never happened.” There is belated talk of online courts to settle disputes, with a judge present but no lawyers. Relate, a charity, is launching an online divorce or separation model based on the pioneering Dutch Rechtwijzer system. Better technology could be used to allow more disputes to be resolved by mediation or arbitration, not in costly courts. Although some lawyers resist change, many senior judges do not. Nobody expects a return to the days of more generous public funding. Lord Thomas is eager to make greater use of technology to settle cases. Lord Briggs has called for an online court to start work as a matter of urgency. And Lord Jackson wants the early introduction of a system of fixed costs for all civil claims worth up to £250,000. Mr Gove has noted that the justice system divides the country, in effect, into two nations: a rich, international class who like to settle cases in London under the gold standard of British justice; and everyone else, left to put up with a creaking, outdated system. He has even floated the idea that highly paid solicitors in London’s “magic circle” firms might be required to pay a levy towards the cost of the judicial system from which they benefit. His biggest challenge will come when he confronts restrictive practices that have long raised costs and diminished competition. At the top end of the market, prices for legal services in Britain are among the highest in the world. The number of qualified lawyers has increased in the past two decades, but outdated restrictions make it hard for new types of provider, including accounting firms, to enter the market. Bodies such as the Law Society and the Bar Council often act as much to protect their members’ interests as to regulate them. Mr Gove has experience, as education secretary, in dealing with entrenched interest groups. Lawyers, heavily represented in Parliament, are an even more formidable lobby than teachers. Under Mr Grayling both solicitors and barristers staged walkouts. Mr Gove may have won plaudits for being readier for dialogue than his predecessor. But his popularity with the special interests within the justice system could yet prove short-lived.Boris and Dave, needling each other MUCH is at stake in Britain’s referendum on European Union membership on June 23rd, from the health of the economy to the future of the United Kingdom itself, as Scotland threatens to break away following Brexit. Now there are fears that one particularly old and venerable institution might not survive the referendum campaign: the Conservative Party. Europe is the issue that has divided the Tories more bitterly than any other over the past 50 years. The referendum, promised by David Cameron in 2013, was supposed to be the safety valve that would stop the party exploding. A united Tory cabinet would allow a passionate debate, win, and move on. But the plan failed to survive first contact with the enemy—and even to anticipate who the enemy would be: one Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, Mr Cameron’s old chum from Eton and Oxford and the Tories’ most effective campaigner. Even before Mr Johnson belatedly declared himself an “outer” on February 21st, there was surprise that fully half a dozen cabinet ministers were prepared to defy Mr Cameron and campaign to leave the EU. They include Michael Gove, the justice secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions minister (and a former party leader) and Chris Grayling, the leader of the Commons. The unscripted Mr Johnson will give the campaign some zest; bookies shortened the odds of Brexit on his declaration. Tory MPs campaigning to leave are delighted: “We are a lot closer than we thought we would be at this stage,” says Philip Hollobone, the MP for Kettering. More worryingly for Mr Cameron, Mr Johnson will encourage other MPs and party members to defy the government. Some 130-150 of the 330 Tory MPs could join the campaign to leave. In local constituency associations, the bias towards leaving is more pronounced. Mr Hollobone, for instance, believes that about 85% of his own activists will vote to leave. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union This makes the party divided, with the grassroots pitched against the leadership. The Conservatives have a dismal record of splitting on such issues, going back to spats over free trade versus imperial preference in the late 19th century. The party was badly divided again in the 1990s, its own MPs bringing a traumatic end to Margaret Thatcher’s 11-year premiership and then wrangling over Europe throughout that of her successor. One consequence of that fratricidal warfare was to help Labour into Downing Street for the following 13 years. This is the fear for Tories as they prepare for months of argument, their divisions highlighted by the relative unanimity of the other big parties in favour of remaining in the EU. Yet as Tim Bale, a historian of the party, points out, the split is now less stark than in the 1990s. Then, the argument within the Tories was between Eurosceptics and those, such as the then-chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, who were fiercely pro-European. Now it is between “hard Eurosceptics and soft Eurosceptics”, the latter arguing to stay on the grounds that they have detached Britain sufficiently from the EU to minimise the damage. A Tory leadership contest is due before the next election, which should give both sides a chance to air their differences. Mr Johnson will be well positioned to run: he is the only one of Mr Cameron’s likely successors to be on the Leave side, meaning he may hoover up the votes of Eurosceptic MPs and party members. But as John Barnes, a Tory councillor, warns, things could still go “very sour” if either side personalises the debate. The hatred that the Thatcherites reserved for those who conspired against her did much to poison the wells during the 1990s. The party is keen to avoid a repeat: Lord Hague, a former leader, has warned that any minister who criticises a colleague will be sent off as “the new special representative to warlords in the Khyber Pass”.Forever the energy of the future BRITAIN has been often criticised for the unpredictability of its energy policy. It should take a lesson from Paris. The national utility, Électricité de France (EDF), reliably puts off a final decision on whether to build Britain’s first nuclear-power station in a generation year after nail-biting year. On February 23rd its boss, Jean-Bernard Lévy, clarified that his latest promise to come up with a verdict “very soon” meant “this year”, four years after the initial deadline in 2012. It may now be best for Britain if EDF calls it quits—however improbable that is. The stakes are high. The £18 billion ($25 billion) project, Hinkley Point C in Somerset, would be a huge engineering work, bigger than the London Olympic Park and on a par with Crossrail, a railway running under central London. It would provide about 7% of Britain’s electricity, and because nuclear energy generates little carbon dioxide, it is central to the government’s commitment to clean power. It is also symbolic of a “nuclear renaissance” after the failure of a state-run industry that limped along from the 1950s to the 1980s, and equally fraught private ownership during the next two decades. It is meant to show how private investment, with a helpful state behind it, is the best model, giving a renewed lease of life to the nuclear industry, says a new book, “The Fall and Rise of Nuclear Power in Britain”, by Simon Taylor, of Cambridge University’s Judge Business School. Yet as the book witheringly points out, the result would be “the most expensive power station in history”. The projected costs are comparable to those of the Three Gorges power station in China, which has about seven times the planned generating capacity—albeit non-nuclear. They may rise if EDF’s painful experience of building two of the same reactors in Finland and France is any guide. Both those European Pressurised Reactors are years behind schedule and three times over budget; there is even a possibility that the French one, Flamanville 3, will be dismantled. To compensate EDF in case of spiralling construction costs, the government has pledged to pay it up to £92.5 per megawatt hour for 35 years once it starts producing—almost triple current wholesale prices. That, Mr Taylor writes, poses the politically sensitive problem of rewarding the firm with as much as £1 billion a year, funded by higher electricity bills, when all of its risks have been overcome. British taxpayers are also on the hook if things go wrong; the government has guaranteed billions of pounds worth of loans on the project. Even more awkwardly, it puts a pillar of British energy security in the hands of firms mostly or wholly owned by foreign governments. EDF, backed by the French state, is a financial mess, with high debts and negative cashflow that this month forced it to cut its 2015 dividend. The strains could become more severe once it starts spending billions of pounds a year on Hinkley Point. The go-ahead also depends on a Chinese state-owned firm taking a one-third stake, amid uncertainty about the health of China’s economy. For all its problems, Hinkley Point is not yet doomed. Politics may trump economics; Britain has committed to stringent climate goals, and France would discourage EDF from abandoning Hinkley Point because it would end the dream of a nuclear-export industry. If EDF does pull out, Dieter Helm of Oxford University says the British government has a fallback option: it could float “nuclear bonds” at low interest rates to pay for the project. That, he says, would be cheaper than the 10% annual return that the French would charge.“Education should not be about wealth,” boomed Tony Blair in 1996. Two decades later, it still is. Private schools teach 7% of Britain’s pupils, but account for half the country’s senior civil servants, cabinet ministers and leading journalists. Seven in ten generals and judges went to independent schools, according to the Sutton Trust, a charity. In some jobs the proportion has even increased. A decade ago, half Britain’s senior doctors were privately educated; today the figure is 61%. The share has risen in the law, too. Even pop stars are more likely than average to have a posh education. And what of the fat cats leading FTSE firms and the plutocrats in Parliament? They, it turns out, are among the least privileged of the lot: only one in three went private.EUROPEANS—their footprints fossilised on Norfolk’s coast 800,000 years ago—might be Britain’s oldest immigrants. But, as Britons campaigning for their country to leave the European Union have noticed, they also account for many of its newest. In 2004 Europeans made up 26% of all Britain’s foreign-born incomers; in 2014 they accounted for 48%. And whereas many of the country’s other immigrants slip, inconspicuous, into large cities, the latest generation—largely English-speaking, ever a short plane ride from home—have gone just about everywhere. The big recent increase comes from Europe’s east. Eastern Europeans were once scarce in Britain. But in 2004, when it lifted work restrictions on eight central and eastern European countries, Poles entered in large numbers: in 2007 they peaked at 22% of Britain’s foreign inflows, and now number some 850,000, making them Britain’s largest group of foreign citizens. In 2013 Britain granted the same rights to Romanians and Bulgarians, and many predicted a similar “surge”. It did not happen: so far only around 230,000 have come. Poles, suddenly and uniquely, had spread themselves across the expanse of the country, settling in improbable market towns, surprising the Northern Irish—who see relatively few immigrants—and going some way to reversing Scotland’s shrinking population. London holds 37% of Britain’s foreign-born population, but only 185,000 Poles live there: fully 80% live elsewhere in Britain (23,000 live in Northern Ireland and 82,000 in Scotland). Half Britain’s Romanians and just under half its Bulgarians, meanwhile, live in London, mostly gathering in Barnet and Brent. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers Poles had arrived at a time when their skills—mainly in agriculture and hospitality—and their willingness to toil for wages and in conditions that British workers spurned, matched the needs of rural employers. Recruiters often went to Poland to seek them out, teach them English and transport them over. They settled with little regard for history: earlier generations of Polish migrants, who had come to Britain after the second world war, were at first unwelcoming to the newcomers (“Closed, closed, closed,” says Jakob Krupa, a correspondent for the Polish Press Agency in London). Many of the new bunch came from small towns themselves, so places like Boston in Lincolnshire, which is now home to a lively Polish community, did not feel too strange. In any case, travelling in companionable groups, and planning to stay only a few years, they were prepared to live just about anywhere. Bulgarians and Romanians, meanwhile, work mainly in construction. The big cities, especially London, account for much of the industry’s demand, so that is where they have gone, settling in the outskirts where housing is cheaper (see map). The relaxation of employment rules in 2013 made little difference to their numbers, as self-employment, common in the construction industry, had been permitted since 2007, when the two countries joined the EU. (The number of Bulgarian-born in work actually fell in Britain in 2014.) Unlike the Poles of 2004, who were forbidden from working in most other EU countries, Romanians and Bulgarians may work all over Europe. They also tend to plan to stay longer, says Stephen Drinkwater of the University of Roehampton, “so they are looking for a better fit from the start”. Trickling in ones and twos, people from Bulgaria and Romania have pooled close to their fellow countrymen. Many Poles started in basic jobs, but within an average of 18 months, says Heather Rolfe at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, they found something better. In towns like Wisbech, in Cambridgeshire, Polish businesses have transformed rundown high streets. Some, keen to fit in, diligently take tea (with lemon) at five. In 2004, according to the International Passenger Survey, one in ten intended to stay at least three years. In 2014, nearly half did. Romanians and Bulgarians arrived in a country used to eastern Europeans, and face less prejudice. They are on average less educated than Poles. But 74% are in some sort of employment, almost the same rate as Polish migrants, 80% of whom are in work. And between 2013 and 2014 there was a sevenfold increase in national insurance numbers issued to Romanians, and a threefold increase in those given to Bulgarians—a sign they are shifting out of self-employment. Anecdotes of porters becoming managers within a year or two abound. And as Brexit campaigners worry European migrant flows are too high, Britain’s food and drink companies, big migrant-employers, fret they are too low. Like migrants from western Europe, those from the east are more likely to be graduates than the British-born. Around three-quarters come for work, nearly half with jobs lined up before they arrive. A new deal limiting benefits for EU migrants is unlikely to make much difference to inflows: fewer will get in-work benefits, but this will be offset by a planned rise in the minimum wage; in any case Britain’s job market, more flexible than the rest of Europe, remains the main attraction. Only limits on free movement from the continent would change things. That happened once before in Britain, as a result of rising sea levels more than 200,000 years ago. Now, as the country threatens to leave the EU, it may yet happen again.In a trough SUCH was the pressure on pig farmers in the late 1980s, caused by low pork prices, that Cameron Naughton’s father had a nervous breakdown. The younger Mr Naughton took time off college to help his father and then took over the family business in the rolling Wiltshire hills. Thirty years on, he is facing another dive in prices. His own mental health is holding up (even if his knees are not), but the 49-year-old farmer says it has not been this bad since the late 1990s. The most recent problem has been a Russian ban imposed in 2014 on EU food products in retaliation for Western sanctions over Ukraine. One-quarter of European pork used to go to Russia; there is now a glut. A year ago British pigs sold for £1.35 per kilo ($0.85 per pound). Today, they sell for £1.13. (EU producers charge, on average, £0.99.) Last week Mr Naughton told his ten employees there may have to be lay-offs. The pork industry had problems long before this year. Foot-and-mouth disease hit hard in 2001. More rigorous animal-welfare standards introduced in 1999 raised farmers’ costs. A recent warning by the World Health Organisation that too much processed meat causes cancer has not helped, says Zoe Davies of the National Pig Association, a farmers’ lobby. In 1998 there were 800,000 sows in Britain. Now there are half that number. Some people switched to eating pork after a scandal in 2013 when horsemeat was found in French beef. But the British are still not big ham fans: the average Briton eats 24kg of pork per year, less than half as much as the average German. Retail prices are holding up as producers take the hit, receiving only £0.32 of every £1 spent on pork, the lowest since 2002. (Beef producers get £0.50.) Ms Davies says that, having legislated for better conditions for pigs, the government should encourage schools and hospitals to buy British meat. And she claims that large imports of cheap European meat increase the chance of another horsemeat-type scandal. British pig farmers squeal that some European rivals enjoy subsidies and have been slower to apply animal-welfare rules. Yet many in Europe are also more efficient, focused on higher productivity for export. Farmers like Mr Naughton struggle on. He grows cereals to help when pork prices sink, and sells only to local butchers, who will pay a premium. He knows three pig farmers who have recently folded. As small farms go under, the industry is integrating, with specialist farms handling different stages of production. Mr Naughton thinks he will survive but he says his son, now 19, is unlikely to want to take on the farm when he retires.Capital spending IN THE four previous elections for London mayor, the main issue has been how to improve public transport. Ahead of the fifth, on May 5th, housing is at the top of the agenda. At a meeting on February 23rd with people from the construction industry, the candidates unsurprisingly promised to boost housebuilding if they were elected. But another solution to the capital’s housing crisis is floating around: clamping down on foreign investment. At the meeting Sadiq Khan, the Labour hopeful, promised to compel housebuilders to give Londoners “first dibs” on homes, ahead of overseas-based folk. Zac Goldsmith, his Conservative rival, proposed a similar policy. The argument goes that foreign owners drive up prices, bringing down the rate of home-ownership among Londoners. Go to certain parts of the capital and you will be left in no doubt that overseas investment is a scourge. One Hyde Park, a block of plush flats in Knightsbridge, often looks deserted at night. On The Bishop’s Avenue, in Highgate, weeds have grown in empty mansions. Such properties are often owned by rich foreign residents fearful of political unrest or expropriation back home. A London bolthole is a good way of preserving capital. (In recent months demand has tailed off, though: depreciating currencies in countries like Ukraine, Russia and Kazakhstan have made London property more expensive for oligarchs.) In 2014 foreigners bought one-third of “prime” homes sold in London (ie, those in the top 8-10% of the market), according to Savills, an estate agent. But this does not mean that the capital is being overrun by absentee investors living abroad. The definition of “foreign” is expansive, including Russian billionaires who never visit Britain, but also someone who has lived in London for years and uses her Canadian passport when buying. The high rate of “foreign” ownership is thus a function of the capital’s cosmopolitanism: about one in four Londoners is a foreign citizen. Foreigners who do not live in Britain make up a smaller chunk of the market for London’s prime homes: perhaps 10%, says Lucian Cook of Savills. And outside the poshest neighbourhoods, non-residents are small beer: in 2013 the Bank of England suggested that they may account for just 3% of all property transactions in London. The people who make up that 3% are still open to the charge that they push house prices up. If so, it is probably not because they buy properties and then leave them empty (so-called “buy to leave”). There is little evidence that foreigners are more likely than Britons to leave a property empty, suggests a report by the Greater London Authority (GLA). In the past decade the number of houses in the capital left vacant for more than six months has fallen by 50%, a much steeper decline than in the rest of England. Most foreign investors instead look to make money. According to Adam Challis of JLL, a property company, 85-90% of Asian buyers living abroad plan to rent out their property. Their buying-to-let may push up house prices, but only marginally: the National Housing and Planning Advice Unit, a now-defunct public body, found that increased lending to landlords (both British and foreign) pushed up prices by 7% in 1996-2007, compared with an overall increase of 150% over the period. Buy-to-letters may reduce the cost of renting by boosting the supply of rooms to let, so in parts they may help housing affordability. Other Asian buyers, according to a survey from JLL, want their children to use their British property while at university—no bad thing, since each year international students at London universities directly contribute about £3 billion ($4.2 billion) to the economy. Very few say their London pad will be a second home. Foreign investment may even pep up housebuilding. Since the financial crisis of 2008, banks have been stingy. They often refuse to fund a proposed development unless housebuilders can demonstrate its viability by selling around one-third of the dwellings in advance (“off-plan”, in the jargon). Britons have typically shunned off-plan properties, thanks in part to how mortgages are structured: few banks are willing to accept a not-yet-built house as collateral. Overseas investors have no such qualms, however. A report commissioned for the GLA may surprise Messrs Khan and Goldsmith: it found that without foreign money “many London [housing] schemes simply would not commence construction”. In posh parts of London monied foreigners push up the price of property; but by spurring on the builders, in other parts of the capital they may pull it down.
