IMAGINE a country the size of India without power. No electric lights, mobile phones, radios crackling with cricket or televisions blaring Bollywood hits. Its economy would be medieval: tailors without electric sewing machines; metalworkers without power lathes; farmers without water pumps. Everyone would rush to finish work by sundown. Nights would be lit only by the moon, cooking fires, candles and kerosene lamps. This is reality for 1.1 billion people globally—not far short of the population of India. The biggest numbers are in rural southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa (see chart). According to the UN, 220m people gained electricity between 2010 and 2012. But most of them were in urban areas, particularly in India. In sub-Saharan Africa, a region that, excluding South Africa, uses less electricity than New York state, electrification barely kept pace with population growth. Some 600m of its people are without electricity; demography means that by 2030 the number could be even higher. What would it take to bring all these people into the modern world? Much as mobile telephony has helped the poor leapfrog landlines and bricks-and-mortar banking services, a handful of tech-savvy entrepreneurs are seeking to provide widespread access to clean, cheap energy with local systems, metered and paid for by mobile phone. They hope to vault electricity grids, harvesting solar energy beamed down onto rooftops rather than using fossil fuels, and connecting it to batteries to store the energy until nightfall. Their offerings are likely to be best-suited to private customers in rural areas, whose energy needs are low and who are expensive to connect to grids. But their evolving business models, and innovative marketing and payment methods, also hold lessons for grid firms seeking to provide power to businesses and urban households. Beyond the pylons Governments and utilities in poor countries are often too cash-strapped to extend their grids. Part of the problem is widespread reluctance among users to pay for electricity. Customers who do not pay their mobile-phone bills can have their connection taken away remotely; electricity is harder to cut off, and easier to steal. This creates a vicious circle in which utilities lose money, reducing the funds available for improving and expanding supply, and further sapping users’ willingness to pay. “The real threat to energy access is that energy is not treated as a private good, but as a right,” says Michael Greenstone, an energy specialist at the University of Chicago. “And the problem with a right is that no one wants to pay for it.” Across the world efforts are under way to change such attitudes, using technology and attempts to tweak social norms. In parts of Delhi, a utility has encouraged women to persuade neighbours to pay their bills in order to secure better service for all. Mr Greenstone is part of a project, funded by the International Growth Centre, a global research network with headquarters in London, that is looking for ways to encourage people to pay for electricity in Bihar, where 64m people are without power—the highest share, at 64%, of any Indian state. Bihar has plenty of generating capacity, Mr Greenstone says, but gets paid for little more than half the power it provides. The rest is pilfered, unmetered or unbilled. The state power company has promised to provide electricity to “feeder” areas of 2,000-3,000 households that pay at least 60% of their bills. In a few randomly selected areas, it will increase the supply of electricity in proportion to the share of bills that are paid. The aim is to make people more aware of the value of their electricity supply and to encourage payment. Mr Greenstone thinks that the results of the trial, due later this year, will underscore the need for pre-paid electricity meters for households. These are similar to coin-fed meters in low-income housing in the developed world, but can be topped up by mobile phone, rather than cash. Uganda, where only 15% of the population is connected to the grid, is an early adopter. Selestino Babungi, the head of Umeme, the sole grid operator, says that half its 800,000 customers use pre-paid meters. Before 2005, when it won the distribution contract, theft was ubiquitous. About 38% of electricity was “lost” because of illegal hook-ups or non-payment; some big businesses went as far as flying in Indian engineers to rig their meters. By making payments easier for clients and installing an automated system that detects when a meter is tampered with, the firm has brought that share down to 18.5%. Higher revenues will help the company reach its goal of tripling the size of its distribution network to absorb additional power soon to be generated in Uganda. Most will go to industry and agribusiness, says Mr Babungi, creating jobs that bring more people to the income level where they can afford to connect to the grid and buy household appliances that consume more power. Customers in such areas are likely to be better payers. The power of progress Though Uganda’s government promises that eventually electricity will be rolled out to everyone, starting with regions where jobs are likely to be created is an idea with a good pedigree. Vietnam launched its post-war electrification in the rice-growing regions of the Red river and Mekong river deltas, helping the country to become one of Asia’s biggest rice exporters. Then it moved on to less immediately profitable areas. Access, which was under 50% in the late 1980s, is now almost universal. Thailand and Costa Rica, which also quickly electrified rural regions, both prioritised areas where the potential for commercial development was higher. Such rapid electrification, often using fossil fuels, may look like the cheapest way to bring power to everyone. And replacing fires and wood stoves improves air quality. But overall the environmental damage is severe, in terms both of adding smog to cities and accelerating climate change. Even the poorest countries are increasingly aware of the risks of pollution, says Anita Marangoly George of the World Bank. “Why lock them into choices that will turn Lagos and Nairobi into Delhi and Beijing?” she asks. Hence donors prefer to fund power projects that are green as well as profitable. Some worry that this could saddle poor countries with pricey, intermittent energy. For instance a $24m utility-scale solar-energy project in Rwanda generates electricity at 24 cents per kilowatt hour. Industry executives say they could produce it at half the cost using natural gas. Brightening the night Others fret that solar energy is still not reliable enough to power economic development. On February 22nd Bill Gates, co-founder of Microsoft and now a philanthropist, published an open letter with his wife, Melinda, drawing attention to poor people’s lack of energy around the world, and poor women’s lack of time (in part because they lack powered labour-saving devices). He says that with current technology, solar power and batteries are insufficient to satisfy Africa’s energy needs. The good news, he adds, is that Africa has several other possible sources of fairly clean and reliable energy: geothermal in east Africa, hydro in Ethiopia and central Africa, and natural gas in several countries, including Mozambique and Tanzania. Unlike wind and solar power, these can be used for “baseload” power that operates constantly. “If you want to attract manufacturing jobs you can’t have intermittent energy,” says Mr Gates. “If you want energy at less than 10 cents per kilowatt hour that’s not some battery connected up to intermittent forces.” Regional transmission networks are an important part of the solution, says MsMarangoly George, since they allow countries and regions to share power, thus making green energy more dependable. And she notes that in recent wholesale power auctions in South Africa, wind and solar power have been as cheap as other sources of energy. Soon auctions in Zambia and Senegal will show whether the cost of green technologies has fallen as fast in poorer countries. Potentially the most promising approach to bringing light to the 1.1 billion divides the task between traditional utilities and smaller, more entrepreneurial firms. The former focus on cities and businesses, and the latter supply “off-grid” power to poorer households in rural areas, individually or via neighbourhood “mini-grids”. M-KOPA, which operates in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, and Off-Grid Electric, in Tanzania and Rwanda, offer packages of appliances, such as a few LED lights, a mobile-phone charger and a radio, all powered by a solar panel and a battery. Payments are made via mobile phone. An upfront cost of $150-500 would be prohibitive to most of their customers. So the firms charge in instalments, which are spread out enough to bring the monthly cost below that of buying kerosene for lamps. Default rates are negligible; if payments stop, the service is disconnected remotely by disabling the box that links the panel to the appliances. Once the loan is paid off, there are no further payments, until a customer invests in a bigger system with more appliances, such as a flat-screen TV. M-KOPA says it is introducing new customers to electricity at the rate of 500 a day. The trick, executives say, is to convince clients that they are buying appliances rather than electricity—and to make the gadgets ever more sleek and efficient so that they can operate on the low voltage generated by rooftop solar panels. The next step is to provide low-energy fridges that could help customers open small restaurants or grocery stores. (Off-Grid Electric says it already powers hairdressers and sports bars.) Meanwhile they seek to convince conventional power providers that they are not in competition. “The main conversation we have with utilities is telling them: ‘We target your non-profitable customers,’” says Xavier Helgesen, the boss of Off-Grid Electric. Lighting the way Neither of these firms is anywhere near the millions of new subscribers a year needed to make a dent in the 1.1 billion. But they show that if payments are sliced small enough and made via mobile phone—and an army of sales staff is deployed to educate potential customers about the social and economic benefits—poor people will pay for small but life-changing amounts of power. These lessons could make grid-based electricity more accessible, too.CROSSING THE QUAYSIDE road in Ambon, the capital of Indonesia’s remote Maluku province, requires care, speed and nerve. The pavement is taken up by a row of food carts, and the road is packed with a motley collection of lorries, minivans and cars. Motorbikes flit dangerously among the larger vehicles. The shortest path between two points may be a straight line, but the safest is usually a corkscrew dance of leaps, backtracks and tight squeezes. On one side of the street lies the Banda Sea, which surrounds the scattered Maluku islands. On the other is a row of low commercial buildings, selling the sorts of basic household goods available from any street stall in Indonesia: little packets of coffee, tea, shampoo and Indomie instant noodles, SIM cards, cigarettes and fizzy drinks. But from one doorway wafts the incongruous scent of Christmas. In a large concrete-floored warehouse sit waist-high pyramids of cloves, pallets of nutmeg and sacks filled with spices. Merchants weigh their wares on old-fashioned scales. The only concession to the 21st century is their smartphones. Four centuries ago these spices were literally worth their weight in gold. Small wonder that the Netherlands, Britain, Spain and Portugal spent two centuries battling for control of the spice trade. The Dutch prevailed, and the Dutch East India Company (VOC)—whose territories would become first the Dutch East Indies and then modern Indonesia—prospered mightily thanks to its monopoly on the spice trade. But eventually the bottom fell out of the market as the VOC lost its monopoly. As spices became less lucrative, Dutch colonists turned to other commodities. They mined tin and coal, developed oilfields and created massive plantations to grow tobacco, cocoa, coffee, rubber, tea, sugar and indigo. After gaining independence in 1945, Indonesia retained a commodity-based economy. For its entire modern history, money grew on trees, bubbled up from beneath the sea and was dug out of mines. Today Indonesia is South-East Asia’s biggest country by both population (255m) and size of the economy. It produces most of the world’s palm oil, as well as large shares of its rubber, cocoa, coffee, gold and coal. Commodities make up around 60% of the value of its exports. When the world was buying, Indonesia prospered: its GDP, both overall and per person, grew steadily throughout the late 20th century (except during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis) and well into the 21st, thanks largely to a ravenous China. But in recent years, as China’s appetite has waned and the price of commodities plummeted, Indonesia has struggled. Between 2010 and 2014 its overall growth rate fell from 6.2% to 5%. As economic growth slowed, it became clear that the country had persistently failed to invest enough in infrastructure and education. Its political system remained narrow and patronage-ridden. Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital and largest city, boomed and Java grew richer, whereas millions of people in the far-flung east felt they lived, in the words of one Ambonese priest, in “forgotten Indonesia”. In 2004, with great fanfare, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono became Indonesia’s first directly elected president; in 2014 he practically slunk out of office. His successor, Joko Widodo (known universally as Jokowi), is different from any previous Indonesian president. He does not hail from the Jakarta elite and has served neither in the army nor in parliament. The eldest son of a poor family from the Javanese city of Solo, he acquired a reputation for pragmatism and—most important to his popular appeal—clean governance, first as mayor of Solo and then as governor of Jakarta. Ordinary Indonesians supported him because he was one of them and had shown himself willing and able to act on Indonesia’s endemic corruption. The local business community cheered his victory because he was also one of them: before entering politics he had been a furniture exporter, and thus understood what it was like to be mummified by Indonesia’s notorious red tape. Foreign investors were pleased that he welcomed them, and hoped he would make Indonesia less protectionist. Jokowi vowed to return Indonesia to 7% growth and promised a cabinet staffed by technocrats rather than party hacks. He recognised that the era of commodity-driven growth was over. He said he wanted to attract high-value manufacturing and services, and realised that would require massive infrastructure investment and a better business climate. In the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business index, Indonesia ranks a woeful 109 of 189. Jokowi got off to a strong start, trimming his country’s wasteful fuel subsidies after just three months in office. Since then, however, the enthusiasm that greeted his election has begun to curdle. He has promised far more than he has delivered so far. Not only has growth failed to pick up, it has continued to slow: preliminary figures show that GDP last year increased by just 4.8%, the lowest rate since 2009. For all the talk about infrastructure investment, too few shovels have hit dirt. Confused policy guidance and lost fights with his party have made him look weak. His foreign policy initially appeared prickly: he blew up neighbours’ fishing boats and executed foreign drug dealers. Fears of radicalisation and religious intolerance are growing. And after seven years of calm, terrorism returned to Jakarta in January: jihadists struck the centre of town, killing four civilians. Many wonder whether their pre-election confidence in Jokowi was misplaced. This special report will argue that it was not. But in office Jokowi has struggled to find the sense of purpose that drove him as a candidate. His often diffident leadership style has caused needless confusion; economic liberalisation has been slow; and he has shown less appetite than expected for taking on vested interests. He promised voters he would change the sytem. The following articles will explain what he must do to fulfill that promise.CAMPAIGN POSTERS AND rallies reveal much about what a politician wants voters to think of him. During Indonesia’s 2014 presidential campaign, two conservative candidates, Prabowo Subianto and Hatta Rajasa, wore buttoned-up white shirts and black songkok caps in many of their posters, recalling Sukarno, Indonesia’s strongly nationalist first president, who always wore a songkok in public. Mr Prabowo also wanted to project toughness; military themes figured heavily in his slogans and posters. As a general in Indonesia's special forces under Suharto, the country's long-time dictator, he was accused of multiple human-rights violations, including the kidnapping, torture and “disappearance” of democracy activists. By contrast, Jokowi usually appeared at rallies and on posters wearing a checked shirt, the garb of an ordinary Indonesian. His image, his background and, often, his words implicitly rejected traditional Indonesian politics. He promised to appoint a technocratic cabinet and oversee a “mental revolution” that would drive corruption from politics. As a first step he would strengthen the KPK, Indonesia’s anti-graft body. One short, simple slogan encapsulated his appeal: jujur, bersih, sederhana (honest, clean, humble). Some of Jokowi’s supporters are now disappointed. As they see it, the candidate who promised to change the system has—in the words of Marcus Mietzner at Australian National University—“entered into arrangements with elite actors that resemble those made by his predecessor”. He has cut too many compromises and failed to confront Indonesia’s vested interests. But others insist that the president is simply picking his battles, and large-scale change inevitably takes time. Both claims have some truth to them. Jokowi came into office already hobbled. First, the party he represents, the Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P), holds just 105 of 560 parliamentary seats (see chart, next page), forcing him into an awkward coalition with smaller parties, all of which demand concessions in return. Second, unlike almost every other post-Suharto president, he does not head his party. Though he had been widely expected to channel his immense popular support into forming his own party, he instead accepted the PDI-P’s nomination less than four months before the election. The party’s boss is Megawati Sukarnoputri, herself a former president and daughter of Sukarno. Both she and his running mate, Jusuf Kalla, are prime examples of the sort of elite Jakarta politicians Jokowi was widely expected to take on, not accommodate. According to Mr Mietzner, Ms Megawati “expected absolute reverence” from Jokowi. In her speech at the 2015 party congress she said that the “president and vice-president naturally enforce a political party’s policy line”. The president was not even invited to speak. Since then, says Mr Mietzner, the two leaders have “settled into an uncomfortable and awkwardly polite truce”. Jokowi’s supporters were also disappointed by his initial cabinet, which included more party appointees than many expected. In subsequent reshuffles some of these were swapped for technocrats. Many in the business community were especially happy to see the back of the trade minister, Rachmat Gobel, whose penchant for protectionism led some foreign businessmen to dub him “the minister of no trade”. He was replaced by Tom Lembong, a 44-year-old former investment banker who previously ran a private-equity fund that invested in Indonesia. I say I say I say The reformists and the traditionalists in Jokowi’s cabinet have often clashed, both with each other and with him. Last August, for instance, the home ministry said it was about to issue a regulation requiring foreign journalists to seek permission from local governments before doing any reporting. A day later Jokowi revoked the plan. The government also considered and then backed away from imposing road-toll taxes, requiring foreigners working in Indonesia to pass a language test and banning some popular ride-sharing apps. These flip-flops illustrate the central problem with Jokowi’s administration to date: the president has the right ideas, but his ministries do not know how to implement them or feel they can ignore orders from the top. One reason for that may be Jokowi’s style: he is a poor orator and has proved reluctant to engage in the public arena. He is happiest when solving practical problems. That is an admirable quality in a mayor, but a president set on reforming Indonesia’s immense and powerful administration needs to be more strategic and has to rally his countrymen behind him. As far as Jokowi is concerned, “bureaucracy must serve the business community and investors…we have to simplify it, [and] change the mindset of the bureaucrat.” The appointment of business-friendly ministers such as Mr Lembong signals the president’s serious intentions: the question is whether he can put them into effect. In one crucial way he has already changed his country’s politics for the better, blazing a path to the presidency from outside the Jakarta elite that others could follow. His much-praised successor as governor of Jakarta, Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, known as Ahok, is the first Chinese Christian to run Indonesia’s biggest city. The mayor of Surabaya has made her city virtually litter-free. The regent of remote Banyuwangi in east Java has built much-needed roads. These jobs now look like viable launch pads for a national political career. “Jokowi’s heart is in the right place,” says Andreas Harsono, head of Human Rights Watch in Indonesia. “But he is putting his political capital on the economy.” Taking on vested political interests will have to wait. For now, he will concentrate on improving the country’s infrastructure and business climate.FOR SEVERAL WEEKS last December, Indonesians were glued to their televisions and smartphones to follow a series of ethics hearings convened by the House of Representatives, the larger of Indonesia’s two legislative bodies. Setya Novanto, the colourful House speaker, faced allegations of corruption. What happened subsequently shows the progress Jokowi has made in his fight for cleaner government. It also shows how much remains to be done. That Indonesia has a longstanding corruption problem is all but undisputed. In the Corruption Perception Index published by Transparency International (TI), Indonesia ranked 88th out of 168 countries last year (see chart). According to TI’s Global Corruption Barometer, 86% of Indonesians thought that their political parties and their judiciary were corrupt. The European Union has chastised Indonesia for its “widespread political corruption”, “corrupt judiciary” and “extensive bribery”. Donors providing money for political campaigns expect their generosity to be rewarded. Indonesians also complain about the innumerable “expediting fees” bureaucrats demand for service, and foreign businesses worry that Indonesia’s court system may not serve them well. Other presidents before Jokowi have tried to crack down. The KPK, or anti-graft agency, was set up under Ms Megawati, in 2002. It is widely respected, though many complain that it is chronically underfunded and understaffed and brings too few cases. Mr Yudhoyono proclaimed a “zero tolerance” policy towards graft at the start of his presidency in 2004 and made some progress, but was beset by scandals within his own party. Jokowi was the first president to take office with a strong anti-corruption record, having earned a reputation for clean governance when he was running Solo and Jakarta. As governor of Jakarta he posted regional budgets in public places to improve transparency. He also made it easier for some taxes to be paid online, which meant fewer opportunities for dishonest bureaucrats. Since he became president, he has overseen a push for online procurement, which he claims has saved his country billions of dollars. Mr Setya is the consummate political insider. He has served as a member of parliament for Golkar, the party of Suharto, for 17 years. Last June he requested a private meeting with Maroef Sjamsoeddin, until recently the head of Freeport Indonesia, a local division of Freeport McMoran, an American mining firm. Freeport wants to invest $17 billion in its Grasberg facility in Papua, the world’s largest gold and third-largest copper mine, but only if its mining licence, due to expire in 2021, is extended until 2041. Jokowi has refused to open negotiations on an extension before 2019. Mr Maroef secretly recorded a meeting with Mr Setya at which Muhammad Riza Chalid, an oil trader, was also reportedly present. Mr Setya allegedly offered Mr Maroef a deal: in return for a 20% stake in Freeport Indonesia, he would persuade Jokowi to extend the licence, claiming that the stake was not for him but for Jokowi and Mr Kalla, his vice-president. Mr Riza and Mr Setya allegedly boasted that they had bought off Darmawan Prasodjo, an assistant to the president’s chief of staff. Jokowi, Mr Kalla and Mr Darmawan have all denied involvement in the plot, which came to light when Sudirman Said, Jokowi’s energy minister, delivered the recording to the House ethics council. When quizzed by the council, Mr Setya claimed he was “joking”. Questioned by the attorney-general, he denied asking for shares in Jokowi’s and Mr Kalla’s names. On December 16th he suddenly resigned the speakership. Jokowi and Messrs Kalla and Darmawan are widely believed to be blameless. After all, it was Jokowi’s own energy minister who blew the whistle. And even Jokowi’s detractors have never suggested that he himself is corrupt—only that he has been too accommodating to vested interests. In some ways, his reputation has been enhanced by the affair. For the first time a case of large-scale corruption has been adjudicated in public. Many talk of Indonesia’s “Watergate moment”. Even so, Mr Setya has filed a police report against Messrs Sudirman and Maroef for defamation and illegal recording. And not only does he retain his seat in parliament, he is considered a frontrunner in Golkar’s forthcoming leadership election.AS YOU DRIVE (or more likely, sit and stew in traffic) in any of Indonesia’s big cities, you may see dozens of cyclists in green helmets and jackets zooming past your car windows. They are clad in the uniform of Go-Jek, an Indonesian e-commerce firm. Its name is a play on ojek, the Indonesian word for the country’s omnipresent motorcycle taxis. Its app, launched in January, lets users call a driver for a ride or a delivery. Since then the company has seen, in the words of its young founder, Nadiem Makarim, “crazy growth”. Indonesia is in the midst of an e-commerce startup boom, and no wonder. It is the world’s fourth-largest mobile-phone market, with more SIM cards in use than there are people. Two-fifths of its 255m population—half of whom are under 30—have a smartphone. But the very success of this boom hints at a broader failure. The e-commerce sector is vibrant in large part because the government has not yet worked out how to regulate it. Indonesia’s attitude towards business has in general been hostile. Its labour laws are rigid. To start a business takes an average of 47 days, compared with four in Malaysia and 2.5 in Singapore. During the long global boom in commodities, firms were obliged to tolerate such red tape, but that no longer holds. Indonesia exports crude oil, natural gas, palm oil, rubber, gold and tin, and is especially rich in coal. Its main commodity exports tripled in value between 2000 and 2010, says Rodrigo Chaves, the World Bank’s country director for Indonesia. As exports boomed, so did the economy. But the value of commodity exports has fallen by more than half from their peak. Bambang Brodjonegoro, Indonesia’s finance minister, laments that coal—which accounts for 11% of exports—now fetches just $50 per tonne, against $150 in 2011. In the decade to 2014 GDP grew by an annual average of 6%, but the commodity bust has slowed the economy. Last year it grew by just 4.8%, the slowest rate since 2009. This year is unlikely to be much better: the 2016 budget sets a GDP growth target of 5.3%. But compared with many other commodity exporters Indonesia is getting off lightly. The value of the rupiah, Indonesia’s currency, against the dollar has fallen by a hefty 30% since mid-2013, but has been stable recently, and other emerging-market currencies have fallen even more steeply over that period. Despite the weak exchange rate, inflation has mostly remained within the central bank’s target range of 3-5%. The main impact of the rupiah’s fall has been to curb imports, helping limit Indonesia’s current-account deficit to around 2% of GDP last year in the face of weaker export earnings. A prudent fiscal policy during the boom years has allowed for a modest fiscal expansion to offset the effects of weak exports and investment. Public debt is just 26% of GDP. The trouble is that GDP growth of around 5% is far below the 8% which the World Bank says Indonesia requires to create jobs for the 2.5m people entering the workforce each year. Indonesia must reform its economy to capitalise on the dividend from a young and growing workforce. As Mr Chaves cautions, “no country became rich after it became old.” Indonesia will never function as seamlessly as Singapore; it is too big, diverse and fractious. But the size of its domestic market gives it an advantage over smaller countries in attracting foreign investment. Encouragingly, it has a track record of liberalising its policies in troubled times. When its “command socialism” collapsed in the 1960s, it opened resource sectors to foreign investment; when oil prices fell in the 1980s, it developed its capital markets and relaxed restrictions on foreign ownership; and after the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98 it abolished many import controls and tariffs. To his credit, Jokowi realises that Indonesia cannot lift its long-term growth rate if the economy remains reliant on extractive industries; it needs a broader range of manufacturing and service industries. If new enterprise is to flourish, Indonesia must support local entrepreneurship and woo, rather than merely tolerate, foreign business. Last April the president told an audience at a World Economic Forum conference in Jakarta that investing in Indonesia would bring “incredible profits”. On his maiden trip to Washington, DC, last October he brought along an entourage of entrepreneurs and businesspeople, and said he was interested in joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership—a free-trade agreement that would commit his country to significant economic liberalisation. Tom Lembong, who took over as trade minister last August, has promised a more liberal approach to economic policy: a regulator’s job, he says, is to “ensure order and get out of the way”, and protection “is for children, the elderly and the vulnerable…not for adults, and certainly not for companies”. Such pronouncements mark a welcome shift. Hans Vriens, who runs a consultancy focusing on South-East Asian businesses, says Indonesian policymakers “have generally viewed foreign investment as a zero-sum game—if the foreigners have it, something is wrong and we have to take it back—instead of thinking, as Singapore does, about how we can thrive together. As a result, many investors have given Indonesia a miss, despite its size.” Jokowi has done his bit to improve the business climate. At the beginning of last year he launched a one-stop service for licensing businesses, which cuts out the need to spend days dashing from one ministry to another. And since last September he has unveiled a series of measures to help business, including easing some onerous regulations, cutting industrial energy tariffs, streamlining licensing procedures for firms on industrial estates and providing tax incentives to invest in special economic zones. Mr Bambang says that under Jokowi the average number of days needed to open a power plant has declined from 900 to 200 (“still short of international standards”, he concedes). The government recently revised its “negative investment list” of sectors in which foreign ownership is banned or restricted, fully opening up the rubber, film and restaurant sectors, among others. The government’s spending plans have become more ambitious. Soon after taking office, Jokowi’s administration began rolling out programmes to provide poor Indonesians with government-funded health care, free schooling for 12 years and tertiary education for students accepted into university, as well as a scheme to provide each of Indonesia’s 15.5m poorest households with a cash transfer of 200,000 rupiah ($14.37) a month. Jokowi says his administration’s health-care programme now covers 88m people, but it already faces a huge shortfall. The government has wisely used savings from cutting fuel subsidies to fund extra capital spending. But the budget deficit still widened to 2.8% of GDP, perilously close to the legal limit of 3%. If public spending is to increase further, the government will need to raise more revenue. That will not be easy. Most workers and employers pay little or no tax. Mr Bambang estimates that only 27m of Indonesia’s 255m people are registered taxpayers, and in 2014 just 900,000 of them paid what they owed. Much of the fault lies with Indonesia’s Byzantine tax system. The country’s tax inspectors are poorly paid, which makes them easier to bribe. Last year Indonesia collected just 82% of its targeted tax revenue, leaving it with a tax-to-GDP ratio of around 10%, compared with around 13-15% for its ASEAN neighbours and near 40% in western Europe. Government officials claim that they want to broaden the taxpayer base, but big companies say that they are being squeezed harder by the taxman because they are an easier target. A steady stream of new protectionist rules suggests that other business-bashing instincts still hold sway. A law requiring that by 2017, 30% of all parts for smartphones and tablets sold in Indonesia must be locally made took effect last summer. Last August limits on cattle imports sent beef prices soaring. Revisions to the negative investment list eased restrictions on 30 sectors but boosted them in 19 others. Indonesia’s bureaucracy, complains one foreign businessman, remains “oriented towards control rather than facilitation”. Where there has been reform, it has not always been well implemented. The one-stop shop for licensing might save a bit of time, but many business folk say that the rules are confusing. Licences are still cumbersome and onerous. Shell, for instance, has around 80 service stations in Indonesia, mostly around Jakarta, for which it needs around 1,500 permits—for safety, water, fire protection, site use and so forth—that must be renewed annually. That takes dozens of people to manage. Investors often complain that the welcome message from the president has not reached his ministries or local governments, or has arrived too late to prevent confusing about-turns. Go-Jek got a fright in December when the transport ministry declared that “services that demand payment using a private vehicle are not legal.” A day later Jokowi publicly chastised his transport minister and rescinded the ban. Other sectors have seen similar flip-flops, giving the impression of a chaotic administration with no clear policy direction. Yet this has already begun to change following several cabinet reshuffles, and may improve further as the government settles in. And in one important regard, Indonesia has taken a giant step forward. Whereas past governments failed to invest adequately in infrastructure, particularly outside Java, Jokowi has made the biggest push of his young presidency in this field.A wealth of coastline AS THE LOGISTICS manager walks from his firm’s office trailer to the dockside at Tanjung Priok, Jakarta’s port, he rails against inefficiency. The port’s equipment is outdated, the workers are slow and practices slipshod. Shipping companies want to make a quick buck while stopping their competitors from doing the same, leading to permanent gridlock. A few small victories have been won. Shippers at other terminals must slip stevedores and crane operators a few thousand rupiah to get their containers off the ship and onto lorries, but not here. He has trained his workers to “do it now, not five minutes from now”, so they are on track to hit their target of moving 28 containers per crane-hour. But he cannot control what happens outside his terminal. Stevedoring associations, shipping companies and greedy bureaucrats profit from the inefficiency of Indonesia’s ports, block reforms and fiercely guard their own interests, he claims (hence his wish to remain anonymous). Too few roads, berths and systems; too many ships, cars and grasping hands, leading to high costs and lost time: that is Indonesia’s infrastructure problem in a nutshell. Jokowi has staked his presidency on solving it, reasoning that improved infrastructure will help bring foreign investment and good jobs to Indonesia as well as helping residents of the poor, far-flung east get their products out. His ambition has been widely cheered. In the short term infrastructure spending puts people to work and boosts demand for raw materials; in the longer term his plans offer the chance to make up for decades of neglect and underinvestment. In the mid-1990s Indonesia invested around 8% of its GDP in infrastructure every year. After the Asian financial crisis that share fell to around 3%, then started rising again slowly. But in 2014, at 6.4%, it was still below the steady 7% which China, Thailand and Vietnam had been maintaining. That underinvestment has sent Indonesia’s logistics costs soaring. Between 2004 and 2011 they averaged 27% of GDP, compared with 25% in Vietnam, 20% in Thailand, 13% in Malaysia and 8% in Singapore. Logistics bottlenecks force companies either to stock up on supplies, driving up inventory costs, or suffer large price fluctuations, particularly at times of heavy travel. In Tanjung Priok in May last year it took an average of 6.4 days for containers to leave the port after being unloaded. Improved systems have brought the time down to just over four days, says Jokowi, but according to the World Bank that is still around four times as long as in Singapore—and this is Indonesia’s busiest and most advanced port. Many of the country’s 1,700 other ports are not even containerised. Such backlogs drive up the cost of basic goods. And once lorries move the goods out of port, they are in the twisted, narrow streets of Jakarta, which has some of the world’s worst traffic. In all, the World Bank estimates that underinvestment in infrastructure cost Indonesia at least one percentage point of GDP growth annually from 2004 to 2014. Jokowi plans to increase infrastructure spending throughout his first term, peaking at around 7.7% of GDP by 2017. Indonesia intends to build 24 new seaports and 15 new airports by 2019. Its energy demand could triple by 2030 as it urbanises and its middle class expands, so over the next five years it wants to add 35GW of power, doubling total installed capacity in a decade. It also has plans for 65 dams, 16 of which are already under construction. In March last year work started on the Keureuto dam, designed to boost agricultural productivity in Aceh. Last September fields were flooded for the massive Jatigede dam in West Java, after 20 years of delays. Once complete, the dam will irrigate 90,000 hectares of rice paddy, giving farmers two harvests a year instead of one. Last April, also after many delays, construction began on the Trans-Sumatra toll road, a $23.1 billion highway that will connect Aceh and Lampung, on the northern and southern tips of Indonesia’s largest island. The Trans-Java toll road, running from east to west across Indonesia’s most populous island, is scheduled for completion in 2017, but some sections are already finished and have cut travel times dramatically. Driving from Jakarta to the town of Subang in west Java, for instance, used to take around six hours, but on the new highway connecting Jakarta and Cikampek it takes less than two. It has not been a straightforward job. This particular section of the Trans-Java toll road runs through five regencies, each of which had its own team working on the project. That called for a further team to co-ordinate all the others. It took nine years to build 73 kilometres of highway. Jokowi complains that local governments are sitting on trillions of rupiah in unused infrastructure money from the central government, which can neither spend the money on their behalf nor tell them what to do with it. All he can do, he says, is cajole and hector them. Ocean view His biggest bet, though, is on maritime infrastructure. In his inaugural speech he laid out his ambitions: “We have turned our back on the seas, oceans, straits and bays for too long…[They] are the future of our civilisation…We have to work as hard as possible to turn Indonesia into a maritime nation once again.” That makes sense: Indonesia, after all, is the world’s biggest archipelago, with 13,466 islands spanning some 5,000 kilometres. It has the world’s second-longest coastline after Canada, an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles and around 93,000 square kilometres of inland waters. Yet with all those resources it exports just $4.2 billion-worth of fish annually, compared with $5.7 billion for Vietnam and $7.2 billion for Thailand, both of which have smaller coastlines and less territorial water. Indonesia claims that this is partly because other countries’ vessels are plundering its territorial waters. Last year the government estimated that 90% of the boats in Indonesian waters were fishing illegally, costing the country around $20 billion annually in lost revenue. Shortly after being sworn in as fisheries minister, Susi Pudjiastuti—a tattooed, chain-smoking divorcee who founded a large charter airline and had never before held political office—seized and blew up (having first removed the crews) around 40 vessels from neighbouring countries found fishing in its waters without permission. Since then dozens more have been sunk. This has proved popular with Indonesians and, according to Ms Susi’s ministry, effective, causing a marked decline in the number of vessels fishing illegally. Apart from repelling outsiders, Indonesia also hopes to wring more value from its waters. The government has banned bottom trawling, selling undersized crustaceans and fishing in tuna breeding grounds to keep its fisheries sustainable. It also plans to build salt-harvesting and seaweed-processing facilities, as well as cold-storage units to keep catches fresh longer. These investments will help further another of Jokowi’s goals: spreading prosperity eastwards, to Indonesia’s most far-flung islands. Most of Indonesia’s people, wealth and economic activity are concentrated on densely populated Java; the rest of the country, above all the islands past Bali, just east of Java, has felt neglected. GDP per person per year in Jakarta is roughly 41.2m rupiah ($2,890); in Papua, Indonesia’s easternmost province, it is 12.3m, and in Maluku just 2.8m. The hope is that better infrastructure will help bring down the cost of basic goods in the east, generate better jobs—particularly in processing local raw materials—and make it cheaper to get goods out. Many Indonesia-watchers turned sceptical in the first half of 2015 after lots of projects had been announced, tendered, and contracts handed out, but little money had been disbursed. But in the second half of last year infrastucture spending picked up. Under Jokowi’s master plan, 30% of infrastructure spending will need to come from the private sector; PwC, a consulting firm, thinks that the private sector’s share may need to rise to as much as 50%. In the current fiscal year the World Bank has approved $800m in infrastructure loans to Indonesia, with another $950m pending. The Asian Development Bank has committed itself to lending $2 billion. In December Japan’s development agency lent Indonesia around $535m for two power stations. But ground-breaking has so far been painfully slow, and even if Jokowi can get all the funding he wants, it still may prove inadequate. McKinsey, another consulting firm, estimates that Indonesia will have to spend at least $600 billion over the next decade to meet its infrastructure needs. And much of Indonesia’s bureaucracy has stubbornly resisted Jokowi’s calls for speed, transparency and efficiency. Land-acquisition laws are tortuous, and everything takes an inordinate amount of time. Planning for the Jakarta-Cikampek section of the Trans-Java highway, for instance, began in 1997; the concession was signed in 2006; land acquisition began in 2009; construction did begin in 2013; and even now the highway operator and numerous landowners are still fighting each other in court. An amended law passed last year streamlines the acquisition process and opens it up to foreigners, but any improvement will start from a low base. As with everything else, the question is not so much what Jokowi wants to do as what he will be able to do, and how soon.IN 2009 SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO, in his second inaugural speech as president, boasted that Indonesia could “exercise its foreign policy freely in all directions, having a million friends and zero enemies.” Its foreign-policy goals, he said, were “advancing multilateralism through the United Nations and creating harmony among countries”. That may have been a little glowing. Mr Yudhoyono did take a more active role in climate-change talks and within the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and he founded the Bali Democracy Forum, an annual talking-shop for Asian democracies. Yet he seemed to favour multilateralism not as a means of furthering Indonesia’s interests but as an end in itself, and as a way to avoid making difficult decisions. His successor has adopted a markedly different stance. Jokowi’s inaugural speech laid out a vision of an “independent and active foreign policy dedicated to the national interest”, an implicit rebuke to his predecessor. And after returning from his first foreign trip as president, to an AsiaPacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) summit, Jokowi asked: “What’s the point of having many friends but we get only the disadvantages?” Some saw this remark as evidence of Jokowi’s lack of sophistication: Jokowi had no previous foreign-policy experience and the subject played no part in his presidential campaign, though his foreign minister, Retno Marsudi, has been in the diplomatic service for her entire career. People close to Jokowi say he has little patience for formal summits with their protocols, glad-handing and anodyne statements, preferring focused, practical one-on-one meetings with other leaders. The world got a taste of Indonesia’s new assertiveness less than three months after Jokowi took office when he approved the executions of five foreign drug traffickers, despite pleas from their governments. Seven months later Indonesia executed another seven foreign traffickers, including two Australians (members of the infamous Bali Nine trafficking ring). Mr Yudhoyono, who had introduced a partial moratorium on executions, was criticised at home at the time; many felt he was giving in to foreign pressure. Jokowi’s decision to execute the two Australians enjoyed widespread public support in Indonesia. Abroad the move triggered diplomatic protests, but seems to have done little damage to Indonesia’s international relations. Ms Retno, the foreign minister, says Jokowi is pursuing a “more concrete” foreign policy, and outlines four priorities. The first is to safeguard Indonesia’s territorial integrity. That could lead to confrontation: for example, Indonesia has at least ten outstanding land-border disputes with Malaysia. More pressingly, China’s claims in the South China Sea overlap with waters claimed by Indonesia around the Natuna islands, off the northern coast of Borneo, which are rich in natural-gas deposits. Ms Retno insists the islands “belong to Indonesia. Done. If there is a competing claim, come talk to us.” She says Indonesia wants to develop the regional gasfields. China recognises Indonesian sovereignty over the Natunas themselves but claims the waters around them. Last September the Indonesian defence minister announced plans to upgrade the Natunas’ port and runway to accommodate warships and fighter jets. A second foreign-policy priority is to protect Indonesians abroad, including thousands of women working as domestics and men as manual labourers in Malaysia and the Gulf States. Third, Ms Retno makes it clear that its ambassadors are expected to promote Indonesian exports and inward investment. The last item on Ms Retno’s list is “international involvement”. That was Mr Yudhoyono’s top priority, but the current government prefers to concentrate on specific instances—notably counter-terrorism, and the risk posed by Islamic State (IS) to the world’s most populous Muslim country. Indonesia is roughly 88% Muslim, mainly Sunni but with some Shias and Ahmadis; the other five officially recognised Indonesian religious groups are Catholics, Protestants, Hindus, Buddhists and Confucians (see chart). By tradition, Indonesians practise a syncretic, tolerant form of Islam, and the country respects religious differences. Some complain that this is starting to change. Shias and Ahmadis say they are increasingly being targeted and harassed. Ms Retno insists that Indonesia’s two biggest civil Muslim groups, Nahdlatul Ulama and Muhammadiyah, offer “a counterscript to eliminate terrorism [and] sell the virtues of tolerance and moderation”. Even so, terrorists have recently struck: on January 14th an IS-inspired attack on Western and police targets in central Jakarta killed eight and wounded at least 23. Sidney Jones, an expert on South-East Asian security who heads the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict, a think-tank, estimates that 250 Indonesian men are currently fighting with IS in Syria. Some 2,000 Indonesians have publicly proclaimed allegiance to the organisation. Jemaah Islamiyah, a militant Islamist terrorist group active in South-East Asia, bombed several Western targets in Indonesia between 2001 and 2009, but in recent years its sporadic attacks have focused on the police and the armed forces. Given the size of Indonesia’s population, the number of people involved in terrorism is tiny. For all the country’s flaws, it remains a largely stable, open, tolerant society without a seething reservoir of frustrated, underemployed young men open to radicalisation. If Jokowi’s foreign policy can keep it that way, it may do more to ensure peace at home and in the region than any number of well-meaning summits.  IT WAS ONE of the most important trips of his young presidency. Last October Jokowi and a bevy of advisers and businesspeople went to Washington, DC, to meet Barack Obama. They were due to go on to Silicon Valley to show off Indonesia’s burgeoning startups. But as his team flew west, Jokowi flew east, summoned home by a crisis: Kalimantan and Sumatra were blanketed by the haze of hundreds of thousands of fires. Such fires rage every year, but in 2015 a dry spell caused by the El Niño weather pattern made them especially severe. Smoke settled over Singapore for months and even reached Cambodia, Vietnam and the Philippines. At least 2m hectares of forest were burned. Dozens of people were killed and hundreds of thousands sickened. For much of last October greenhouse gases released by those fires exceeded the emissions of the entire American economy. The losses over five months of fires amounted to around 2% of the country’s GDP. Last year was worse than usual, but only in degree, not in kind. Between 2001 and 2014 the country lost 18.5m hectares of tree cover—an area more than twice the size of Ireland. In 2014 Indonesia overtook Brazil to become the world’s biggest deforester. One of the reasons for those forest fires is economic. The country produces well over half the world’s palm oil, a commodity used in cooking and cosmetics, as a food additive and as a biofuel. It accounts for around 4.5% of Indonesia’s GDP, and demand is still rising. To meet it, Indonesian farmers set fires to clear forest and make way for new plantations. Often these forests grow on peatlands, which store carbon from decayed organic matter; in tropical regions these hold up to ten times as much carbon as surface soil. Draining peatlands releases all of that carbon. The peat also becomes a fuel, so it is not just felled trees that are burning but the ground itself. But politics also plays a part. The government’s response to last autumn’s haze was no better than it had been under Jokowi’s predecessors. The president declared a moratorium on peatland-development licences and called for peat forests to be restored, even as his agriculture minister pointed out that burned peatland can be used for corn and soyabean planting. Neither set of comments made any discernible difference on the ground in Sumatra and Kalimantan. To cap it all, Jusuf Kalla, the vice-president, came up with a creative response to Singapore’s complaints about the air pollution: “For 11 months our neighbours enjoyed nice air from Indonesia and they never thanked us.” Fortunately for Indonesia (and the planet) the rainy season put an end to the mayhem in late October. Why it won’t stop Yet the reasons for the fires have not gone away. Slash-and-burn land preparation is cheap. Indonesia’s land-use laws are complex and have been inconsistently interpreted and applied. There is no agreed map showing all plantations and (often competing) claims of ownership. Responsibility for developing and approving plans for forest use is spread among at least three ministries, along with the national parliament, as well as provincial governors and district heads, local parliaments and forestry officials. These groups rarely co-ordinate their plans, and their interests often clash. The president and national ministers may understand the benefits of conservation, but local officials have little interest in curbing their revenues for a nebulous goal such as “sustainability”. Directives from the top often go unheeded at the bottom, thanks to corruption and lack of political will. Back in 2010 Norway pledged $1 billion in conditional aid to Mr Yudhoyono to help Indonesia stop deforestation, but the conditions were not met and not much has been paid out. Civil-society groups have had some success. At least 188 Indonesian palm-oil companies have made some sort of sustainability pledge, including five large multinational firms that in 2014 signed the Indonesian Palm Oil Pledge (IPOP), which commits them to avoiding deforestation and planting oil palms on peatland. Together those five firms account for 80% of Indonesia’s palm-oil exports. All the same, deforestation continues. Perversely, it may even have increased temporarily, as companies cleared as much land as they could before the agreement took effect. Besides, opaque supply chains allow companies to buy palm oil from suppliers not bound by IPOP. Glenn Hurowitz at the Centre for International Policy says that when big palm-oil companies are shown evidence of deforesting, they respond. But that kind of monitoring is done only on an ad-hoc basis. It is no substitute for clearer land-use laws, better local governance and more enforcement on the ground. And for those things to materialise, Jokowi will need to give a strong lead and make sure others follow.
