THE brokers who traded shares in the Tontine coffee house in 18th-century New York often resorted to stronger drink, leaving them “a little addled”, according to one contemporary account. The technology involved in share-trading has changed a bit since then, and at least some of the participants have sobered up. But more than 200 years later, investors in American equities still wonder whether they are really receiving decent service. On the face of things, they have little to complain about. The cost of trading has declined sharply over the years (see chart). Explicit commissions, which were once levied in percentage points (0.25% in 1792), have largely disappeared. This is thanks mainly to competition. Whereas the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) dominated the trading of shares listed on it for most of the 20th century, there are now lots of places where they can be bought and sold. The impetus for the fragmentation was “Regulation NMS”, adopted in 2005 by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Wall Street’s main regulator. This required share-trading orders to be funnelled to the exchange offering the best price. The intention was to boost competition to NYSE and NASDAQ, which had a near-duopoly in share-trading at the time. It succeeded in that: both now have less than a fifth of the market. (In response, firms running exchanges have branched into other markets—see next article.) American shares are traded on a dozen exchanges; at least six other exchanges cater to investors in derivatives linked to shares. Shares also change hands on another 40 or so “alternative trading systems”, as well as a number of “single-dealer platforms”. Finally, many trades are now “internalised” by big banks and asset-managers, meaning that they pair up buyers and sellers within their sprawling empires rather than use an outside trading venue. Yet investors worry that, in many cases, competition has brought down the visible price of trading by adding hidden costs. Two anxieties stand out. One is the worry that the current set-up of the markets allows high-speed traders to anticipate big orders and “front-run” them, moving prices in an unfavourable direction before an order can be executed. The other is the question of how robust the system is, with regulators still unable fully to explain events like the “flash crash” of 2010, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged by 9% in minutes before rebounding. Start with fears of front-running. Many institutional investors complain that ultra-fast traders spot big orders entering the market, and race ahead of them to adjust their prices accordingly. Attempts to hide from the speedsters can go awry. In January Credit Suisse and Barclays, two big banks, agreed to pay $154m in fines for misleading clients about the workings of their “dark pools”, where offers to sell and bids to buy are not published. In theory, that protects investors from front-running; in practice, several of the firms running such venues had concealed the central role that high-frequency traders played on them. (Credit Suisse didn’t admit or deny wrongdoing in the settlement.) There is another, less-often-told side to the story. Speed is necessary to knit together a dispersed set of exchanges, so that investors are immediately routed towards the best price available and so that their orders are the first to get filled. And plenty of high-frequency traders are market-makers; it is their job to adjust prices in response to new information. Nonetheless, the idea that markets are rigged is widespread, not least thanks to the publication of “Flash Boys”, a book by Michael Lewis on the evils of high-speed trading. One proferred solution is to level the field by slowing things down deliberately. IEX, whose founder is the hero of Mr Lewis’s book, is a trading platform that has applied to the SEC to become an exchange. It uses miles of coiled cable to create a “speed bump” that delays trades to the advantage of institutional investors. The SEC has received more than 400 letters in support of its application, but there is a vigorous debate about whether IEX’s system complies with the requirements of Regulation NMS. Some think that the better solution would be to get rid of Rule 611, which in effect requires orders to be sent to the exchange showing the best price, even though such quotes can sometimes be unobtainable in practice. The SEC will vote on IEX’s application by March 21st. Front-running is not the only concern about America’s market structure. The other is the risk of sudden spasms like the flash crash. Glitches are common. In 2012 two public offerings, for Facebook and BATS (“Better Alternative Trading System”, a firm that runs exchanges and other trading venues, ironically enough), suffered disruption. Later that year faulty software toppled Knight Capital Group, a big trading firm, by vomiting orders to exchanges without tracking those that were filled. In 2013 the primary electronic market and the back-up system both failed at NASDAQ thanks to a software bug, and so on. Andrew Lo, a professor of finance at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), argues that investigations into such events tend to focus on the venue most affected. How they reverberate through the broader system is very little studied or understood. Sometimes, the existence of other venues may help: in July the NYSE briefly went offline and traders barely noticed as other exchanges filled the gap. On other occasions, they may amplify volatility. In August lurches in the future and equities markets caused the value of exchange-traded funds to deviate from the value of the underlying shares they owned. Mr Lo proposes a simple reform: the creation of a commission that can subpoena witnesses and evidence to look into the causes of crashes, just as the National Transportation Safety Board investigates air disasters. The commission would look as widely as it liked at what went wrong and then publish its findings. The SEC acknowledges that the rules governing share-trading need amending. Mary Jo White, the chair of the SEC, has mused, for example, about monitoring the controls firms use to prevent their algorithms running amok. Another idea is to provide the SEC with the power to curtail otherwise legal trading when the market is convulsing. The risk is that in addressing market complexity, the regulators only add to it. A single SEC proposal, on a facet of a facet of the overall system, is now up for public comment. It runs to 581 pages.EVEN as the business of trading splinters across ever more platforms, the firms that run exchanges continue to consolidate. Last year NASDAQ agreed to buy Chi-X Canada, Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) purchased Interactive Data and Deutsche Börse snapped up 360T. The past decade of dealmaking in the industry has given rise to five powerhouses: the London Stock Exchange Group (LSE), Deutsche Börse, CME Group, ICE and HKEX. This week it emerged that, not for the first time, LSE and Deutsche Börse are talking about a merger. Organisations like the LSE once made all their money by charging fees to those who traded or listed shares. But as regulators allowed rival trading platforms to encroach on the established exchanges’ turf, those fees came down, pushing them into other lines of business. LSE and others bought up derivatives exchanges, data providers, index compilers and clearing houses. The intention was to serve customers throughout the process of buying a security, from research to clearing and settlement. Only a tenth of LSE’s and Deutsche Börse’s revenues now come from the trading of equities. This strategy has worked well. LSE’s shares have outperformed the FTSE 100 by more than 200% over the past five years. The groups have developed slightly different models, though. The German exchange adopted a “vertical silo”, in which customers for one of its products must also use others. Trading on the group’s Eurex derivatives exchange meant using its clearing house, for example. Running a vertical silo made expanding into other areas attractive, as new customers could be steered towards the rest of the group’s offerings. LSE, in contrast, offered open access to its exchanges and its clearing house. The EU is now obliging exchanges to open up their silos and let clients mix and match execution and clearing. That leaves Deutsche Börse more exposed. What is more, LSE’s strengths in shares and indices complement Deutsche Börse’s in derivatives. Putting Eurex Clearing and LCH.Clearnet under the same roof would also allow customers of both to clear trades with less collateral. Previous attempts to combine London’s bourse and Frankfurt’s failed in 2000 and 2005. The European Commission, which in 2012 blocked a tie-up between Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext, could kick up a fuss. Should it happen, Brexit would also complicate matters. But the incentives for exchange groups to join up are not going away.LIKE politicians, financial regulators know that late on a Friday is a good time to slip out bad news. The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), part of America’s Treasury, chose February 19th to announce it had rescinded a devastating finding against a European bank suspected of facilitating money-laundering. The withdrawal, less than a year after the designation, looks like a climbdown. In March 2015 FinCEN branded Banca Privada d’Andorra (BPA) as a “primary money-laundering concern”, saying its top managers had moved cash for criminal groups. This so-called “311” measure (after the relevant section of the Patriot Act of 2001) is usually crippling for the bank concerned, because in effect it cuts it off from the American financial system and any banks that participate in it. BPA was no exception: the government of Andorra, a mountainous financial haven nestled between France and Spain, ended up taking over the bank despite objections from its majority shareholders, the Cierco family; its Madrid-based wealth-management arm was liquidated. The Ciercos, insisting there was no legal basis for FinCEN’s move, sued in the American courts. FinCEN’s explanation for its reversal was that Andorra had taken steps to protect BPA from money-laundering risks, and the bank therefore no longer poses a threat. The Ciercos are having none of this. They argue that it was instead a “blatant effort to avoid judicial scrutiny” of the 311 measure. They point to the timing: the court was to hear a motion to dismiss the case next month. That would have required much more detailed evidence to be aired in support of the 311 action. The Americans wanted to avoid this because their case was flimsy, critics say. The Ciercos have argued from the start that it was based on cases of suspected money-laundering which the bank itself had reported to Andorran regulators and had brought in KPMG, an accounting firm, to investigate. If BPA was already cleaning up its act, why go after it at all? Some suspect the bank was a pawn in a tussle between governments: miffed that Andorra was slow to adopt American-style anti-money-laundering rules, including limits on cash transactions, America decided to show who was boss by selecting a bank to pick on. There is some evidence to support this sacrificial-lamb theory. In unscripted comments last year, for instance, an American diplomat suggested that America chose to “use the hammer” on BPA as a way of resolving wider concerns about Andorra. (FinCEN referred questions from The Economist to the Department of Justice, which declined to comment on the ground that lawsuits are under way.) The Treasury has been challenged in another 311-designation case. FBME Bank of Tanzania sued it after being accused of servicing all manner of bad guys. Last autumn an American court issued an injunction blocking the government’s action until the bank received more information about why it was deemed a threat to the financial system. The case continues. Meanwhile, FBME’s operations have been severely disrupted: it has sought an injunction to stop the authorities closing an important subsidiary in Cyprus. These cases highlight two problems with FinCEN’s money-laundering cudgel. The first is double-standards. It tends to go after only small banks in strategically unimportant countries; its use of 311 has been likened to using a sledgehammer to crack nuts. The second is its lack of openness. It faces no requirement to make detailed evidence public, or even available to a court, at the time of action. By the time any challenge is heard, it may be too late for the bank in question. BPA is not dead, but it is seriously wounded. Much of the value may have already vanished from a bank that was worth €600m ($680m) before the debacle—though there are substantial assets left thanks to a freezing order. The Ciercos want the Andorran authorities to halt the disposal of its assets and enter into “remedial negotiations”. They have hailed FinCEN’s about-face as a “momentous victory”. But will it be a hollow one?VICTORY this week in the Nevada caucuses, on top of recent triumphs in New Hampshire and South Carolina, make Donald Trump the clear favourite to be the Republican nominee in America’s presidential election. Users of Predictit, a gambling website, collectively rate his chances at about 70%. Although many people think that Mr Trump cannot triumph in November, it is worth remembering that Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, is hampered by several nagging scandals that could conceivably deepen. So investors need to start thinking about what the economy might look like under a President Trump. This is far from easy, because the candidate gives a good impression of making up policy as he goes along. How seriously is one to take his policy on Chinese trade (declaring the country a currency manipulator and eliminating its “illegal” export subsidies)? Is the plan for a border wall contingent on his improbable promise of getting the Mexicans to pay for it? And it is not clear whether Mr Trump’s policies would be approved by Congress. A Republican House and Senate would normally follow the lead of their party’s standard-bearer. But Mr Trump has departed a long way from party orthodoxy in some respects, such as declaring the Iraq war a “terrible mistake”. On taxes, at least, Mr Trump is not so different from other Republicans, arguing for sweeping cuts. He wants a higher standard income-tax deduction, along with lower bands of 10%, 20% and 25%. Dividends and capital gains would be taxed at 20% at most. The alternative minimum, estate and gift taxes would all be abolished. The corporate-tax rate would be cut from 35% to 15%. The cost of these cuts would be partly offset by limits on certain deductions, and by taxing companies’ global profits, whether repatriated or not. Part of Mr Trump’s “man of the people” appeal is his apparent divergence from Republicans on some tax breaks for the rich. One example is his promise to end the tax break on “carried interest”, which allows private-equity fund managers to cut their bills substantially. But the Tax Policy Centre (TPC), a think-tank that has analysed Mr Trump’s proposals, points out that although his plan does indeed reclassify carried interest, it would still cause the effective tax rate on it to fall from 23.8% to 15%. The billionaire need not worry about losing the private-equity vote. How will all this be paid for? Lower taxes could stimulate economic growth, although the size of the improvement is debatable and it could be offset by higher debt-servicing costs. The TPC estimates the tax cuts would reduce revenues by $9.5 trillion over ten years. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (CRFB), a fiscal watchdog, puts the total cost at $12 trillion-15 trillion. Debt could rise as high as 140% of GDP by 2026. Perhaps Mr Trump is a secret admirer of Paul Krugman, a liberal economist, and plans a big Keynesian stimulus? Not so: he has called for a balanced budget. That would mean huge spending cuts, but he has not outlined many. He wants to beef up the armed forces, and to spend more on veterans and immigration controls. He has also promised to protect Social Security (the national pension scheme). Mr Trump says he will save $300 billion from Medicare (the government health-care scheme for the elderly) by buying drugs more cheaply. Alas, total Medicare spending on drugs is likely to average $111 billion annually over the next decade. Aggregate American spending on drugs (public and private) is around $300 billion a year, says the CRFB. Perhaps Mr Trump thinks he can persuade the pharmaceutical companies to give their product away: the “art of the deal” in action. As the chart shows, the more departments that are protected, the bigger the cuts needed elsewhere. Funding his tax cuts would require spending reductions of 61-78% in the unprotected areas; balancing the budget would be impossible, according to the CRFB, as there is not enough spending left to cut. For those counting on economic growth to eliminate the deficit, the annual increase in GDP required would be more than 10%. All politicians promise too much, of course, but Mr Trump’s plans differ in the sheer scale of their implausibility. If investors also factor in the candidate’s unpredictability, the wildness of his foreign-policy rhetoric and a potentially fractious relationship with Congress, it all adds up to considerable uncertainty, something that markets traditionally dislike. If Mr Trump does become the Republican nominee, prepare for a volatile autumn. Economist.com/blogs/buttonwoodHair today… AS LONG as they stay on the right side of political battles, officials who reach the exalted heights of Chinese government can generally count on job security. Firing them in the middle of their term for poor performance is almost unheard of. The removal last week of Xiao Gang, China’s securities regulator (pictured), more than two years before the end of his term, was thus remarkable. It was bad enough that a stockmarket bubble had swollen and burst on Mr Xiao’s watch. He became chief of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) in early 2013; the stockmarket rally began in mid-2014 and turned into a mania before collapsing in mid-2015, wiping out some $5 trillion in wealth. Worse, his fingerprints were all over the market’s excesses, when it soared and when it fell. On the way up, he was an energetic cheerleader. In the months before the crash, when prices were already unsustainably high, Mr Xiao described the rally as a “reform bull”—that is, a fair response to the government’s economic-reform plans, however vague and incremental they actually were. He also missed the dangers in the market, arguing that leveraged buying of shares was under control, when in fact it had reached unprecedented levels. On the way down, he was the guiding force behind the adoption of a circuit-breaker mechanism intended to slow losses. This ended up exacerbating panic-selling and had to be scrapped. For months, rumours spread that senior leaders had lost faith in Mr Xiao. Investors took to referring to him as Xiao Rectum, which sounds very similar to his actual name. Reuters reported on January 18th that he had offered to resign. Yet the final decision to remove him from the CSRC is still a risky one for Li Keqiang, the premier. Until now, the bumbling Mr Xiao stood as a buffer between the stockmarket and Mr Li. In the event of more market mayhem, blame will now filter upstairs. …gone tomorrow Mr Xiao’s successor is Liu Shiyu, who most recently was chairman of Agricultural Bank of China, a big state-owned bank, and previously was a deputy governor of the central bank. He is doubtless hoping that the worst is past: the CSI-300 index of blue-chip shares has shed more than 40% of its value since last June’s peak. Yet even after the sell-off, small-cap shares still trade at nearly 90 times last year’s earnings, which suggests that the correction may have further to run (a multiple of 40 or so would be more reasonable). Daily dispatches: China's market mess What’s more, Mr Liu has the unenviable task of changing the way that initial public offerings (IPOs) are conducted. For years the authorities have mulled shifting from a system in which these are individually authorised to one in which eligible firms simply register their intention to list. Under the former, regulators control which companies get to list, when and roughly at what price. In the latter, these decisions are given over to the market (in effect, to underwriters, firms and investors). The authorisation system is prone to corruption because it gives regulators undue power. But in a volatile market with scant legal protection for investors, the fear is that registration will be abused by unscrupulous firms and so could be even more damaging. Mr Xiao handled this dilemma by dragging his feet. Mr Liu will be under pressure to move more boldly.CHILDREN are sometimes reassured that new siblings arrive via friendly storks. The reality is messier. Money creation is much the same. The “stork” in this case is the central bank; many think it transfers money to private banks, which act as intermediaries, pushing the money around the economy. In reality, most money is created by private banks. They generate deposits every time they make a loan, a process central banks can influence but not control. That alarms some, who worry that banks use this power heedlessly, thereby stoking disruptive booms and busts. Campaigners in many rich countries want to strip private banks of the power to create money. In Switzerland members of the “Vollgeld Initiative” presented the government with enough signatures in December to trigger a national referendum on the subject. Bank deposits, they point out, make up some 87% of the readily available money in Switzerland, vastly exceeding notes and coins. Since money creation is the main fuel of both inflation and growth, they argue, it should not be in private hands, let alone entrusted to institutions that are prone to binge and purge. Under the existing system deposits sit on private banks’ balance-sheets. Under the proposed alternative (a variation on “narrow banking”), accounts would be transformed into something much closer to the safe-deposit boxes nestled in Swiss vaults. Customers would pay the banks a charge for storing their cash. Any loans banks make would have to be funded by shareholders or by borrowing of their own, not by deposits. The central bank, meanwhile, would survey the economy and judge how much cash was required to maintain stable inflation. Rather than tweaking interest rates to influence private banks’ lending, it would simply hand out (or siphon away) the necessary cash itself, to the government, the public, or as loans to private banks. The system would be safer for depositors, since banks could not lend out and lose their money. That would allow governments to withdraw the implicit protection banks currently enjoy as the guardian of voters’ deposits. Even big banks could be allowed to fail, since the losses would not reverberate through the system so much. That possibility would nudge lenders into behaving more prudently. The Swiss government responds officially to every issue to be put to a referendum. On February 24th it released its verdict on the Vollgeld Initiative (the actual vote will not take place until next year at the earliest). It is not a fan. As the central bank issued more money, the government points out, its liabilities (cash) would rise without any increase in its assets. This, the government fears, would undermine confidence in the value of money. Those hoping for a simpler, more streamlined system would probably be disappointed. There would need to be heavy-handed rules to make sure that banks did not create “money-like” instruments. The government also worries that the change would hobble Swiss banks, including multinational giants such as UBS and Credit Suisse, which would face mammoth restructuring costs. Finance, a huge part of the Swiss economy, would be turned inside-out, with unpredictable but probably expensive consequences. The government also points out that the initiative only guards against one particular form of financial instability. Even once the new system is in place, a bank could still become insolvent or suffer a liquidity squeeze, with potentially disastrous results for those that had backed it and the economy as a whole. Even though it did not accept retail deposits, Lehman Brothers still collapsed, and nearly brought down the global financial system as it did so. Given the limited benefits, the costs the reform would involve look prohibitive, opponents argue. Besides, “there are less radical means to achieve financial stability,” according to Serge Gaillard, director of Switzerland’s Federal Finance Administration. Rules on lending, reserves and capital have all been tightened since the crisis. Now that these reforms have been implemented, the government says, such a fundamental overhaul of the system is unnecessary, if not downright dangerous. Safe-deposit boxes may be popular in Switzerland, but the public will probably side with the government, disappointing radical economists hoping for a trailblazer to prove that the model can work. The Swiss authorities believe they have recommended the safer option. Campaigners will think them narrow-minded.Economic stimulus and fiscal godsend LEAP years are a plus for finance ministers: the extra day bolsters annual output by a sliver and so flatters their record. Arun Jaitley, India’s finance minister, should be especially grateful for any boost to GDP on “leap day”, when he unveils his third budget. Although the Indian economy continues to outpace both richer and poorer rivals, the government’s fiscal options are narrowing. Given jittery markets and total public debt of around 65% of GDP, a high figure for an emerging market, the question isn’t whether the government should cut its budget deficit but by how much. It is projected to be 3.9% in the fiscal year that ends on March 31st. The government has pledged to reduce the shortfall to 3.5% in the coming year and 3% the following one. But these targets are already less ambitious than ones Mr Jaitley had set previously, and ministers seem to be preparing the ground to push them back further—to bond markets’ consternation. As always, politicians can craft a compelling case for another “one-off” delay in budget-trimming. Civil servants are expecting a mammoth pay bump as a result of a once-a-decade wage negotiation; there is also a boost to military pensions that will cost around 1.1 trillion rupees ($16 billion), or 0.8% of GDP. Fresh funds will have to be found to recapitalise 29 state-owned banks, most of which have books infested with dud loans and so are making heavy losses. State governments, which add a further 2.3% of GDP to the central government’s deficit, are being leant on to bail out bankrupt power-distribution companies. There is an economic case for deferring cuts, too, given febrile global conditions. Private investment is at a nadir, due to firms’ heavy debt and weak earnings. Two disappointing rainy seasons in a row have depressed incomes in rural regions, where most Indians live. And though India’s growth, at 7.5% last year, looks buoyant by global standards, it is below the 9-10% the government aspires to. (Many, including some government officials, in any case question the accuracy of the data.) There is some debate among economists about whether further public spending is warranted in such circumstances. Unfortunately for Mr Jaitley, one of the most vocal critics is Raghuram Rajan, the central-bank governor. He has compared India’s economy to Brazil’s, which is similarly indebted and shrinking fast—a humiliating rebuke to the government. Mr Rajan has argued that there are few investments the government can make that are likely to deliver high enough returns to compensate for adding to India’s debt pile. More public spending risks crowding out the private sort, he thinks. The implicit threat from Mr Rajan is that he will not reduce interest rates from their current 6.75% if the deficit does not shrink. After all, India has already received a hearty stimulus, albeit not one of Mr Jaitley’s doing. No other country has benefited quite so much from the tumbling price of commodities, particularly oil, of which it is a huge net importer. When Narendra Modi came to power in May 2014, with crude at nearly $110 a barrel, whatever tax the government levied on petrol and other oil products was largely spent on fuel subsidies for the poor. The subsidy bill has since atrophied, while the government has pocketed much of the benefit of falling prices by raising the tax on petrol. It has received unexpected revenue of 1.5% of GDP, even as consumers’ spending power has risen. For a country whose tax receipts total around 11% of GDP, that is a sizeable boon. Economists point out that the oil price, currently hovering near $30, cannot tumble another $80 next year. Worse, it might go up, which could prompt a reversal of the tax increases. If so, a $10 increase in the oil price would cost the government 0.35% of GDP, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank, more or less doubling the cuts needed to meet its current fiscal targets. Modest rises in other taxes have been mooted, and may be necessary if Mr Jaitley sees public investment or rural handouts as a political necessity. But there is another obvious way of raising money: selling down the government’s stakes in hundreds of Indian companies. Targets for privatisation have been missed in nine of the past ten years (see chart). Although many of the government’s holdings have little strategic value—it owns stakes in cigarette-makers, engineering firms and hotels, for instance—it has resisted a sell-off. The reticence should end, argues Sajjid Chinoy of JPMorgan Chase, a bank, who advises government to think of divestments not as asset sales but as asset swaps, trading stakes in companies for the money to build new roads and railways. A selling spree would allow Mr Jaitley to stick to his 3.5% target. Yet if anything, he is expected to trim projected revenue from privatisation. The disappointment of bond markets will be blunted by a rule that obliges banks to keep 21.5% of their assets in government bonds. But the price of profligacy is mounting: of the 13.7 trillion rupees the government expects in revenue in the coming year, over a third of it, or 5.1 trillion rupees, will go on interest payments.LONDON may be Europe’s commercial capital, but not all Britons are thrilled about that. In a poll conducted in 2014, two-thirds of non-Londoners reckoned that London had a positive impact on the British economy as a whole, but fewer than a third thought London’s strength was good for their city. London lures skilled workers and productive companies away from other parts of Britain. It also lures workers and firms from across Europe—something that makes many Britons, both in London and beyond, bristle. Indeed, London’s mop-topped mayor, Boris Johnson, this week joined the campaign to persuade Britons to withdraw from the European Union. London dominates Britain, accounting for 23% of its population and about a third of its economic output. The city grew to enormous size in the 19th and early-20th century, when it served as the political and economic hub of a global empire. The post-war decline in its population, a result both of the loss of empire and of policies intended to curb its growth, ended in the 1980s, when the globalisation of finance rejuvenated the city’s main industry. Greater London is the fifth-largest metropolitan economy in the world, according to the Brookings Institution, a think-tank. It is the EU’s largest city, by both population and output. Yet London should arguably be bigger than it is. It is Europe’s most important financial centre, and one of its biggest hubs for information industries and professional services—the European analogue to New York city. But London accounts for just 4.5% of the EU’s output, after adjusting for variation in the cost of living, and just 2.9% of its population, whereas New York accounts for 8.1% of America’s GDP and 6.3% of its population (see chart). Were European integration ever to yield something like a United States of Europe (and Britain ever to be part of such an enterprise), London would probably swell in size and importance. Why should that be the case? Economists have touted the benefits of cities since 1826, when a German one named Johann Heinrich von Thünen tried to explain why farmers gather in villages rather than living by their fields. Paul Krugman, in a paper published in 1991, homed in on the role of “increasing returns to scale” in driving the growth of cities. Because it is expensive to move people and goods, customers want to be where producers are and vice versa. As cities grow, increasing returns kick in: the more people who live in a particular place, the more attractive that place becomes to others. Mr Krugman focused on clustering in manufacturing. Two trading regions with a slight imbalance in population would naturally evolve into a developed core and an underpopulated periphery, he argued. In the paper, which the Nobel committee cited when awarding him the prize for economics, Mr Krugman pointed as an example to Europe, where industrial activity is concentrated in the north-west. Manufacturing no longer drives urbanisation in the rich world. In 2009 Edward Glaeser and Joshua Gottlieb of Harvard University surveyed recent research in order to distil the nature and causes of the “wealth of cities”. Although manufacturing firms have grown less likely to concentrate together in dense areas, thanks to the falling cost and hassle of shipping, firms in knowledge-based industries like technology and finance have become more prone to clustering. In cities with lots of skilled workers, productivity tends to rise with population density. The authors reckon that it is now the advantage of associating with other clever people, and the intellectual stimulation and exchange that results, that gives the biggest cities their magnetism. City sticker Congestion slows cities’ breakneck growth: housing and transport infrastructure seldom keep pace with demand. As a result, rather than a single metropolitan goliath, economies tend to develop a series of cities distributed by size according to “Zipf’s law” (named after George Zipf, an American linguist). The largest city tends to be twice the size of the second-largest, three times the size of the third-largest, and so on. American cities roughly follow this pattern. In the less-integrated EU, however, there is instead a jumble of big cities and a dearth of medium-sized ones. Deeper integration would push Europe toward a more American distribution. London would probably be the main beneficiary, given its particular strengths. Europe’s financial markets remain highly fragmented. Its stockmarkets are about half the size of America’s, despite the similar size of the two economies; European corporate-bond markets are about a third of the size. Few Italian firms, for instance, turn to their country’s relatively small equity or bond markets for funding. Instead, they simply borrow from Italian banks, which tend to have their headquarters in Milan. The EU is currently trying to rectify that by making it easier to borrow, lend and invest across its internal borders, in the hope of reducing funding costs for European firms. If such efforts bear fruit and Britain remains a part of the union, firms based in London would help more foreign companies issue shares or bonds there, at the expense of other European financial centres. Easing the cross-border provision of services, another thing on the EU’s long-term agenda, would likewise prove a boon for London. That prospect would naturally discomfit continentals. Just as New York rose head and shoulders above Philadelphia and Boston as the American economy grew and integrated, Paris, Frankfurt and Milan could all expect to cede ground to London in a close-knit EU. But London’s boosters might also blanch at the growth deeper integration might bring. It would mean more building, for starters. Greater London added 23,000 new housing units in the year to September, less than a third of the new units approved in New York last year. Were London to follow the example of New York, its GDP and population could eventually eclipse that of the rest of Britain, lengthening the political and cultural shadows cast across the rest of the country. Mr Johnson is angling for a promotion to prime minister; ironically, a vote to remain could make his current job one of the most desirable in Europe.Correction: In a recent article on the restructuring of big banks (“Chop, chop”, January 30th), we said Barclays planned to “shut up shop” in Asia. In fact, it is only closing its share-trading business there. Sorry.
