“WE FEEL we must speak up in the face of what we see as an overreach by the US government.” With those words Tim Cook, head of Apple, the world’s biggest information-technology (IT) company, explained on February 16th why he felt his firm should refuse to comply with an FBI request to break into an iPhone used by Syed Farook, a dead terrorist. Farook and his wife Tashfeen Malik, who were sympathisers with Islamic State, shot and killed 14 people in California in December, before both were themselves killed by police. The FBI’s request, Mr Cook said, was “chilling”. Ever since 2013, when Edward Snowden’s leaks pushed privacy and data security into the public eye, America’s IT firms have been locked in battle with their own government. The issue at stake is as old as mass communication: how much power should the authorities have to subvert the means citizens and companies use to keep their private business private? For Mr Cook to choose the Farook case as the line he will not cross seems, on the face of things, baffling. The phone is government property (Farook was a public employee). The FBI wants help unlocking it because it may contain information on the motives or contacts of a dead terrorist. What could be more reasonable? But for Apple, and those security advocates who think the firm is right to defy the government, it is not reasonable at all. Far from being a one-off, they suspect the FBI’s case has been chosen carefully, in order to set a legal precedent that would let policemen and spies break into computers much more easily—and would do so in a way that undermines everyone’s security. Cryptoporticus The files on Farook’s phone, as on all iPhones, are encrypted. Unless the correct code is entered to unlock the phone, they are meaningless gibberish. By itself such a code provides little security. It is, by default, a mere four digits long, which makes it easy to memorise but means there are only 10,000 possible combinations. This makes it simple to try every combination until by chance the right one is hit, a process called “brute-forcing”. Other features, though, are designed to make brute-forcing harder. After six wrong guesses a user has to wait a minute before trying a seventh. That delay rises rapidly to an hour. On average, therefore, brute-forcing a four-digit iPhone passcode will take 5,000 hours—nearly seven months. Yet even that might be a surmountable obstacle, were it not for the fact that iPhones can also be set to wipe themselves clean after ten failed attempts to log in. Crucially, both restrictions—the time between attempts, and the wipe after ten failed tries—can, unlike the encryption itself, be circumvented. That is because they are enforced by the phone’s operating system, iOS, and operating systems can be changed. Apple does so regularly, issuing updates that add features and fix bugs. The FBI is, in essence, asking for just such an update, bespoke to the phone in question, that would remove the extra security features so that they can brute-force it quickly. In theory the bureau could write such an update itself. But it could not use it without Apple’s help because, precisely to stop such attacks, iPhones will accept an update only if they can be convinced, via a special, cryptographically signed certificate, that it comes from Apple. Only Apple possesses the long, randomly generated number used as the key to that process. The FBI has insisted its request is a one-off, and that once the software has done its job Apple can delete it. But many security experts are sceptical: they do not believe that looking inside Farook’s phone is the bureau’s only motive. “They almost certainly won’t find anything of interest on the phone,” opines Nicholas Weaver, a computer-security researcher at the University of California, Berkeley. He points out that Farook and his wife took the trouble to destroy two other phones and a laptop, while leaving the iPhone—which belonged to Farook’s employer—intact. (On the other hand, Farook did disable the phone’s online backup feature, data from which the FBI would have access to—a few weeks before his rampage.) Dr Weaver and people like him think the FBI has pushed the case specifically because it is hard, from a public-relations point of view, for Apple to be seen to be refusing to co-operate. They worry that if Apple agrees to build such a system once, it will find similar requests impossible to refuse in future—an argument that was bolstered when it emerged that the Justice Department was demanding Apple’s help in at least nine similar cases (in seven of those, the firm is resisting). Some fret that the FBI might even require the firm to start sending subverted code to specific suspects over the air, using the technology it employs to distribute legitimate updates. Viewed narrowly, that might be no bad thing. The FBI has argued many times that encryption can thwart legitimate investigations, leaving vital clues undiscovered. But security researchers point out that what works for the good guys works for the bad guys, too. If a subverted operating system managed to escape into the “wild” even once, then the security of every iPhone would be put at risk. The trade-off, says Kenneth White, a director of the Open Crypto Audit Project, an American charity, is not security versus privacy, but security for everyone versus the police’s ability to investigate specific crimes. And the risk of a leak would rise with every extra person who had access to the nobbled code: defence lawyers demanding to see it; court-appointed experts given the job of checking it works as intended; and so on. A second argument against collaboration points out that Apple has governments besides America’s that it must answer to. Deliberately compromising its security for the Americans, says Mr White, will encourage other countries to make similar, perhaps even broader, demands for access. Having conceded the point once, Apple will find it hard to resist in future. In countries less concerned with civil liberties and the rule of law, that could have serious consequences. Key decisions All these arguments are set to be rehearsed when Apple and the FBI meet in court, on March 22nd. But however the decision goes, it is unlikely to be the last word. Most observers expect appeals to carry on all the way to the Supreme Court. In the meantime IT firms, Apple included, are taking steps to lock themselves out of their own customers’ devices, deliberately making it harder to fulfil official requests for access. New versions of the iPhone feature something called the Secure Enclave. This is a separate computer within the phone, whose job is to police access to the rest of the device. Cracking it would require an extra piece of customised software aimed at neutering the Enclave itself. That is doable, for Apple has retained the ability to alter the Enclave so that it can issue updates and fix bugs. But things need not stay this way. The firm has pondered removing its ability to modify the Enclave, which would frustrate official requests for access. Even then, a determined policeman has options. It is possible, with expensive equipment and a good deal of skill, to recover cryptographic keys from hardware by poking around physically in the transistors and wiring of the chip itself. Decapping, as this process is known (the first step is to remove the chip’s protective plastic cap) is the stuff of intelligence agencies and a few dedicated laboratories, and carries a risk of destroying the chip for no gain. But, if access were thought crucial, and there were no other options, it is possible to do it. Even so, ensuring that phones themselves can be unlocked will not solve all of the authorities’ problems. There are plenty of encrypted messaging apps available for smartphones, many written outside the United States and thus beyond the reach of its government. The most advanced feature a technique called forward secrecy, which uses disposable, one-time encryption keys to ensure that old messages stay scrambled even if those looking manage to get hold of the conversers’ permanent keys. (One such app, called Telegram, which was developed by Pavel Durov, a nomadic Russian, announced on February 24th that it had reached 100m users.) All this may sound like an arms race. It is. Silicon Valley has roots in the counterculture of the 1960s, and a potent streak of civil libertarianism. There is a sense there that Mr Snowden’s revelations proved the American government cannot be trusted not to abuse its powers of surveillance. And there are commercial factors, too. Apple has made privacy and security important selling points for its products. Cybersecurity types, meanwhile, feel aggrieved that policemen and politicians do not seem to grasp what they view as a fundamental point: weakening security for the police’s benefit inevitably weakens it for everyone. “They keep asking for a ‘Manhattan Project’ to figure this out,” says Mr White. “But that’s like asking for a Manhattan Project to figure out how to divide by zero.” (Attempting to dividing by zero is, by definition, a mathematical folly.) It will be left to the courts to decide the right approach in this particular case. But the fight between Apple and the FBI raises very big questions. To answer them will ultimately require the intervention of elected politicians.AMPLE evidence shows that exercising regularly reduces the risk of cancer. Similarly, those who have survived the disease are less likely to see it return if they engage in lots of physical activity after treatment. All this suggests that such activity triggers a reaction in the body which somehow thwarts cancer cells, but the details of the process have remained murky. Now, a team led by Pernille Hojman at Copenhagen University Hospital, in Denmark, has reported in Cell Metabolism that the key to the mystery is adrenalin. Dr Hojman began her work by verifying that exercise truly does have beneficial anti-tumour effects. She and her colleagues gave some of the mice in their laboratory activity wheels, which the animals could run around inside as much as they liked. Other mice, meanwhile, were given no opportunity to exercise beyond moving about inside their cages. The researchers then induced mice of both sorts to develop one of three types of cancer. Some, they injected with a substance called diethylnitrosamine, which causes liver cancer. Others, they injected below the skin with melanoma cells, which then set up shop where they had been injected. Others still had their tails inoculated with melanoma cells. In mice, previous experience has shown, this leads to melanomas forming in the lungs. The results were instructive. While all mice injected under the skin with melanoma cells developed that cancer, the tumours in animals which had had access to a running wheel were 61% smaller after six weeks than were those in mice that had been unable to exercise. A similar reduction in size (58%) pertained to lung tumours. And, of the mice injected with diethylnitrosamine, only 31% of those with wheels in their enclosures developed tumours at all—in contrast to a 75% tumour-development rate in mice lacking access to a wheel. To try to understand why exercise does this, Dr Hojman and her team put under a microscope some of the tumours they had induced. They found that those from well-exercised mice contained more immune cells than equivalent tumours from inactive animals. Specifically, the former had double the number of cytotoxic T-cells, which kill off body cells that are damaged, malfunctioning or infected with viruses. They also had five times more natural killer cells, a type that sounds the alarm and attracts other immune cells. In light of these discoveries Dr Hojman repeated the experiment, this time on mice that had been engineered to lack cytotoxic T-cells. Again, she found that mice with access to wheels had smaller tumours. This suggested that the natural killer cells, not the T-cells, were the responsible agents. A third experiment confirmed this. She sabotaged natural killer cells by giving mice an antibody that eliminated these cells while leaving the rest of the immune system intact. With the natural killer cells gone, the tumours of all the mice, regardless of whether or not they could run in a wheel, grew to the same size. Dr Hojman knew from past work that epinephrine, a hormone also commonly known as adrenalin, has the potential to mobilise natural killer cells. She knew, too, that this hormone’s levels in the blood rise during periods of physical exertion. That led her to wonder if it is epinephrine which is behind the cancer-thwarting effects of exercise. To find out, she ran a fourth experiment, in which mice induced to have cancer were injected either with epinephrine or with saline. The hormone performed well, reducing the growth of tumours by 61% in mice that had no access to a wheel. However, this was not as impressive as the reduction of 74% which the team saw in control mice that got regular exercise. There was, they concluded, something else involved. And they found it in the form of interleukin-6. Levels of this molecule also spike during exercise—and it, too, helps immune cells home in on tumours. When Dr Hojman and her colleagues exposed sedentary mice both to epinephrine and to interleukin-6, the rodents’ immune systems attacked the tumours in their bodies as effectively as if those animals had engaged in regular wheel-runs. Dr Hojman’s findings, then, suggest that epinephrine and interleukin-6 could be used as anti-tumour drugs. She is not proposing that they should be a substitute for exercise in those who are merely lazy—not least because exercise brings benefits beyond curbing oncogenesis. But people who are too old or too ill to be active might thus gain exercise’s anticancer benefits without the need to get sweaty.TRICHIASIS, the last stage of an infection called trachoma, rarely hits the headlines. That is because it does not kill. It does, however, blind. More than 2m people suffer, half of whom have lost their vision. The condition, caused by certain strains of Chlamydia trachomatis, a bacterium, makes the eyelid turn inward. That causes the sufferer’s eyelashes to scratch his cornea when he blinks. People blink 15-20 times a minute, so the pain is relentless, and eventually the scarring caused by the scratching results in sightlessness. Trachoma is preventable (by regular face washing and general cleanliness) and treatable (by an antibiotic called Zithromax and by surgery to correct deformed eyelids). But, until recently, where such efforts should be concentrated was not clear. This changed with the publication earlier this month, by the Global Trachoma Mapping Project, of an atlas of risk (see above). The survey which created this atlas, led by Sightsavers, a British charity, examined 2.6m people over three years to see whether they had the disease. That sample was drawn from a population of 224m in 29 countries reckoned at risk. The project’s methodology was designed to be simple and reliable. Out went pens and paper. In came smartphones. Data could thus not be lost to the rain, and their quality could be checked continuously. Nor was there any doubt about where they were collected from, since the phones were tracked by the Global Positioning System. The atlas’s publication brings encouraging news. Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda had much lower levels of trachoma than expected. Laos and Cambodia, unsurveyed since the 1960s, turned out to be virtually free of it. And, for those places that are infected, the full force of antibiotic-distribution and face-washing education programmes can now be brought to bear. The World Health Organisation aspires to eliminate trachoma as a public-health risk by 2020, leaving only sporadic cases that local doctors can clear up. That sounds ambitious. But knowing where to concentrate fire certainly helps.GUILT-FREE intercourse may, as Philip Larkin wrote, have begun in 1963, but sexual reproduction has been around a good deal longer than that. Single-celled organisms began exchanging and mixing up genetic information in ways modern biologists recognise as rudimentary forms of sex about two billion years ago. Yet the question of why sex exists at all remains troublesome. A creature which reproduces asexually passes on all of its genes to each of its progeny. One that mates with another, by contrast, passes on only half of them. On the face of things that is a huge selective disadvantage. There must therefore, evolutionary biologists believe, be equally huge compensating benefits. Two ideas exist about what these might be. One is that the constantly changing genetic variety sex creates stops parasites and pathogens evolving stable techniques for exploiting a host species. This is the “Red Queen” hypothesis, an allusion to a character in “Through the Looking-Glass” who had to run as fast as she could to stay in the same place. The other idea is that the continual mixing of genes from generation to generation separates good and bad mutations, permitting the bad ones to be purged by natural selection without taking the good ones along for the ride. This process was described by Joel Peck, one of its progenitors, as plucking rubies from rubbish. “Plucking rubies” and the “Red Queen” are not mutually exclusive. Both could be true. But, while the queen has experimental evidence to back her up, rubies have had little such validation. Until now. For Michael Desai of Harvard University believes he has demonstrated such plucking experimentally in brewer’s yeast. This is a well-understood experimental organism and one ideal for Dr Desai’s purpose because it can reproduce both sexually and asexually. Studying the switch between the two modes, he hoped, might illuminate the purging process. And, as he and his team write in Nature, it has. Despite having two sexes, known as mating-types a and alpha, yeast’s default mode of reproduction is asexual, so Dr Desai’s first task was to work out a way to turn his yeast cells on to sex, as it were. He did this by adding to their DNA genes for resistance to two antibiotics, hygromycin and G418, and arranging for this resistance to be turned on only when the gene for mating was also active. Adding the antibiotics to the yeast’s growth medium meant only sexually active yeast cells could survive. This done, he and his team set up 24 lines of this modified strain (12 of mating-type a and 12 of alpha) and let them grow for six months, a period that corresponds to about 1,000 yeast generations. Six lines of each mating type were forced to undergo sexual reproduction every 90 generations, by mixing the sexes together and adding the antibiotics. Others were left to carry on cloning themselves. At these 90-generation break points the researchers also sampled each line to look for any genetic mutations that had arisen in the intervening period. Such mutations are the stuff of evolution, and Dr Desai hoped they might tell the story of why, in an evolutionary sense, sex works. They did. The researchers found, as predicted, that when a beneficial mutation appeared in a few of the asexually reproducing cells, it would spread only if its positive effects outweighed the negative effects of any deleterious mutations that appeared in the same cells. Even if a good mutation prospered, it did so slowly, as any bad mutations associated with it came along for the ride when the genome it was in passed from one generation to the next. In the sexual yeast population, however, good and bad mutations often went their separate ways when the parent cell’s genome was chopped up and mixed around during reproduction. This permitted different combinations of good and bad mutations to pass to the genomes of different offspring of the same parent cells. That made it easier, in an evolutionary sorting of wheat from chaff, for the good mutations to spread, even if they first appeared in bad company. So, as evolutionary theory predicts, over the course of the experiment genomes containing deleterious mutations disappeared and positive mutations accumulated in the genomes of cells that remained. The crucial test, though, came at the end of the experiment, when Dr Desai compared the asexual to the sexual strains. In every case, the descendants of sexually reproducing yeast cells bested their asexual rivals in the competition for food and resources. His experiments thus confirm that the ruby hypothesis works—at least, in a laboratory. That puts it on an equal footing with the Red Queen. What goes on in the wild, though, has yet to be determined.Sing up, dear THE lovey-dovey monogamy which the untutored eye may perceive in pairs of songbirds, raising their young together in nests constructed by joint endeavour, has long been exposed by zoologists as a fantasy. Even by the adulterous standards of the ornithological world, though, the red-backed fairy-wren, an Australian bird, is a champion. According to a study just published in Biology Letters by Daniel Baldassarre of Cornell University and his colleagues, almost half of fairy-wren nestlings are not fathered by the male that is helping to feed them, and 60% of nests contain at least one such chick. For male fairy-wrens, then, trying to guarantee paternity is a continual struggle, and Dr Baldassarre and his team wondered which strategies worked best. Broadly, a male fairy-wren has two options. He can try to discourage interlopers by beating them up, or he can woo his mate to encourage her not to stray. He does this by duetting with her. That both keeps her attention and may suggest to other males that she is, indeed, loyal. To see which was the better approach Dr Baldassarre and his team ran some experiments in Queensland. They challenged male fairy-wrens with dummy interlopers who were given voice by recorded songs. They then compared the males’ typical responses to these artificial encounters with the paternities of actual nestlings subsequently raised, as estimated by comparing the youngsters’ DNA with that of their purported fathers. In practice, all challenged males responded both by attacking the stuffed rival and by duetting with their mates. They did so, however, with varying levels of enthusiasm for each approach. Altogether, in the course of several slightly different experiments, the researchers looked at the adults and offspring in 51 territories. Their results were intriguing. A male’s level of aggression towards the dummy made no perceptible difference to his chance, subsequently measured, of being a cuckold. His level of duetting, by contrast, made a big one. The best duetters had almost no offspring born of adultery inflicted on them. Aggression, presumably, brings other advantages, otherwise it is hard to see why it happens. Probably, it serves to protect a territory (and thus its food resources) from predatory neighbours. In the matter of sexual fidelity, though, it seems to be useless. For female fairy-wrens, it is rather a mellifluous mate that is the key to domestic harmony and a loyal partnership.Setting the liberal agenda David Astor. By Jeremy Lewis. Jonathan Cape; 416 pages; £25. DAVID ASTOR, who edited the Observer from 1948 until 1975 (and whose family owned it), belonged to a time when newspapers were Britain’s principal source of information. For well over 20 years, Astor’s Observer was the voice of Britain’s liberal consensus. It campaigned persistently and successfully against the death penalty, theatre censorship and racial discrimination; in favour of the decolonisation of Africa and of tolerance towards homosexuality. The laws that were passed subsequently freed people to make social and moral decisions for themselves. Jeremy Lewis, in a lively, gossipy and affectionate biography, asserts that Astor was “one of the outstanding editors of the last century”, and it is hard to disagree. Although Astor never learned to type, he was a good copy editor and headline writer. He hired writers he admired, even if they had not dutifully served the usual three-year journalistic apprenticeship in the provinces.  Anthony Sampson, one of his most distinguished editorial acquisitions, thought that the paper was more like a family charity, or an eccentric college, than a commercial newspaper. One significant difference between Astor and most Fleet Street editors was his inherited wealth. He was brought up at Cliveden, a great house on the Thames: “a shallow, vapid, cotton-wool life”, he once said, dominated by his obtrusive and overbearing American mother Nancy, Britain’s first female member of parliament. It is no surprise that he sought consolation in Freudian psychoanalysis, in which he never lost his faith. His father, Waldorf, (whose own father had bought the paper from Lord Northcliffe in 1911) suggested it might provide David with a suitable occupation. The young man not long out of Eton and Oxford found the idea wearisome, but the outbreak of the second world war piqued his interest. While still on the staff of Lord Mountbatten’s Combined Operations, he persuaded a reluctant Observer editor to run a weekly series that contemplated life after the war. In 1945 he became its foreign editor, nurturing temperamental central European intellectuals such as Arthur Koestler and Isaac Deutscher. David Astor’s reputation was made by his violent opposition to the Suez invasion in 1956. The Observer damned it as gangsterism. Although advertising suffered, circulation did not. His paper fought the cold war, was routinely Atlanticist and favoured a federal Europe. But it was the campaigns that defined it. The other crucial ingredient was writing that burnished a golden age of Sunday journalism. Kenneth Tynan’s theatre reviews, the reportorial brilliance of Patrick O’Donovan and Michael Davie, Jane Bown’s photographs, Hugh McIlvanney’s match reports and Terry Kilmartin’s literary pages set standards few journalists could match. The problem was money. Waldorf Astor had set up a charitable trust to protect the paper from disagreeable predators, with statutes that prevented it from making a profit or borrowing money. The only legitimate source of new capital was the family, and David Astor himself ploughed at least £1.25m (in late 1960s money) into the paper and leant on his siblings for more.  The money was needed to compete with the Sunday Times, but not even the Astors had enough. Besides, Astor was not naturally competitive. When the Sunday Times published a magazine, he declined to follow suit, until his commercial department forced him to. Shortage of capital meant the Observer could not rival the size and range of the Sunday Times, and, as an editor, he had little sympathy with the investigative journalism that became the powerful speciality of its rival. He was wrong; by the 1970s, the battle for supremacy on Sundays was over. When Astor retired in 1975, Sir Harold Evans, the celebrated editor of the Sunday Times, declared that he no longer thought of the Observer as a rival. The Sunday Times published some memorable journalism; none more so than its determination to win compensation for the victims of thalidomide. But the Observer’s campaigns for social liberalism have profoundly affected the way Britain lives and thinks. So who was the more influential editor? It was David Astor, surely.Being a Beast. By Charles Foster. Profile; 218 pages; £14.99. To be published in America by Metropolitan in June, $28. STRIDING around describing plants and animals, often in flowery prose from behind a desk or a camera lens, seems rather old-fashioned. In “Being a Beast” Charles Foster takes a more modern approach, getting down to the animal’s level to see what it is really like to be a badger, an otter, a fox, a red deer and a swift.  It is an extreme proposition. Mr Foster, a writer and barrister who qualified as a vet and has a PhD in medical law and ethics from Cambridge, doesn’t just investigate the taxonomical differences with humans; he attempts to overcome them. This means eating rubbish from bin bags as an urban fox would do, living in a sett as a badger, cowering naked on a moor as a red deer and launching himself fully clothed into a river pretending to be an otter.  Mr Foster is a nature writer, but not one you would recognise. There is plenty of shit and blood and dirt and very little description of the beauty of the animals. Because who needs to read that? Readers know that a badger is handsome. What they do not know is what worms taste like. Since you ask, it’s like wine apparently: once you get past the slime, each worm has its own individual terroir.   Mr Foster shapeshifts with the book. In the badger chapter he is sensuous yet ruthless. As an otter he has ADHD. As a fox he is a canine kind of street smart. And as a swift? Suddenly transcendent. The book contains some very funny moments, usually involving other humans who are confused as to why a man is sleeping under a shed, eating spiders or growling at a dog.  But to dismiss Mr Foster as an eccentric would be a mistake. In each chapter the reader learns a lot about the animals involved. What does it feel like to sleep by a road, hunt voles or be hunted by hounds? The author hones senses long neglected. As a badger he maps the dark wood by smells alone, as an otter he sees the river through a thousand tiny bubbles, and as a fox he slinks into a new city of London defined by dark corners and rubbish dumps.  The idea that people should stop managing the landscape and let the wild back into their tired lives has gained so much in popularity it now goes by the buzzword “rewilding” in conservation circles. Mr Foster is the real thing, going truly feral and in the process discovering a whole new world. It is not a midlife crisis so much as a lifelong passion.  Yet no matter how hard he tries, poor Charles Foster is such a very human homo sapiens. He cannot escape being a middle-aged man. It is like watching a geek with the cool kids at a party, trying to assume the character of a cunning fox or a confident badger. He has moments, like when he discovers the joy of chasing a cat or earthworms emerging after the rain. But in the end, he is too clumsy, too bipedal—and altogether too intellectual.  A streak of eastern mysticism runs through Mr Foster’s book. In the end he listens to its call and lets rip. This is the moment when he becomes a swift, allowing his writing and his thoughts to fly and “slash the veil”, as he calls it. He believes that the closest he can get to being a swift is to understand the finer details of the planet he shares with the bird: “The velvet flow of a caterpillar’s legs and the grunt of a crocus as it noses out of the earth.” Finally, the author accepts that he is human, which is all about being curious and pushing boundaries. This idea is not new. Attempting to connect to animals and even become them has been tested over generations, not least as shamans and through stories, such as “Homeward Bound”. What is new is the modern world that humans have created full of cars and houses and computers, where “sensitivity is impossible”. It would be all too easy to mock the author’s commitment to recognising his atavistic abilities and releasing his inner animal. But curiosity prevails. “Being a Beast” wastes no time telling you how to identify nature or become a better person. It encourages you to get down on your hands and knees and start sniffing. 
