Ray of sunshine One Breath: Free-diving, Death and the Quest to Shatter Human Limits. By Adam Skolnick. Crown Archetype; 336 pages; $26. Corsair; £20. THE death of Nick Mevoli, an American freediver, on November 17th 2013, while competing at Dean’s Blue Hole—a 202-metre-deep funnel of darkness in the Bahamas—is a litany of “if onlys”. If only the 32-year-old from Brooklyn, tired and in pain, had not attempted a dive that day. If only, sensing trouble, he had turned back to the surface sooner. If only his team’s resuscitation efforts had succeeded. “One Breath”, Adam Skolnick’s dissection of an extreme sport and post-mortem of a dive gone wrong, becomes a morality play of hubris, imprudence and obsession. Free-diving, descending as deep as possible on a single breath, is a niche interest that is more dangerous than any sport other than base-jumping (leaping from a bridge or cliff wearing a wingsuit). Perils include punctured eardrums, embolisms, blackouts and “lung squeezes”. Diving at extreme depths brutalises the lungs, which at a depth of 30 metres compress to a quarter of their normal size. At worst, capillaries and pulmonary vessels rupture and a diver drowns in his own blood. It took Mevoli, who began his first formal course in free-diving in 2011, slightly more than a year to rocket from being a novice competitor to a record-holder, and that was part of the problem. “The biggest problem with freedivers now is they hurry. They go too deep too fast,” said Natalia Molchanova, possibly the world’s greatest freediver, who drowned last August off the coast of Spain. She was giving a private lesson when she made a dive for pleasure. Not being clipped to a line, she was swept away and never found. Even the best of the best are not immune. Mevoli grew up in a broken home with a neglectful, self-absorbed father who gave his son a life-insurance policy for his 18th birthday and made himself the beneficiary. Before his parents’ divorce, Mevoli would plunge into the backyard pool of his boyhood home in Florida, surface to check if the angry voices had subsided, and, if not, submerge again. In free-diving he found solace and self-worth. “Each dive”, Mr Skolnick writes, became “a referendum on his own value.” Mevoli-the-friend was caring and large-spirited. Mevoli-the-competitor was reckless—“cowboyish” a friend said—prone to tantrums, sulks and self-excoriation. “I really liked Nick,” a fellow diver observed. “But I didn’t like him as a competitor. He was exorcising demons from his past and using free-diving to do that.” It is a haunting tale. To the list of “if onlys” one should perhaps add one more: If only Nick Mevoli hadn’t measured his self-worth in metres. “Numbers infected my head like a virus,” he wrote in a blog post shortly before he died. “The need to achieve became an obsession.” And “obsessions”, he noted, “can kill.” At 20 metres, the body loses its buoyancy. Pressure builds, the lungs shrink, gravity exerts its pull. The diver goes into free fall, carried ever deeper away from light and into blackness. One imagines Nick Mevoli, young and beautiful—an undersea Icarus falling from the sun, away from friends, family and life.My Name Is Lucy Barton. By Elizabeth Strout. Random House; 193 pages; $26. Viking; £12.99. “DON’T ever worry about story,” a novelist assures her writing students in “My Name Is Lucy Barton”, Elizabeth Strout’s new novel. “You have only one.” Every writer may indeed be telling the same story over and over, with slight variations. So it is for Ms Strout, who turns every book (including her Pulitzer-prize-winning “Olive Kitteridge”) into a kind of love story. These are not romances, mind you, but yarns about the primal, unwieldy love of family—those unchosen mothers and hapless brothers—and the bonds that can sometimes feel like manacles. Ms Strout’s latest book unfurls in retrospect. Lucy Barton, a writer in New York, is recalling a time in the 1980s when a mysterious illness forced her to stay in hospital for nearly nine weeks, away from her husband and young daughters. Her solitude left her aching with loneliness, eager for visits from her doctor (who “wore his sadness with such loveliness”) and nurses, who were too busy to linger. So it is with relief that she wakes up one day to discover her mother at the foot of her bed. “Hi, Wizzle,” her mother says shyly. It has been years since they last saw each other, after a falling out over Lucy’s husband. But suddenly the recognition of her mother using her pet name makes Lucy “feel warm and liquid-filled, as though all my tension had been a solid thing and now was not.” This sweet but odd visit by her mother dredges up more complicated memories of Lucy’s impoverished and isolated childhood in rural Illinois, with a father who was never quite right after what he saw in the second world war. Lucy managed to escape this deprivation, first through books and then through a scholarship to university, where she met her husband. After her parents ignore her wedding and then barely acknowledge her daughters, her contact with them is reduced to awkward phone calls on holidays. Not even the thrum of the city can displace the ache of loneliness left by her youth. Yet these grievances quietly evaporate in the hospital. For Lucy, the sound of her mother’s voice nattering on with town gossip while she dozes in and out leaves her with an overwhelming feeling of comfort. “I thought: All I want is this.” Of course Lucy is alert to what makes her mother so frustrating, too. How is it that her mother never seems to ask her a single question? Or even pay her a compliment? But the older Lucy narrating this slim and compassionate book is too wise to fan the flames of these disappointments. She knows her mother loved her, albeit imperfectly—(“Because we all love imperfectly.”) And there are times in a grown woman’s life when there are few things more reassuring than a flawed mother’s love.SOMETIMES it really is the little things that count. France faces high unemployment, a divided political establishment and surging xenophobia. But the issue that has the French particularly outraged is an argument about language. Two decades ago the French Academy, a group of 40 greybeards charged with keeping the language pure, decided to reform French spelling. The government took its time with implementing the academy’s decisions. But, starting in the autumn, new school textbooks will at last comply. What has French social media in an uproar? The academy wants to simplify or regularise certain tricky spellings—allowing nénufar for nénuphar (water lily), and ditching a silent “i” in oignon, making it ognon (onion). But one change has symbolised all the others: maîtresse will become maitresse, and many other words will similarly lose the tricky little hat-shaped accent-mark that gives the online protest its name: #JeSuisCirconflexe. It should take something serious to make the French repurpose the hashtag used after the massacre in January 2015 of staff at Charlie Hebdo at the hands of jihadist murderers. But the French who have joined the protest might retort that for them, language is serious indeed: a typical criticism on Twitter read “simplification, glorification of mediocrity, sinking to the lowest common denominator”. The French take linguistic prowess as a proxy for intellectual agility of all kinds. For many “prowess” is a mastery of the complexity (some of it quite pointless) of the written language. The academy was founded in 1635. Official French spelling, which largely reflected its Latin roots, has changed little. But like every other language, the spoken argot has gone on changing. This has left French with many silent letters. The tricky circumflex, which on many words does not change a vowel’s pronunciation, still had to be there. Top French students prize themselves on taking down dictée in much the same way their American counterparts compete in spelling bees. But plenty of ordinary people hate spelling, just as in English. Much of the analysis outside France on the circumflex case has made two related observations. Pointlessly difficult spelling isn’t actually pointless: it shows who has had a fine education. Those howling about mediocrity, under this theory, are really afraid for their expensively acquired status. The second theory is that it is France itself—always closely identified with its language—that is on the decline, and that the need to simplify the spelling just shows that the country isn’t as vigorous as it used to be. Both these analyses are working too hard to put France’s peculiarities on the psychoanalyst’s couch. In fact, a glance across the Rhine shows that the circumflex dead-enders are in good company—with their German neighbours. In the 1990s a government-sponsored commission proposed a few sensible reforms, including simplifying a few spellings, much as France is now doing, and removing the distinctive German “sharp S” (ß) from many words with a short vowel sound. The result was an almighty pushback. Intellectuals such as Günter Grass, a Nobel-prize-winning novelist who, before his death last April, had been a kind of steward of Germany’s post-war moral self, rejected the reform ostentatiously. Springer, a huge publishing house, and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, one of Germany’s main national broadsheets, said they would refuse to observe the reforms. One of the 16 federal states went as far as to hold a referendum against the spelling changes—which passed. (The reforms were slightly modified, and the holdouts gave in in the end.) All this took place in a Germany that was much more at ease with itself than France is today. People just have an irrational attachment to spelling. What they associate with hard but successful work as a child—learning to spell—is more precious than the pointy-headed reformers ever realise. The best analogy outside spelling might be the demoting of Pluto from its status as a planet. Many of those who had hardly bothered to think about the icy rock-ball at the far edge of the solar system suddenly found a childhood memory tarnished, mnemonic devices now featuring a superfluous P at the end. Humans, it seems, are natural conservatives: even if Pluto really isn’t a planet, even if the circumflex really is useless most of the time, it is not about the thing itself. Human beings don’t like going back and rewriting old memories.SHE was a plain, chubby, chain-smoking southern girl, living in a cold-water flat in New York and working as an airline-reservation clerk. He was a paunchy, balding, chain-smoking teacher of semiotics, the study of signs, codes and meanings in language, at various Italian universities. Both enjoyed producing small articles and pastiches, she for the college magazine, he for avant-garde publications, and it was only challenges from friends that induced either to embark on a novel. His first, “The Name of the Rose”, published in 1980, sold 10m copies worldwide. Her first, “To Kill a Mockingbird” (1960), sold more than 40m, and was proclaimed by some to be the best American novel of the 20th century. Umberto Eco rode literary stardom like a plump surfer on a giant laughing wave. Harper Lee was drowned by it. “Mockingbird”, set in fictional Maycomb, Alabama, was a story of racial injustice seen through the clear but innocent eye of a small tomboy, Scout, whose father, Atticus Finch, was given the hopeless task of defending a black man accused of raping a white woman. On the eve of the civil-rights era the novel pricked America’s conscience, and reporters raced to photograph Miss Lee in her home town of Monroeville, Alabama, on the porch and in the courthouse, nervously smiling. The book was assumed to be her life in thin disguise. But in a rare interview in 1961 she said it was all fiction, nothing to do with her “dull” real childhood, and (unspoken but implied) would they please now go away. Mr Eco would have queried that wished-for divide between fact and fiction. It wasn’t as clear-cut as that. The urge to tell stories, weave myths and simply lie lay deep in the possibilities of human language. But if facts could become fables, fables could lead to facts, just as wild medieval tales of lost kingdoms had inspired Europe’s exploration of America. Besides, any novel pretended to be true, and a good “open” text would spur the reader to judge and interpret that truth for himself. “Mockingbird” and “The Name of the Rose” were both essentially whodunnits, and “Who done it?” Mr Eco said, was the fundamental question of all philosophy. His own journey through the labyrinth described an investigation by William of Baskerville and his sidekick, the novice Adso, into a series of gruesome murders in an unnamed abbey in the year 1327. He began with a pleasing idea, that a monk might be poisoned by reading a book, and took it from there, lovingly channelling the Middle Ages and pouring forth everything he knew. Again, though this was fiction, pages covered the theological, philosophical and scientific debates of the time, well-dosed (for those who knew) with his own semiotics in medieval dress. Both he and Miss Lee dealt in sealed-off worlds: Maycomb isolated in cotton fields and quiet red dust; the abbey perched on precipices behind high walls. In suchworlds rumours festered and conspiracy theories proliferated, fed by the feverish interpretation of signs. Both featured places (in the abbey, the library; in Maycomb, the tumbledown Boo Radley house) peopled by shadows and littered with symbols. In the abbey, painted phrases from the Apocalypse beckoned towards horror. In Maycomb, Indian-head pennies left in a tree seemed to do the same. Despite her protests, Miss Lee’s minute evocation of Maycomb—the talcum scent of white women in the humid afternoons, the smell of Hoyt’s Cologne in the blacks’ church—was evidently drawn from childhood. And she had honed her skills of observation afterwards when Truman Capote, a childhood friend, took her along in 1959 to help with the exhaustive forensic interviews in Holcomb, Kansas that became “In Cold Blood”. Mr Eco, who worked from notebooks, index cards, obscure codices and hand-drawn maps, was seldom autobiographical, save for musing on the seductive symbols and myths of fascism with which he had grown up; and save for reflecting that his omnivorous curiosity, his love of lists and lunatic science (“Ptolemy, not Galileo”) and his analysis of every conceivable cultural artefact, from Thomas Mann to Mickey Mouse, from Snoopy to Avicenna, from TV quiz shows to the “Poetics” of Aristotle, had been fed in boyhood by reading Jules Verne. Opening the text Sudden fame encouraged him all the more. He travelled the globe, wrote columns for left-wing newspapers and produced six more novels: one, “Foucault’s Pendulum” (1988), about an all-encompassing conspiracy theory; another, “Baudolino” (2000), about webs of lies. All sold well. In his several residences he amassed a collection of 50,000 books; but he still spent five days a week merrily teaching semiotics in Bologna, partly at the university and partly, till late, in the tavernas of the town. Harper Lee vanished. The second novel would not come, and she retreated to Monroeville. In 2015 the discarded part of “Mockingbird” was published as “Go Set a Watchman”, to tepid reviews. She too, in confused old age, was indifferent to it. But in Bologna one professor might have noted that “Watchman”, in which the noble Atticus suddenly expressed racist opinions, had opened up “Mockingbird” to new and startling interpretations: which surely should encourage the millions who loved it to read it all over again.The London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse hoped it would be third time lucky, as the pair confirmed they were in advanced talks about merging. The London and Frankfurt exchanges tried to integrate in 2000 and 2005, but their overtures were rejected by shareholders. Times have changed since then. Only 10% of the LSE’s and Deutsche Börse’s revenues now come from trading in equities; both have expanded into derivatives, clearing houses and other financial services. See article.  Deposed from office China’s government ousted Xiao Gang as head of the securities regulatory commission for failing to prevent the bubble, or manage the bust, in the country’s stockmarkets, which fell sharply again this week. Mr Xiao’s replacement is Liu Shiyu, the chairman of Agricultural Bank of China and a former deputy governor of the People’s Bank of China. See article.  China, including Hong Kong, has surpassed America as the country with the most dollar billionaires, according to Hurun, a publication, and is home to 568 billionaires compared with America’s 535. The figures for China were based on share prices in January, and take account of tumbling stockmarkets. India came third on the list with 111 billionaires. Britain and Germany were joint fourth with 82 each, followed by Russia on 80. Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, again dampened expectations of an interest-rate rise this year when he told a committee in Parliament that, on the contrary, he wasn’t ruling out cutting the bank’s benchmark rate to zero if the British economy worsened. Focus on Asia A fall in profit in its Asian business helped push HSBC to an $858m quarterly pre-tax loss (pre-tax profit for all of 2015 came in at $19 billion). It also had to put aside money for legal costs as American regulators have now added HSBC to the list of banks they are investigating for employment practices in Asia. Standard Chartered made an annual loss of $2.4 billion, its first since 1989. Saudi Arabia’s oil minister surprised energy markets by reiterating that he would be happy to see oil prices fall to $20 a barrel to squeeze out “inefficient, uneconomic producers”. The minister’s remarks somewhat undermine the kingdom’s pact with Russia to freeze oil production in order to boost prices (though only if other big producers do the same). BHP Billiton joined the list of mining giants to publish dismal earnings on the back of the slump in commodity prices, when it reported a $5.7 billion six-month loss. Andrew Mackenzie, the Anglo-Australian company’s chief executive, said the mining industry was in a “new era” and needed “a different dividend policy to handle that”. BHP duly slashed its dividend by 74%. A proposal that would have seen a Chinese tech company take a stake in an American one fell apart after the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, a government body, said it would open an investigation. The $3.8 billion deal would have given Tsinghua Unigroup, which is linked to Tsinghua University in Beijing, a 15% holding in Western Digital, which is based in Irvine, California. Sharp, a struggling Japanese electronics company, said it had agreed to a takeover from Foxconn, a Taiwanese firm that assembles the iPhone in China. But Foxconn announced a delay to sealing the bid because Sharp had inserted new terms into their agreement. Foxconn had bid for Sharp against a fund backed by the Japanese government. Sysco, an American company that is the world’s largest supplier of catering food, agreed to buy Brakes Group, a food-services firm in Britain with operations in other European countries, in a deal valued at $3.1 billion. Brakes supplies food to pubs as well as hospitals, restaurants and schools. The rhetoric intensified between the FBI and Apple over a legal order to get the company to unlock an iPhone used by one of the attackers in last December’s terrorist attack in California. A Department of Justice filing claimed that Apple’s argument—that unlocking the phone would weaken its encryption protections—was a marketing ploy to strengthen its business model. Tim Cook, Apple’s boss, said that what the FBI was asking it to do was the “software equivalent of cancer”. Last year’s must-have America’s consumer-safety commission deemed that no brand of hoverboard (self-balancing scooters that don’t actually hover) currently on the market is safe. The agency said it had received 52 reports of fires caused by batteries overheating in hoverboards in the past few months, which in two cases caused homes to burn down.More KAL's cartoonsIN A week’s time, the race for the Republican nomination could be all but over. Donald Trump has already won three of the first four contests. On March 1st, Super Tuesday, 12 more states will vote. Mr Trump has a polling lead in all but three of them. Were these polls to translate into results, as they have so far, Mr Trump would not quite be unbeatable. It would still be possible for another candidate to win enough delegates to overtake him. But that would require the front-runner to have a late, spectacular electoral collapse of a kind that has not been seen before. Right now the Republican nomination is his to lose. Worse, it might not stop there. Polls show that 46% of Americans of voting age have a “very unfavourable” opinion of Mr Trump, which suggests his chances of winning a general election are slight. But Mr Trump’s political persona is more flexible than that of any professional politician, which means he can take it in any direction he wants to. And whoever wins the nomination for either party will have a decent chance of becoming America’s next president: the past few elections have been decided by slim margins in a handful of states. When pollsters ask voters to choose in a face-off between Mr Trump and Hillary Clinton, the Democratic front-runner wins by less than three percentage points. Mr Trump would have plenty of time to try to close that gap. An economy that falls back into recession or an indictment for Mrs Clinton might do it for him. That is an appalling prospect. The things Mr Trump has said in this campaign make him unworthy of leading one of the world’s great political parties, let alone America. One way to judge politicians is by whether they appeal to our better natures: Mr Trump has prospered by inciting hatred and violence. He is so unpredictable that the thought of him anywhere near high office is terrifying. He must be stopped. The world according to Trump Because each additional Trumpism seems a bit less shocking than the one before, there is a danger of becoming desensitised to his outbursts. To recap, he has referred to Mexicans crossing the border as rapists; called enthusiastically for the use of torture; hinted that Antonin Scalia, a Supreme Court justice, was murdered; proposed banning all Muslims from visiting America; advocated killing the families of terrorists; and repeated, approvingly, a damaging fiction that a century ago American soldiers in the Philippines dipped their ammunition in pigs’ blood before executing Muslim rebels. At a recent rally he said he would like to punch a protester in the face. This is by no means an exhaustive list. Almost the only policy Mr Trump clearly subscribes to is a fantasy: the construction of a wall along the southern border, paid for by Mexico. What would he do if faced with a crisis in the South China Sea, a terrorist attack in America or another financial meltdown? Nobody has any idea. Mr Trump may be well suited to campaigning in primaries, where voters bear little resemblance to the country as a whole, but it is difficult to imagine any candidate less suited to the consequence of winning a general election, namely governing. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar With each victory, the voices trying to make peace with Mr Trump’s hostile takeover of the Republican Party grow louder. He has already been endorsed by some Republican congressmen. Some on the left point out that he is less conservative on social and economic questions than some of his rivals (while privately hoping the Republicans nominate him so that Mrs Clinton can give him a shellacking). Some on the right argue that Mr Trump is merely playing a role, blowing chilli powder up the nostrils of the politically correct, and that in essence he is a pragmatic New York property developer who likes to cut deals. Were he to win the nomination, their argument runs, he would be privately intimidated and would appoint sensible advisers to whom he would defer. This is wishful thinking by those who want their side to win at any cost. There is nothing in Mr Trump’s career—during which he has maintained close control of the family business he runs, and often acted on instinct—to suggest that he would suddenly metamorphose into a wise chairman, eager to take counsel from seasoned experts. For those who have yet to notice, Mr Trump is not burdened by a lack of confidence in his own opinions. Republican in name only For too long, the first instinct of Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, the leading alternatives to Mr Trump, has been to avoid criticising the front-runner in the hope of winning over his voters later. The primaries may at times resemble a circus, but they also provide a place to test candidates for leadership and courage. So far both men have flunked that test. Republicans need to take Mr Trump on, not stand transfixed by what is happening to their party. More than 60m people voted for Mitt Romney in 2012. A big majority are decent, compassionate, tolerant people who abhor political violence, bigotry and lying. Thoughtful conservatives will be heart-broken if asked to choose in November between a snarling nativist and a Democrat. If The Economist had cast a vote in the Republican primaries in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina or Nevada we would have supported John Kasich. The governor of Ohio has a good mixture of experience, in Congress and in his home state as well as in the private sector. He has also shown bravery, expanding Medicaid in Ohio though he knew it would count against him later with primary voters, as indeed it has. But this is not Mr Kasich’s party any more. Despite his success in New Hampshire, where he came second, Mr Kasich is the preferred choice of less than 10% of Republican voters. If the field remains split as it is now, it is possible for Mr Trump to win with just a plurality of votes. To prevent that, others must drop out. Although we are yet to be convinced by Mr Rubio (see article), he stands a better chance of beating Mr Trump than anyone else. All the other candidates—including Mr Cruz, who wrongly sees himself as the likeliest challenger—should get out of his way. If they decline to do so, it could soon be too late to prevent the party of Abraham Lincoln from being led into a presidential election by Donald Trump.THE battle is joined, at last. David Cameron has called a referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union for June 23rd, promising to campaign hard to stay in. What began as a gambit to hold together his divided Tory party is turning into an alarmingly close contest. Betting markets put the odds that Britons opt to leave at two-to-one; some polls suggest the voters are evenly split; several cabinet ministers are campaigning for Brexit. There is a real chance that in four months’ time Britain could be casting off from Europe’s shores. That would be grave news—and not just for Britain. A vote to leave would damage the economy, certainly in the short term and probably in the long run. (As financial markets woke up to the prospect, the pound this week fell to its lowest level against the dollar since 2009.) It would imperil Britain’s security, when threats from terrorists and foreign powers are at their most severe in years. And far from reclaiming sovereignty, Britons would be forgoing clout, by giving up membership of a powerful club whose actions they can influence better from within than without. Those outside Britain marvelling at this proposed act of self-harm should worry for themselves, too. Brexit would deal a heavy blow to Europe, a continent already on the ropes. It would uncouple the world’s fifth-largest economy from its biggest market, and unmoor the fifth-largest defence spender from its allies. Poorer, less secure and disunited, the new EU would be weaker; the West, reliant on the balancing forces of America and Europe, would be enfeebled, too. Dreams, meet reality The Brexiters’ case is that Britain is held back by Europe: unshackled, it could soar as an open economy that continued to trade with the EU and all round the world. That is possible in theory, but as our briefing (see Briefing) explains, it is not how things would work in practice. At a minimum, the EU would allow full access to its single market only in return for adherence to rules that Eurosceptics are keen to jettison. If Norway and Switzerland (whose arrangements with the EU many Brexiters idolise) are a guide, the union would also demand the free movement of people and a big payment to its budget before allowing unfettered access to the market. Worse, the EU would have a strong incentive to impose a harsh settlement to discourage other countries from leaving. The Brexit camp’s claim that Europe needs Britain more than the other way round is fanciful: the EU takes almost half Britain’s exports, whereas Britain takes less than 10% of the EU’s; and the British trade deficit is mostly with the Germans and Spanish, not with the other 25 countries that would have to agree on a new trade deal. To some Eurosceptics these hardships would be worth it if they meant reclaiming sovereignty from Europe, whose bureaucrats and judges interfere with everything from bankers’ bonuses to working-time limits. Yet the gain would be partly illusory. In a globalised world, power is necessarily pooled and traded: Britain gives up sovereignty in exchange for clout through its memberships of NATO, the IMF and countless other power-sharing, rule-setting institutions. Signing up to treaties on trade, nuclear power or the environment involves submitting to regulations set jointly with foreigners, in return for greater gains. Britain outside the EU would be on the sidelines: notionally independent from, but in fact still constrained by, rules it would have no role in formulating. It would be a purer but rather powerless sort of sovereignty. One exception is immigration, the area over which many Eurosceptics most long for control. Half of Britain’s migrants come from the EU, and there is little the government can do to stop them. If Britain left the union, it could. But doing so would have a double cost. Gaining the right to stop immigration from the EU would almost certainly mean losing full access to the single market. And reducing the numbers of immigrants would hurt Britain’s businesses and public services, which rely on French bankers, Bulgarian builders and Italian doctors. A global concern The longer-term costs would go beyond economics. Brexit might well break up the United Kingdom itself. Scotland, more Europhile than England, is again agitating for a divorce; if Britain decides to leave Europe, then the Scots may at last have a point. Brexit could also dangerously unsettle Northern Ireland, where the peace process over two decades has depended on the fact that both Ireland and Britain are members of the EU. The Irish government is among the most vocal foreign supporters of the campaign for Britain to stay in. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Ireland is not the only country that would suffer. European leaders know Brexit would weaken a club already in deep trouble over such issues as migration and the euro crisis. And Europe would be poorer without Britain’s voice: more dominated by Germany; and, surely, less liberal, more protectionist and more inward-looking. Europe’s links to America would become more tenuous. Above all, the loss of its biggest military power and most significant foreign-policy actor would seriously weaken the EU in the world. The EU has become an increasingly important part of the West’s foreign and security policy, whether it concerns a nuclear deal with Iran, the threat of Islamist terrorism or the imposition of sanctions against Russia. Without Britain, it would be harder for the EU to pull its global weight—a big loss to the West in a troubled neighbourhood, from Russia through Syria to north Africa. It is little wonder that Russia’s Vladimir Putin is keen on Brexit—and that America’s Barack Obama is not. It would be shortsighted for Eurosceptics to be indifferent to this. A weakened Europe would be unambiguously bad for Britain, whose geography, unlike its politics, is fixed. A lot thus rests on the tight race now under way. For those who believe, as this newspaper does, in free trade and freedom of movement, the benefits to Britain of its membership of the EU have never been in much doubt. What more sceptical sorts must now recognise is that Brexit would also weaken Europe and the West. The stakes in Mr Cameron’s great gamble are high; should he fail, the losses would be widely felt.
