AN INDONESIAN trade minister, Rachmat Gobel, once wanted to ban the import of secondhand clothing because, he said, it could transmit the HIVvirus. He also restricted imports of beef to promote the dubious goal of self-sufficiency; the result was not rendang in every pot, but soaring beef prices, butchers’ strikes and protests. Mercifully, Mr Gobel was shown the door last August, and his replacement, Tom Lembong, seems to believe that a country’s trade ministry should facilitate rather than impede free trade. But Mr Gobel’s views remain all too common in Indonesia, and Mr Lembong’s all too rare. The world’s fourth-most populous country is blessed with a natural bounty of coal and oil under ground and, above it, forests and plantations producing rubber and palm oil. But its huge potential in other areas is still unrealised (see our special report in this week’s issue). As with many resource-dependent economies, protectionism and rent-seeking have flourished. The government shields large domestic players at the expense of consumers. In 2007 Indonesia expanded the number of industries in which foreign investment is barred or restricted from 83 to 338, making it South-East Asia’s most hostile country to foreign capital. When commodity prices were high and China was buying, this model appeared to work reasonably well. Indonesia’s economy grew, and if foreign companies wanted what was in Indonesian mines they had to play by Indonesian rules. Now that commodity prices have plummeted, output is sputtering and Indonesia’s weaknesses are apparent. Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president (pictured above), who is widely known as Jokowi, came to power promising reform. He has said a lot of sensible things about boosting infrastructure, reducing subsidies and attracting foreign investment, particularly the sort that brings high-value manufacturing and service jobs. But the kinds of firms that produce these jobs are choosy. If Indonesia does not create the right conditions, they will not invest, and Jokowi’s promise to return Indonesia to 7% growth—a tall order at the best of times—will go unkept. Unfortunately, his record has fallen short of the reformist rhetoric. He got a few big things right after taking office, cutting wasteful fuel subsidies and introducing a one-stop shop for business licensing, which simplified a notoriously Byzantine process. More recently he has trimmed Indonesia’s negative investment list, removing barriers to foreign investors in 30 areas of the economy, including cold storage and warehousing, which should help stabilise food prices and help fishermen sell their catches. The other Jokowi Alas, these reforms have been countered by other policies that smack of the old protectionism. Even as Jokowi lowered some restrictions, he increased barriers to foreign investment in 19 other industries. In July he unveiled a law requiring that at least 30% of components in tablets and smartphones sold in Indonesia should be made in the country—despite lacking the industrial base to produce them. This balance-sheet is not good enough. If Jokowi is to be the man to lead Indonesia to sustained prosperity, he needs to toughen his reformist mettle—and quickly. The to-do list is a long one, starting with slashing the negative-investment list and lifting restrictions on agriculture that keep rice prices high. None of this will be easy in a country where powerful vested interests have ensured that protectionism has predominated for decades. But it is not impossible. Indonesians have shown great bravery in their revolutions for independence and freedom. Now the economy needs to be unchained.CITIES are the world’s economic engines—and the bigger they are, the better. Middle-aged ones like London and New York are booming, and would be doing even better if they were not constrained by green belts, zoning and other NIMBYism. But the real giants are in the emerging world. Fast-growing metropolises like Lagos and Manila, with populations of more than 15m, perform an amazing alchemy by turning poor rural migrants into better-educated, wealthier urbanites. Unfortunately, these engines can barely run. Megacities are seizing up. Surveys of São Paulo suggest that half of all adults spend at least two hours a day travelling. Lagos has such epic traffic jams that an army of street hawkers plies the roads, selling peanuts, Christmas trees and puppies to a captive market of drivers. Last autumn the chairman of Manila’s transport authority was an hour late for a live television interview. He was stuck in traffic, of course (see article). Residents shake their heads and blame corruption, potholes, undisciplined drivers and growing affluence for the jams. They are partly right, especially about the affluence. More urbanites with more money means more wheels on the road: new-car sales in the Philippines jumped by 91% between 2013 and 2015 alone. But the main reason the megacities are stuck is that their governments are doing almost nothing to reduce traffic, and quite a lot to make it worse. Some continue to fix fuel prices at artificially low levels. Others have cut subsidies, although oil prices have been so low that consumers are yet to be convinced that governments will allow costly fuel. And governments favour drivers in other ways. Most megacities have minimum parking rules, which specify how many parking spaces must be provided whenever a new shop, office or block of flats is built. Lagos insists on one parking space for every 40 square metres of “worshipping area” in a church. These laws greatly encourage driving and, in effect, impose a tax on non-drivers, because businesses pass on the cost of building the spaces to all their customers. Even megacities that try to force drivers out of their cars often achieve the opposite. The modish method, which is used to tackle air pollution as well as traffic, is to ban cars from the roads on specific days, determined by the last digit of their number plates. Beijing was an early adopter. Delhi tested an odd-even scheme in January and will have another go in the spring. But the history of these schemes, in Mexico City and elsewhere, suggests that they do not cut traffic for long. Instead they are a boon to carmakers: any family that can afford it simply buys a second car with a different number plate. Inching forward Many big cities are now building “rapid bus” networks, with dedicated lanes. If well designed, these are a cheap, effective form of public transport. But governments that invest in public transport while retaining the inducements to drive are mostly wasting their money. Ideally, all would follow London, Singapore and Stockholm in charging drivers to move around the city at congested times. But cutting subsidies would be a good start. So hats off to the great cities of Latin America, which are doing more than those in Africa or Asia to reform. São Paulo has abolished parking minimums; Mexico City has quietly allowed its number-plate scheme to fade, while building a large rapid-bus network. These cities are still stuck, but the road ahead is clearing.CITIZENS have a right to both security and privacy. The difficulties arise when these two rights are in conflict, as they now are in the battle between the world’s most valuable company and its most famous law-enforcement agency. Apple has refused to comply with a court order to help the FBI unlock an iPhone used by Syed Farook, one of the terrorists involved in the San Bernardino shootings in December. The company says the government’s request fundamentally compromises the privacy of its users; the feds say that Apple’s defiance jeopardises the safety of Americans (see article). Some frame the stand-off in terms of the rule of law: Apple cannot pick and choose which rules it will obey, they say. That is both true and beside the point. The firm has the right to appeal against a court order; if it eventually loses the legal battle, it will have to comply. The real question is whether Apple’s substantive arguments are right. That hinges on two issues. The first is whether the FBI’s request sets a precedent. The law-enforcers say not. This is not an attempt to build a generic flaw in Apple’s encryption, through which government can walk as needed. It is a request to unlock a specific device, akin to wiretapping a single phone line. The phone belonged to a government department, not Farook. Apple and other tech firms regularly co-operate with the authorities on criminal cases; this is no different. Yet Apple is being asked to do something new: to write a piece of software that does not currently exist in order to sidestep an iPhone feature that erases data after ten unsuccessful password attempts. Later models of the iPhone than the one Farook used are harder to compromise in this way. But if the court’s ruling is upheld, it signals that companies can be compelled by the state to write new operating instructions for their devices. That breaks new ground. The second issue is whether that precedent is justified. And that entails a judgment on whether security would be enhanced or weakened by Apple’s compliance. In the short term, the answer is that security will be enhanced. Farook was a terrorist; his phone is the only one being unlocked; and the device might give up the identity of other malefactors. But in the longer term, things are much fuzzier. Security does not just mean protecting people from terrorism, but also warding off the threat of rogue espionage agencies, cybercriminals and enemy governments. If Apple writes a new piece of software that could circumvent its password systems on one phone, that software could fall into the hands of hackers and be modified to unlock other devices. If the capability to unlock iPhones exists, so will the temptation for the authorities to use it repeatedly. And if tech firms are forced to comply with this sort of request in America, it is harder for anyone to argue against similar demands from more repressive governments, such as China’s. This newspaper has long argued against cryptographic backdoors and skeleton keys on these grounds. It is possible to imagine a scenario that might override such concerns: if information is needed to avert a specific and imminent threat to many lives, for example. But in this instance, Apple’s case is the stronger. Core arguments This battle presages others. If the courts rule against Apple, it will work to make its devices so secure that they cannot be overridden by any updates. In that event (or, indeed, if the tech firm wins the Farook case), legislators will be tempted to mandate backdoor access via the statute book. If Tim Cook, Apple’s boss, is not to hasten the outcome he wishes to avoid, he must lay out the safeguards that would have persuaded the firm to accede to the FBI’s request. Tech firms are at the centre of a vital policy debate (see article). Apple has rejected the authorities’ solution. Now it must propose its own.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Let them in Britain should be rolling out the red carpet for the best and brightest foreign students (“Train ’em up. Kick ’em out”, January 30th). The country’s global status in science and innovation is built on the creativity that is sparked when people from different cultures collaborate. What do Ernst Chain, Andre Geim and Venkatraman Ramakrishnan have in common, apart from their Nobel prizes? They were all welcomed to Britain from abroad: a world without their pioneering work at British universities on penicillin, graphene and ribosomes would be a much poorer one. Foreign students propelled Silicon Valley and now they drive innovation and entrepreneurship in Britain. If we turned our backs on international students, Britain’s economy and society would lose. The cost to the world would be incalculable. ALICE GAST Your article explores the many arguments for opening the doors of colleges and societies to international students (“Brains without borders”, January 30th). There are many benefits. It can lower costs to host societies in interactions with global communities—as foreign students learn English, America and Britain have to train fewer people in foreign languages to do business with the world. As professionals, the skills and systems learned as international students, such as accounting and logistics management, can be transferred to their home countries. Also, when firms from the host country go overseas, foreign students who have returned home are potentially superior recruits because of their knowledge of the language and culture of the employer. Additionally host universities could tap foreign-born alumni for big endowments. ANNY WONG   The origin of species Your article on the origins of the Trump family (“Kallstadt’s king”, February 13th) missed an important event in the story of the young Friedrich Trump. You had him arriving in America and eventually making his financial “nest-egg” in Washington state before returning to Germany. In fact, he, like so many others in 1897, was caught up in the Klondike Gold Rush. He sold his business in Seattle and joined the thousands who travelled by steamer to Dyea and carried supplies over the Chilkoot Pass to the Klondike. Along the way he opened a canteen for hungry miners, and he set up a hotel and restaurant in Bennett and Whitehorse. Mr Trump ran a fine eatery but the bulk of the profits came from liquor and sex (normal for hotels in that area). He was shrewd enough to know that the real money was in “mining the miners”, which is essentially still what the Trump business does today. He left the Yukon after three years when the Mounties began to tighten up on gambling and prostitution and returned to Germany with $582,000 in today’s money: the source of the future Trump property fortune. Donald Trump owes other things to Canada too. His first wife, Ivana, lived there before moving to New York. ROBERT HOLMES Promoting the economy *“Grossly Deceptive Plans” (January 30th) raised the point about local officials in China who are promoted for boosting GDP growth. Local officials often lack the knowledge or capacity to develop and implement polices that achieve the targets set by central government. As in other countries, China’s local officials do not always understand the complicated relationship between social, environmental or poverty alleviation policies. In some cases, gains in one area can be undermined by actions in another. Filling in the gaps What to do about Confederate monuments? One suggestion as you reported is to add plaques to them explaining their background (“Recast in stone”, February 6th). Statues and monuments are immediately visual experiences, not reflective mental experiences. Remove the sabre from the hand and put into it a lash and from the other hand a chain that leads to a collar around the neck of some poor miserable wretch. Add one or more statues of slaves to every monument to the Confederacy and the viewer will immediately and viscerally understand what the civil war was about and what Confederate soldiers fought for. Instantly those men will be deprived of the patina of nobility and gallantry that they did not earn and do not deserve to have attributed to them. STEPHEN MERRIMAN Nothing personal Although you get much right about the need to simplify tax reliefs (“Spaghetti Junction”, February 13th), your praise for the personal allowance for income tax is undeserved. Far from being a “simple and progressive policy”, continued increases in the allowance primarily benefit the top half of the income distribution, with the lowest-paid 20% of workers not benefiting at all. To prevent the policy being even more regressive, it is also withdrawn at £100,000 ($140,000) further complicating the tax code. If you envisage tax relief as public spending, it is a hugely inefficient and wasteful policy compared with other options. The £86 billion that HMRC loses in the personal allowance is almost triple the £30 billion it spends on the entire tax-credit system, which does much more to improve the finances of the low paid, and incentivise work. A first step to creating a better system would be to stop increasing the personal allowance and spend the money on reducing the withdrawal rates of social-security benefits, so that the lowest paid keep more of what they earn. DUNCAN EXLEY * In your article about the government’s fiscal policy you suggest that the value of the British film tax relief to the British economy is unclear. However, figures on actual film production spend in Britain on production facilities, locations and jobs published by the British Film Institute (BFI) are crystal clear. They show that over £1.4 billion ($1.9 billion) was contributed to Britain’s economy last year alone and over £10 billion since the film tax relief was introduced in 2007. HMRC’s own published statistics state that £1.5 billion has been paid out through the film tax relief directly to film producers since 2007. The film tax relief has been a key factor in enabling the British film industry to achieve a leading position in a global industry making films that people in Britain and around the world want to see. TINA McFARLING Linguists unite The return of the Johnson language column to the print edition is a wonderful offer to your readers (“What would the doctor prescribe?”, January 30th). As a bilingual who has always been fascinated by words, reading such a column is always a pleasure to me. In this digital age of instant messaging where words are contracted and defaced beyond recognition, engaging in some lexicographic exercises has advantages. It will allow us to pause and think about the most important tool of the human race—language. Our casual attitude toward the improper usage of words and phrases, which I also notice in my own native tongue, Amharic, the national language of Ethiopia, is developing a culture of carelessness that is reflected in our written and spoken communications. I hope your fortnightly column will continue to raise issues that are relevant to the predicaments that the world’s languages face at present. TEWODROS ABEBE Order, order The Republican-controlled Senate will probably deprive Barack Obama of the opportunity to appoint a new Supreme Court justice (“Courting controversy”, February 20th). But the Democrats could have the last word. Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders should pledge, prior to the election, that they will appoint Mr Obama to the Supreme Court if they win the presidential election. Mr Obama is brilliant, has the experience of dealing with constitutional-law matters, and he wouldn’t be the first former president to be appointed to the Supreme Court. PAUL FEINER * Letters appear online onlyTHE referendum on Britain’s membership of the European Union that David Cameron has called for June 23rd will be not only the most crucial event in this parliament but the most important in Europe in years. It will determine the prime minister’s future, for a start: it is hard to see him staying in office if he fails to win his campaign to remain in the EU. It may be decisive for the future of the United Kingdom, as Scottish Nationalists have said a Brexit would trigger another vote on Scottish independence. And the departure of one of the heavyweight members would have a huge impact on the future of the EU. The referendum was called after Mr Cameron completed his promised renegotiation of the terms of Britain’s membership at a marathon EU summit in Brussels that ended late on February 19th. In all four areas where he demanded change, he won concessions that could prove useful, even if they do little to swing the result of the referendum (see article). Yet it is hard to portray these relatively small reforms as the fundamental change in Britain’s relationship with Europe that Mr Cameron once promised. Nor did he secure the “full-on” treaty change he once said he needed. As a result, his deal suffered a predictable trashing in Britain’s Eurosceptic press and from many backbench Tory MPs. This was a blow to Mr Cameron. But the referendum will be decided not on the details of his deal but on the far bigger issue of whether voters believe that Britain is better off in or out of the EU. On this, a heavier blow for the prime minister came when six of his 29 senior ministers confirmed, after a special cabinet meeting on February 20th, that they would campaign to leave. Besides such usual suspects as Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, their number included Michael Gove, the justice secretary and a close friend of the prime minister. And on February 21st came the biggest setback to Mr Cameron, when Boris Johnson, the popular mayor of London and aspirant to the Tory leadership, announced that he too would campaign to leave (see article). Even before these leading Tories had come out, opinion polls suggested the outcome of the referendum would be close. Since Mr Cameron first promised an in/out referendum in a speech at the London office of the Bloomberg news agency in January 2013, there has usually been a clear lead for staying in (see chart 1). As worries have grown over Europe’s economic woes and its migration crisis, the gap has narrowed. The adverse reception of Mr Cameron’s Brussels deal and the decision of Mr Johnson to throw his weight behind the leave campaign may shift opinion further. Belatedly business and the financial markets have woken up to the rising danger of Brexit. This week sterling slid to its lowest level against the dollar in eight years. Bosses of many of the biggest companies in Britain have come out strongly in favour of remaining in. Yet the chances that Brexit may happen look greater than at any time in the past five years. And that makes it worth dwelling on what Brexit would entail—and how it measures up to the promises of would-be leavers. An infernal article The merits of the claims of the leavers are hard to judge because nobody can be sure what relationship a departing Britain would have with the EU. There is no precedent aside from Greenland. It left the club in 1985, but it is tiny and remains a dependency of Denmark, which is still in the EU. The assumption, now confirmed by Mr Cameron, is that a vote for Brexit would trigger an application to withdraw under article 50 of the Lisbon treaty. Article 50 provides that the EU will negotiate a new agreement with the withdrawing country over two years. That can be extended, but only by unanimous agreement. The article also specifies that, when agreeing a new deal, the EU acts without the involvement of the country that is leaving. To get a feel for the negotiating dynamic, imagine a divorce demanded unilaterally by one partner, the terms of which are fixed unilaterally by the other. It is a process that is likely to be neither harmonious nor quick—nor to yield a result that is favourable to Britain. Indeed, the incentive for other EU countries is not to act with generosity. A decision to leave will be seen by many as a hostile and destabilising act for a union that is already in deep trouble. Voters across Europe are disillusioned with Brussels. Populist parties in France, the Netherlands, Italy and elsewhere are watching the Brexit debate closely. The EU will be desperate to show that a decision to leave does not have a painless outcome. The immediate effects of a Brexit vote are likely to be bad. Prolonged uncertainty over Britain’s new relationship with the EU will discourage investment, especially foreign direct investment, of which Britain is the biggest net recipient in the EU. This is particularly worrying for a country with a large current-account deficit that must be financed by capital inflows. Fears about the current account, Britain’s credit rating and Brexit have been drivers of the pound’s recent fall (see chart 2). The longer-term effects of Brexit are also likely to be adverse. Most studies suggest that economic growth would suffer. A detailed analysis from the Bank of England in October found that EU membership had benefited the British economy. Attempts to model the consequences of Brexit point to economic damage. Two American banks, Goldman Sachs and Citigroup, recently warned that growth and the pound would fall further after a vote to leave the EU. The trickiest issue for a post-Brexit Britain would be how to maintain full access to the EU’s single market, the world’s biggest. This is crucial since almost half Britain’s exports go to the rest of the EU. It matters greatly for the fastest-growing component of exports, services (including financial services). It will not be simple. Norway and Iceland have access to the single market through their membership of the European Economic Area (EEA). But they are obliged to observe all the EU’s single-market regulations without having a say in them, to make payments into the EU budget (in Norway’s case, around 90% of Britain’s net payment per head) and to accept free movement of EU migrants. As a Norwegian minister once put it, “if you want to run Europe, you must be in Europe. If you want to be run by Europe, feel free to join Norway.” Switzerland, which is not in the EEA, has negotiated bilateral agreements that give access for goods but not most services. It has to keep to most single-market rules, contribute to the budget and accept free movement of people. The Swiss have been warned that, if they try to implement a 2014 referendum demand for limits on the latter, their trade agreement with the EU will lapse. Countries such as South Korea and, now, Canada, have free-trade deals with the EU that do not require observing all its rules, paying into the budget or accepting migrants. But such deals do not circumvent non-tariff barriers, nor do they cover financial services. Moreover, the EU has or is negotiating free-trade deals with America, China and India, from which a post-Brexit Britain would be excluded. The EU has 53 such deals. Britain would have to try to replicate them, a huge challenge given its lack of trade negotiators and the length of time even simple trade talks take. Heading for the Brexit The Brexit lobby responds with three arguments. The first is to assert that both sides have a strong interest in a free-trade deal. This is true but any deal is unlikely to cover services. The second is to claim that, because Britain runs a big trade deficit with other EU countries, they need the British market more than Britain needs theirs. This is a fallacy: Britain accounts for only 10% of EU exports, while the EU takes almost half of Britain’s. Moreover, most of the British trade deficit with the EU is with just two countries, Germany and Spain—yet a trade agreement must be endorsed by the other 25 members too. The third argument is that a post-Brexit Britain could strike new free-trade deals swiftly. Yet experienced trade diplomats are doubtful. Tough negotiators like the South Koreans are unlikely to offer Britain the same deal they gave the EU. America, China and India have made clear that they would be more interested in a deal with the EU than one with Britain alone. When it comes to opening China to more trade, say, the negotiating clout of the world’s biggest market far outweighs Britain’s alone. The next issue is regulation. The leave campaign claims that EU red tape hobbles Britain’s firms and strangles growth. Yet studies by the OECD, a rich-country club, find that, despite being in the EU, Britain’s product and labour markets are among the rich world’s least regulated. Moreover, a post-Brexit bonfire of market-unfriendly rules is fanciful. Britain led the charge for environmental rules, for example. The biggest interventions in the market, such as tight planning laws and a new living wage that will reach £9 ($13) an hour by 2020, are home-grown. Immigration policy, on the other hand, would surely change post-Brexit. Although libertarians who want to leave favour more, not less migration, most Brexiters do not. Indeed, the big selling-point of their campaign is to restore British control of the frontiers by stopping free movement of people. It will be hard to do this and keep full access to the EU’s single market; it may also compromise the position of 2m British citizens who live in other EU countries. But the bigger point is that immigration curbs would do economic damage. Studies find that immigrants are net contributors to the economy because they pay far more in taxes than they take out in benefits. Brexit would also have implications for the survival of the United Kingdom. The Scottish National Party is campaigning to stay in. If the leave side wins thanks to English votes, which is quite possible, the SNP will demand another independence referendum, which it expects to win. Northern Ireland is also troubled by Brexit: Britain’s economic, trade and political relations with Ireland depend heavily on both belonging to the EU. This helped underpin the peace process in Northern Ireland. Then there are the implications for the EU’s place in the world. As opinion polls have shown, voters in other EU countries agree with their governments in wanting Britain to stay in. Besides its size, global reach and free-trade instincts, Britain is a useful counter to the dominance of Germany and France. And, as the biggest military power in the EU, it is central to the club’s foreign-policy and security clout. Less clout if it’s out The growing role of the EU in global diplomacy, ranging from the imposition of sanctions on Russia through a nuclear-weapons deal with Iran to action against piracy off Somalia, would be severely diminished were Britain no longer in the club. The fight against terrorism would also be harder. It may be possible to try to replicate the police, security-service and judicial co-operation built up within the EU to fight terrorism, but it would take time and might not work as well. Brexiters answer that NATO, not the EU, is the guarantor of the West’s security. A post-Brexit Britain could still co-operate with the EU on security issues, including the European arrest warrant and exchanges of information. They also see no reason why leaving the EU should upset either Northern Ireland or the union with Scotland. Mr Cameron disagrees. In Brussels he said firmly that Britain would be safer and stronger, not just more prosperous, in the EU. In the coming weeks, he will make domestic and national security a large part of the argument for remaining in. The strongest argument for Brexit is that it is the only way to restore sovereignty to Parliament and escape the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice. Mr Cameron’s plan to counter this with an act that reasserts parliamentary sovereignty will not convince many, for the ECJ would still stand supreme. In a world with a network of international treaties and obligations, sovereignty is not a completely binary matter; as Mr Cameron put it this week, it would be possible to regain the illusion of sovereignty but without real power. The conclusion is that the purported benefits from Brexit are uncertain and may prove illusory, while the risks are much greater if voters choose to leave. Similar sentiments led Britons to vote to stay in the European project in 1975, and Scots to remain in the union in 2014. And yet the outcome in June seems more uncertain. That is partly because the leave side has had a good few weeks. But it is also because voters will be influenced not by a cool calculation of costs and benefits but by their general view of Europe. And in the midst of a huge refugee crisis and stuck in the economic doldrums, Europe does not look inviting. Referendums are always unpredictable: a sudden shock in the markets, or even a terrorist incident, could swing voters. There is all to play for.Have they made Cameron feel special? AFTER 48 hours of hard bargaining and little sleep David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, emerged from a summit meeting of European leaders at midnight on February 19th to announce a deal on his four demands for reforms to the European Union. Donald Tusk, the European Council president, declared the creation of a “special status” for Britain. Whether it will count for much in the referendum is much less certain. Agreement came most easily on competitiveness and the promise of more free-trade deals, to which all EU countries pay lip service, even when obstructing them in practice. Mr Cameron’s demands on sovereignty were harder to settle. All agreed to give the EU’s 28 national parliaments a “red card” whereby support from 55% of them could block EU laws. But several leaders were hostile to Mr Cameron’s insistence on an exemption for Britain from the EU’s goal of “ever closer union”. He won it by what he called a “live and let live” approach: Britain will not impede others’ desire for deeper integration so long as it can opt out. The most important change Mr Cameron wanted was a guarantee that the bigger euro-zone block could not gang up on non-euro countries. The 19-strong euro area, with votes weighted according to the size of countries, now has the power to legislate for the entire EU. He has secured agreement for enhanced observer status for non-euro countries in euro-zone meetings and an understanding that a non-euro country can appeal to an EU summit if it objects to decisions taken at such meetings. The most heated argument came over Mr Cameron’s desire to stop new EU migrants to Britain from claiming in-work benefits for four years, and to cut the level of benefits paid for children whom they have left in their home countries. As a compromise, he secured an “emergency brake” that will let Britain delay paying benefits for a seven-year period and cut child benefits for existing migrants after 2020. East Europeans are unhappy with these changes. Yet they seem unlikely to reduce the numbers of EU migrants, since most come to Britain to work, not to claim benefits. Mr Cameron insists his changes are legally binding and irreversible. But though promises were made to change the treaties in future and the European Parliament said it would help with legislation, some may still be challenged either politically or in the European Court of Justice. One proposal he was, however, happy to accept: that if Britons vote for Brexit, the entire deal will lapse. This is meant to bolster Mr Cameron’s insistence that a vote to leave is just that—and not as Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, suggests, merely a prelude to getting a better deal from Brussels.HIS father Mario, a struggling bartender; Oriales, a hotel maid and devoted mother; Pedro, his garrulous, cigar-smoking grandfather, known to the grandchildren as Papá; an elder brother, also Mario, who became a Green Beret: the supporting cast in Marco Rubio’s back-story is a technicolour pageant of striving Cuban immigrants turned patriotic Americans. If Mr Rubio somehow manages to seize the Republican nomination from Donald Trump—a feat he seems best-placed to achieve—Americans will hear his story often. But what, exactly, is its moral? In Mr Rubio’s telling, his biography is a fable of America, which “changed the history of my family”. In no other country could someone who, as a child, was taken by his father to ogle the dreamlike mansions of the rich, rise to the Senate, and possibly beyond. It follows that America must not forsake its rugged individualism: “We don’t want to become like the rest of the world,” Mr Rubio insists, delighting his many fellow exceptionalists. It is also, of course, a story about Mr Rubio’s own exceptionalism—as some voters, knowing American meritocracy is often more promise than reality, intuitively understand. “It’s really cool,” said a young man cradling a baby after a rally in Rock Hill, South Carolina, “that he could navigate through all these obstacles—it wasn’t just handed to him on a silver platter.” The contrast with some other candidates, privileged in money, schooling or connections, is plain. As for his difficulties with mortgage payments and ill-advised property dealings, which some have used against him: Mr Rubio adduces them, like his student debt and rueful talk of post-dating cheques in pinched times, as yet more evidence that he alone can “talk to people who are living the way I grew up”. With its hardscrabble, Everyman beginning, the tale also has a gratifyingly upbeat pay-off, featuring a photogenic family—his student-sweetheart wife is a former Miami Dolphins cheerleader—as well as success. And, as no other candidate could, Mr Rubio recounts all this as insinuatingly as a Hollywood weepie. Were he not a politician, it has been said, he could have been a televangelist; he might also have made it as a stand-up comic. His scripted jokes are actually funny, and, contrary to the impression created by his robotronic malfunction in the Republican debate in New Hampshire, he ad-libs with an easy charm. He explains complex subjects, such as the national debt, persuasively. He likes hip-hop. These attributes bolster his claim that, in a field of Republican gargoyles, he is the likeliest to prevail in November. Yet the longer he remains in the race, the louder two key criticisms will become. They seem contradictory, but both contain elements of truth. One is that, beneath the altar-boy haircut, winning smile, chirpy voice and banter about football, Mr Rubio is as ideologically extreme as anyone in the contest. The other is that the feel-good narrative masks a void. “Marco Rubio”, Jeb Bush once said, “makes me cry,” a remark that would have been prophetic had he not added “for joy”. Mr Bush was Florida’s governor during Mr Rubio’s lightning rise through its House of Representatives, from whip, to majority leader, to become, at 34 (he is now 44), its first Cuban-American Speaker. Alongside the portraits of his more grizzled predecessors in the capitol in Tallahassee, his is startlingly boyish. Mr Bush presented him with a sword, symbolising conservatism; at least, that is what it symbolised then. The pollster in the sky Strikingly, in the face-off that ended with Mr Bush’s withdrawal on February 20th—which, in a saner primary season, might have been the headline drama—most of Florida’s Republican establishment lined up behind the former governor. “They all went in one direction like fish in a tank,” says Johnnie Byrd, a previous Florida Speaker and among the minority who favoured Mr Rubio. Gratitude for Mr Bush’s patronage helps explain the preference; some “Jebbies” may just have jumped too early. But it also reflects a sense, even among the operators in Tallahassee, that the younger man’s breakneck ambition was offputting. Dwelling on polls, fundraising, the mechanics of the game, Mr Rubio’s memoir, “An American Son”, reinforces the image of a pure politician. “Did God read polls?” he asks when, during his long-shot bid for the Senate in 2010, his wife tells him to trust the Almighty. Both the resentment, and the air of weightless ambition, have been reinforced by his luck. For if Mr Rubio could not rely on a parental Rolodex, as he puts it, his career has been blessed in other ways: seats opening up at serendipitous moments, money and well-paid jobs magically materialising. Norman Braman, a Miami car-dealing tycoon, took a lucrative shine to him, donating generously and employing his wife. Not long after he secured the Florida Speakership, Mr Rubio landed a $300,000-a-year post at a politically connected legal firm (he once specialised in land-use law). Some of his jobs were not terribly demanding, suggesting, to his critics, a pattern of absenteeism stretching to his poor attendance record in the Senate. “He’s just like Barack Obama,” worried a woman in Florence, where Tim Scott, a South Carolinian senator, whooped Mr Rubio onto the stage like a boxing announcer. The implicit concern is that he has more offices to his name than achievements, or, some say, principles. They point, above all, to his gymnastics over immigration: running for the Senate, he opposed a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants, then embraced it as part of a doomed reform in 2013; now, in the xenophobic heat of the campaign, he downplays that idea, arguing that terrorism has upended even unrelated aspects of his policy. (This revision could forfeit some of the Hispanic votes that Republican apparatchiks covet—though given the tensions between Hispanic communities, confidence that he would deliver them may be naive.) Still, anyone who thinks Mr Rubio entirely devoid of convictions should watch his farewell speech in Tallahassee in 2008. “God is real,” Mr Rubio passionately declared: “He loves you...whether you are an embryo or behind bars.” God’s providence, and Mr Rubio’s gratitude for it, often feature in his story. His faith is longstanding: as a boy, he would don a sheet after mass and pretend to be a priest. (It is also ecumenical: in Miami, he attends both Catholic and Baptist churches, and during a childhood spell in Las Vegas went to a Mormon one.) And for all his pole-climbing, his philosophy has been consistent. A better reading of his flip-flop-flip on immigration may be that his liberal stance was an anomaly. His tougher line today—no Syrian refugees; fewer family-reunion visas—fits into anultraconservative outlook that his story has sometimes camouflaged. Smile and smile and be a Tea Partier A standard critique of Republican strategy is that it exploits social issues to divide and distract groups whose economic interests lie in more redistributive government. Mr Rubio’s tactic, alleges an old adversary from his days in Florida politics, is to “use [his background] as a shield to push forward his agenda”. Or, as Mr Rubio writes of Mr Obama in his memoir: “His personality and language gave an impression of moderation, but his ideas and voting record” revealed a zealot. Take his avowed commitment to helping the little guy. He acknowledges the alienation some members of minorities feel, drawing on his own experiences in cosmopolitan Miami. He speaks warmly of early intervention for disadvantaged toddlers, and of leniency towards mildly straying youngsters. He can be insightful about America’s precarious place in a globalised, post-industrial economy. But when it comes to taxation, his priorities lie elsewhere. One of his favourite lines is that the poor are not made richer by making the rich poorer. Under his plans there is no fear of that: his proposal to scrap taxes on capital-gains and dividends would instead make the rich richer. The exigencies of the primaries have sharpened Mr Rubio’s tone. But, in content, he is a veteran hardliner. Dan Gelber, formerly the Democratic minority leader in the Florida house, calls him “the best spokesman that the severe right-wing could ever hope for” (adding that he “was never dishonest or disreputable”). Indeed, while Mr Rubio is more clubbable than his fire-breathing rival Ted Cruz—witness his ongoing stream of endorsements from congressmen and governors—he and Mr Cruz, another Cuban immigrant’s son and devout first-term senator, have more in common than either cares to admit. An elegant weapon for a more civilised age For example, though Mr Rubio doesn’t deny climate change, as Mr Cruz does, he says, in effect, that America shouldn’t do much about it. He claims gun controls fail wherever they are tried. Like Mr Cruz he wants to abolish the Department of Education; ditto, naturally, Obamacare. He opposes abortion unless the mother’s life is endangered. He wants the legalisation of gay marriage to be reversed. His upbringing shaped his global outlook as well as his morality. His focus on foreign affairs may partly be designed to imbue his youthfulness with gravitas. But it can also be traced to the entrepôt of Miami-Dade, which, quips Mr Gelber, may be the only county with a foreign policy. What he somewhat prematurely calls “the Rubio doctrine” reflects the congenital neoconservatism of many exiles: he may not be quite as hawkish as his revered Papá, who thought Margaret Thatcher should invade Argentina as well as the Falklands, but he comes close. He says he would cancel the nuclear deal with Iran on his first day in office, and undo the normalisation of relations with Cuba. He wants to send troops into Syria, and take on Bashar al-Assad and Islamic State at once. He threatens to pack off more terrorists to Guantánamo. The final chapter “Just because someone is wrong,” Mr Rubio says, “doesn’t mean they are bad.” Wrong is wrong, however, and, beyond the politesse, he shows little appetite for compromise on the neuralgic issues that will continue to divide America under its next president. That might hamstring him in the White House; more immediately, it might prevent him reaching it. His well-honed formula—robust conservatism with a smile—will attract some voters who share his instincts but are repelled by harsher rhetoric. Whether it can convert moderates in sufficient numbers is unclear. That is where the story comes in. “It makes him a whole person, a real person,” said a supporter in a barn in Gilbert, as the obligatory country music rolled. Transmuting astringent economics into compassion, promising tolerance without a cost, wreathing jeremiads in sunshine, the story might even do the trick. Mr Rubio’s inauguration is the climax its logic demands. In the end, its meaning is simple. The moral of the story is its teller, Marco Rubio.It doesn’t stay in Vegas MANNING the front desk of the Trump Hotel, where the gold wallpaper and drinking fountains match the building’s mirrored-gold exterior, Gabriel said he would leave work early to vote for his boss at the Republican caucuses on February 23rd. Nataly, who was standing at the entrance of the restaurant on the ground floor to welcome diners, said she didn’t even know that the caucuses were taking place, though in the morning she had glimpsed the blond chevelure of Donald Trump himself, who sometimes stays in his hotel. An unrepresentative survey of staff members at Mr Trump’s five-star extravaganza, each of them of Hispanic extraction, reveals that Mr Trump put no pressure, however subtle, on his employees to vote for him. He possibly felt he had no need to. A member of the Trump team, who was sitting by the hotel pool in a blue T-shirt emblazoned with the Trump campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again”, was so confident about the outcome of the vote that she explained matter-of-factly that Mr Trump would speak just after his victory was announced, and that the victory party would be held in the ballroom of Treasure Island, a gargantuan hotel next door which is fronted by two life-size pirate ships. After winning the South Carolina primary by around ten percentage points and Nevada by more than 20, Mr Trump looks almost unstoppable. Next comes Super Tuesday, on March 1st, when about a dozen states award delegates. To secure the nomination, a candidate needs to win 1,237 delegates. By March 2nd, half that number will have been awarded. There follow a handful of big winner-take-all states, where all the delegates go to the candidate with the most votes (the states that vote on Super Tuesday award delegates proportionally). Florida, on March 15th, could be the moment of Mr Trump’s coronation. He has a sturdy lead in the polls there. The best chance of beating him would be if all but one candidate were to drop out. But which one? Ted Cruz is the only other candidate to have won a contest, and is expecting to do well in Texas and Arkansas. Marco Rubio has come second in the past two contests; John Kasich came second in New Hampshire. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar At the Trump victory party in Las Vegas, the candidate, flanked by two of his sons, Eric and Donald junior, started his speech graciously, thanking everyone involved. He then promised to “get greedy for the United States” and “grab and grab and grab”, as he has done in his business career. Mr Trump reiterated his promise to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it. “They will be thrilled to be paying for the wall,” he said (rather puzzlingly, exit polls suggested that Mr Trump won a healthy 44% of the 6,000 votes cast by Hispanics in the caucus). The list of things he said he loved included “the poorly educated”, the Second Amendment, Liberty University in Virginia, which was founded by Jerry Falwell, a televangelist, and “the evangelicals”. He promised to keep Guantánamo open and “load it up with bad dudes”. Reports of confusion and chaos at caucus sites in Nevada circulated throughout the early evening. At the Ed W. Clark high school, one of the sites in central Las Vegas, proceedings were organised, if casual. Volunteers wore T-shirts or sweatshirts with Trump campaign logos, which seemed odd for a task requiring impartiality. Almost everyone agreed that Mr Trump would win. Many of his supporters were moderate and thoughtful. Bruce Bongardt, a volunteer who used to be an independent, explained that he likes many of the things Hillary Clinton says, but believes that America now needs someone with “a bit of a harder edge”. Mr Bongardt thought Mr Trump would probably back away from extremist views once he wins. He may not have to wait long to find out.A day is a long time...“Well I like the mandate. OK…I don’t want people dying on the streets.” …in politics“I was asked about health care…and have been consistent—I will repeal all of Obamacare, including the mandate.” Girls gone wild“A lot of people think…we’re just hookers and all we know is how to have sex and we don’t know anything about politics. But that’s not true.” Thin skin“Donald Trump is a very nice person.” Manners maketh man“I wouldn’t go that far, sir.” Go north, young man“Hi Americans! Donald Trump may become the president of your country! If …you decide to get the hell out… might I suggest moving to Cape Breton Island!” The meaning of “is”“You’re asking me to say, have I ever [lied]? I don’t believe I ever have...I don’t believe I ever will.” It’s the journey“I don’t know if my purpose is to be president. My purpose is to be out here doing what I think I need to be doing…It doesn’t matter the size of the crusade. It’s the fact that you are in a crusade.” Born free“I’ve never breathed a breath of air on this planet when I was not a US citizen. It was the act of being born that made me a US citizen.” Money pitBen Carson has spent $795 per vote, Jeb Bush $368, Mr Trump $64. Faint praise“He’s one of my four favourite sons.” Presidential plumbing“The vegan diet is what I like the best…I never clog...And I feel good.”“SOMETIMES I wonder,” said Doug Long, shivering among the demonstrators in Raleigh, North Carolina, on February 13th, “whether everyone who defines themselves as Christian really believes in the same God.” As a rabbi sharing the interfaith stage blew a shofer, and a protest group called the Raging Grannies denounced restrictions on voting rights, Mr Long, a pastor in the United Church of Christ, explained that, in his view, Jesus would have stood for racial and sexual equality. Another clergyman told the crowd that, since everyone is made in the image of God, legislators should remember that “the harm they do unto others, they do unto [Him].” Waving placards celebrating Planned Parenthood and public schools, and proclaiming that immigrants “make America great”, the marchers processed to the state capitol. There they were addressed by the brother of a Muslim murdered in North Carolina last year, the brother of a civil-rights activist killed in Mississippi in 1964, and finally by Reverend William Barber, the star turn and one of the rally’s organisers. He complained that the state’s politicians had “made it easier to get a gun than they have to vote”. Citing the Book of Isaiah, he declared: “Woe unto those who legislate evil and rob the poor of their rights.” This is not the sort of politics typically associated with devout Christians these days. Several Republican primaries are said by psephologists to turn on the votes of evangelicals; Ted Cruz, one of the front-runners, has based his strategy on the hunch that they can send him to the White House, endeavouring to motivate them with fire-and-brimstone denunciations of liberal depravities. On the face of it, this perception—of evangelicals as irate ultraconservatives—has some legitimacy. Once left-leaning, many evangelical congregations swung behind the Republicans under Ronald Reagan, shepherded by influential televangelists, and have since, as Jim Guth of Furman University puts it, “come to believe the Republican Bible cover to cover”. Growing majorities of white Protestants, and indeed white Catholics, have since embraced his party. That realignment has not been driven by faith alone. Class and (especially in the South) race have also played a role. But Christianity is part of the story, not just in moral concerns about abortion, homosexuality and the church’s place in public life, but in economic attitudes too: for many evangelicals, self-reliance is the corollary of personal salvation, wealth a divine blessing and overweening government anathema. Some, at least, see helping the poor as a private obligation rather than the state’s. Yet another Christian constituency doubts that God would approve of, say, the construction of a wall on the Mexican border, or a squeeze in health-care provision. That includes Mr Barber. “We can no longer allow a heretical adaptation of evangelical faith to take centre-stage in this country,” he says, decrying the term “religious right” because “We don’t think they are religiously right.” By his own lights a conservative evangelical, Mr Barber started the Moral Mondays initiative, a multiracial, unobtrusively religious campaign of protests against North Carolina’s skimpy education funding and failure to expand Medicaid, which has spread to other states. An evangelical, he argues, adducing scripture, must bring good news to the poor. After all, he says, Jesus was a radical. Part of the trouble with how Christianity is perceived, thinks Jim Wallis, the founder of Sojourners, a Christian social-justice organisation, is that the media is mostly secular-minded and prone to demonising believers. They say “Iowa evangelicals”, for example, when really they mean “old, white people”. The Bible, Mr Wallis points out, contains 2,000 verses touching on poverty, rather more than mention homosexuality; a worldview that neglects “the least of these”, he insists, “makes no biblical sense”. Among the outfits that agree is the PICO Network, an ecumenical alliance of religious communities which, says Reverend Michael-Ray Mathews, feel “compelled by faith” to tackle communal problems such as gun violence. Participants, he explains, use prayer and religious texts to develop “a vision of a better life”. In black churches, the tradition of social activism stretches through the civil-rights movement to abolitionists and slave rebellions. Many are evangelical (as are rising numbers of Hispanics); their congregations mostly vote Democratic, invalidating any glib equation between that strand of Protestantism and right-wing ideology. As with American Christians as a whole, the politics of black churches is more nuanced than is sometimes assumed. Trials here below Consider a recent Sunday service at the Vision Church in Atlanta. Along with sensational music, it featured moving re-enactments of recent police killings of black Americans, scenes counterpoised with members’ own stories of triumph and resilience: alcoholism and deprivation overcome, degrees earned, businesses started. It also, in a largely gay congregation, contained frequent allusions to sexual tolerance and AIDS. “Some of us are not supposed to be here,” intoned a preacher, “but He preserved us.” A fur-clad worshipper rose from his pew to sing beautifully the refrain to “Can’t Nobody do me like Jesus”. The presiding minister, Bishop Oliver Allen, founded the Progressive Pentecostal denomination to which the church belongs; it is now a national fellowship of gay-friendly, predominantly black churches. “Civil rights cannot just be for black people,” Mr Allen says. “If we’re not liberating people, what good are we?” Christians of all stripes, he thinks, should not allow their faith “to be hijacked by the loudest political voices”.
