Watching over the flock in Ferguson WHEN anti-federal activists occupied a nature reserve in Burns, Oregon last month, members of the Oath Keepers, an association of current and former soldiers, police officers and other all-action types, grabbed their weapons and flocked to the high-desert town. The group’s leader, an Ivy League-educated lawyer and ex-serviceman called Elmer Stewart Rhodes, opposed the occupation but felt his men could end the stand-off. When one of the occupiers was killed on January 26th, Oath Keepers rushed to evacuate women and children from the scene, fearing an attack by the Feds. Beyond the group’s main objective of defending the constitution, Mr Rhodes believes Oath Keepers have a duty to protect those unwilling or unable to protect themselves. “When we hear gunfire, we run towards it,” says Mr Rhodes on the phone from his home in Kalispell, a logging town in Montana. In November 2014, when protests erupted in Ferguson, Missouri after a grand-jury decision not to indict a white policeman for shooting an unarmed black teenager, Oath Keepers hurried there, climbed onto its rooftops and patrolled back and forth, cradling rifles. “If we hadn’t guarded the buildings, they would have burned to the ground. Fact,” says Mr Rhodes. After an attack on a military recruiting centre in Tennessee last July, armed Oath Keepers stood guard outside similar offices across America. The Oath Keepers’ size (there are thought to be around 30,000 members) is unusual, but its existence is not. According to Ryan Lenz of the Southern Poverty Law Centre, an advocacy group, the number of what it calls “patriot groups” has grown from 149 in 2008 to 998 in 2015. As well as having a deep mistrust of government, most also subscribe to outlandish conspiracy theories. The Oath Keepers’ website suggests that George Soros, a financier and philanthropist, and the Council on Foreign Relations are exploiting the refugee crisis for their own gain. Other groups believe a shadowy elite is plotting to rule the world through one tyrannical government. Mr Lenz attributes the rise in patriot groups to the election of Barack Obama, which spurred those with extreme anxieties about likely government expansion and extra gun controls to band together. After waning for a few years, the number of groups then jumped by 14% from 2014 to 2015—an increase Mr Lenz chalks up to a confrontation in 2014, when the father of two ranchers involved in the Oregon stand-off faced down government officials on public land in Nevada. Brian Levin of California State University at San Bernardino thinks deeper forces are at work. Scepticism of centralised government is baked into America, he argues. Now, with the country’s future as a hegemon uncertain and confidence in its institutions eroded, that doubt has intensified. A recent poll by the Pew Research Centre found that only 19% of Americans trust the government in Washington most or all of the time, compared with 73% when they began asking the question in 1958. This inspires more people to support maverick politicians, and motivates others to opt out of the system entirely. Beyond the fringe It was such disenchantment that prompted Mr Rhodes to start the Oath Keepers. An eloquent if gruff Renaissance man, he has worked as a professional sculptor, once crafting a Minuteman for a Las Vegas hotel, and was a paratrooper before enrolling at Yale Law School. There he is remembered for taking his Bill of Rights class to a shooting range and winning an award for his paper on that document. Mr Rhodes’s studies overlapped with the September 11th attacks, and he observed the government’s response with horror. He still gets angry when he talks about the Patriot Act and the Supreme Court’s ruling in Hamdi v Rumsfeld (2004), which held that the constitution does not prevent the government from treating its own citizens as unlawful combatants. “It’s called the treason clause, and it’s right there in front of your face!” he bellows. He is also troubled by many things that worry progressive civil-libertarians: the government’s surveillance of its own citizens, warrantless searches, belligerent police. “I definitely think we’ve crossed the Rubicon. We’re going down the same road as Nazi Germany or Stalinist Russia.” Mr Rhodes worked on Ron Paul’s 2008 campaign for the Republican nomination. When Mr Paul ended his bid, he abandoned mainstream politics and started the Oath Keepers. He hoped that by reminding its members to obey the constitution above all else, he and they would help “put the brakes on” creeping authoritarianism. When police officers and military servicemen enroll in their respective forces, they pledge to “defend the constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic”. Mr Rhodes believes that oath should be kept under all circumstances, even if it means flouting the demands of a higher-up. He uses William Calley, a lieutenant in the Vietnam war who claimed he was merely following orders when he killed 22 unarmed civilians at My Lai, to illustrate what can go wrong when individuals stray from that creed. He praises Hugh Thompson, who intervened before more civilians were massacred, as an exemplar. Mr Rhodes may be typical only of a fairly small fringe. But even there, concern about political polarisation seems widespread. “When Bush was in power I could get liberals to listen to me,” he explains. “It has a flipside. I can talk to Republicans now because they hate and fear Obama because he’s a nasty Democrat. But once Trump’s elected—God forbid—I think they’ll all go back to sleep. And then you’ll see liberals going ‘Oh my God! He’s violating the Bill of Rights’.”SOME politicians campaign in poetry, others in prose. Too often Hillary Clinton—a lifelong policy wonk—sounds like a set of PowerPoint slides. So it is striking that the best television advertisement of her 2016 presidential campaign to date offers a dose of almost undiluted emotion. Filmed at a recent meeting with Hispanic women in Las Vegas, the spot shows a young girl, Karla Ortiz, tearfully explaining that her parents may soon be deported. Offering the child a hug—“Come here, baby”—Mrs Clinton fixes her with a gaze that is part headmistress, part-grandmother, and promises to do “everything I can” so that Karla need not be scared. “Let me do the worrying, I’ll do all the worrying, is that a deal?” says the former secretary of state, senator and First Lady, as women around them wipe their eyes. In the ad Mrs Clinton comes across as a battered-but-unbowed, worldly-but-compassionate matriarch. That is not a bad summary of Mrs Clinton’s image among many Hispanic Democrats, a group that she won by a two-to-one margin when she last sought the presidency in 2008. The spot is credited in Clinton-world with contributing to their candidate’s victory in the Nevada caucus of February 20th over her left-wing challenger, Senator Bernie Sanders, not least by shoring up her support with Latinos (different pollsters disagree as to whether Mrs Clinton narrowly won or lost the Nevada Hispanic vote). The ad is now showing on TV in Colorado, which holds its Democratic caucus on “Super Tuesday”, March 1st, when a dozen states hold presidential contests. Colorado is home to half a million Hispanic voters, and no Democrat can win the state without their help. To Hispanic fans the Clintons are family, praised for ties stretching back to 1972, when an owlish Hillary Rodham helped register Mexican-American voters in the wilds of south Texas. Ken Salazar—a former senator, secretary of the interior and Clinton-backer—recalls how Mr Sanders voted against immigration reforms in 2007, shortly after being elected to the Senate from Vermont. Back then Mr Sanders often cast immigration as a threat to American workers. He has since reversed his stance, promising that he will “absolutely” fight to pass comprehensive immigration reform in his first 100 days as president. The Vermont senator “is new to these issues,” says Mr Salazar, tersely. A mood of slightly mournful realism hangs over Mrs Clinton’s encounter with Karla Ortiz. The candidate does not promise to save the girl’s mother and father, because she cannot. An executive action by President Barack Obama would have shielded Karla’s parents, but is currently blocked by lawsuits filed by Republican-run states. In contrast with Mr Sanders’s bold (and implausible) talk of passing immigration reforms within weeks, Mrs Clinton says only that she would introduce an immigration bill in her first 100 days, before working to sell it to Congress. That pragmatism resonates with nine Hispanic women gathered for caucus-training at a home in Denver. An elegant group, sipping pink wine and nibbling canapés, the women include retired teachers, school principals and longtime Democratic activists. They are fired up about this election: one prompts tut-tutting as she describes nine year-old pupils who are frightened of Donald Trump, the Mexico-bashing bully running for the White House as a Republican. But they are wary of Mr Sanders’s fiery solutions and calls for revolutionary change. “Revolution is not a word that connects with us,” says Rosemary Rodriguez, a stalwart of the state Democratic Party, noting that many peers have ties to countries racked by instability. “We prefer Hillary, and evolution.” Hispanic America: Tu casa es mi casa The Democratic primary contest has exposed a generational chasm, with Mr Sanders winning younger voters by crushing margins and Mrs Clinton doing best with older, more affluent voters, especially women. Those are good allies to have: older folk are reliable voters. The generational divide especially complicates the contest for Hispanics. Colorado’s Latino electorate is “extraordinarily young,” with more than 40% born since 1981, notes Joelle Martinez of the University of Denver. That should help Mr Sanders, who dominates among such so-called millennial voters. But Hispanic millennials are hard to turn out: in the 2012 presidential election, just 38% cast votes nationwide. Talking about a revolution The Sanders campaign is working hard. Caucus-training at the University of Colorado in Boulder—a mostly white campus crammed with Sanders-loving hipsters—draws a handful of Hispanics, among them Zurisadai Juarez Delgado. The undergraduate hails Mr Sanders for radical policies that would help all “marginalised” Americans and not just Latinos. She proudly reports that she has converted her mother, a former Clinton-fan. Across the state Mr Sanders has tapped into traditions of radical campaigning by Chicano activists and Hispanic union organisers. In north Denver Lexington watched young activists hit gritty streets bounded by railway lines and a roaring highway, bearing Spanish brochures hailing Mr Sanders as a son of poor immigrants. The Clinton camp is working hard, too. Mrs Clinton has a near-lock on a different political tribe: the state’s elected Hispanic Democrats, many of them moderates who needed lots of Anglo votes to win office. Nor is she surrendering millennials to Mr Sanders. Her national Latino vote director, Lorella Praeli, is a young immigration activist who explicitly praises Mrs Clinton for making promises that she can keep. “She is not going to set the community up for failure,” says Ms Praeli. Mrs Clinton actually faces two tests in Colorado. Mr Sanders may well win the caucus: Colorado is a proudly anti-establishment state. It is arguably more important for Mrs Clinton to win a clear majority of Latino votes. For the contest for Hispanic hearts and minds is in part a proxy fight: a dispute about how to help the disadvantaged, pitting practicality against idealistic fervour. That is a fight Mrs Clinton can ill-afford to lose.A TACO seller points to two spots on Acapulco’s beach where people have been shot dead in recent days. An American on a sunbed recalls having a massage within sight, he later realised, of the body of a murdered vendor. The mayhem in Acapulco, the world’s fourth most violent city, is largely confined to its periphery, but tourists are beginning to notice it. Soldiers patrol the beaches, provoking unease rather than inspiring confidence. A Canadian, who started coming to Acapulco in the 1970s, says he will not be returning. The bloodshed on the beach does not tell the whole story about crime in Mexico. Many parts of the country are more peaceful than they once were, especially in areas where wars between drug gangs have ended with victory for one side. In Acapulco, in the south-western state of Guerrero, the fight for control of trade in heroin, made from locally grown poppies, is still raging. Some sorts of crime, including kidnapping and extortion, appear to be diminishing. But after three years of decline the national murder rate jumped in 2015 and has continued to rise this year (see chart). The number of murders in January was 11% higher than during the same month last year. This does not portend a return to the horrific violence of 2010-12; almost 40% of the recent rise is accounted for by gang-infested Guerrero. Even so, it greatly increases pressure on the president, Enrique Peña Nieto, who promised to “step up the pace” on security in the second half of his term, which runs until 2018. An astonishing 99% of all crimes are never punished, a level of impunity that encourages criminality of all sorts. Mexico came 58th out of 59 countries in a global impunity index published recently by the University of the Americas in Puebla, south-east of Mexico City. Several recent outrages have piled on the pressure for change. So far this year four journalists have been murdered, one more than in all of 2015; the mayor of Temixco, south of Mexico City, was killed after just a day in office; 49 inmates of Topo Chico prison in the northern state of Nuevo León died in a riot in February. In the state of Veracruz five people vanished after their arrest by state police, an ugly echo of the disappearance in September 2014 of 43 students in Iguala, about 220km (135 miles) inland from Acapulco. Peña has a plan Mr Peña’s response to the public revulsion caused by the students’ disappearance was to announce a ten-point anti-crime programme. It is making halting progress. A law that would allow the federal government to take over local administrations infiltrated by organised crime is stalled in Congress, largely because of fears among opposition politicians that the government could abuse its power. Also stuck is a law that would assign a unique ID number to each citizen, making it easier to track those suspected of committing crimes. Political wrangling is holding up a measure that the president considers vital, a federal law that would subject Mexico’s 1,800 or so local police forces to the control of the 32 state governments, a policy known as mando único (unified command). Like his predecessor, Felipe Calderón, Mr Peña relies on the army and navy to combat serious crime, largely bypassing local police forces. Under mando único state police forces, which are supposedly more competent and effective than local ones, could play a more active role. Mr Peña’s plan is competing with proposals put forward by opposition parties, one of which would let big towns keep their police forces. Odds are that a federal law will eventually be passed, in part because the interior minister, Miguel Ángel Osorio Chong, is thought to have presidential ambitions. In the meantime mando único is being implemented in piecemeal fashion; more than half the states have introduced a version of it. In Guerrero, just a few towns have agreed so far to let the state government run their police forces. The policy is not the cure-all the government seems to think it is. State police forces have not been shown to be less corrupt or more effective than municipal ones. Incompetent officers serve at both levels. Four of the seven state policemen arrested in connection with the recent disappearances in Veracruz had failed tests of their fitness for duty. In Guerrero, mando único could “decontaminate” some of the local police forces that have been infiltrated by organised crime, says Gabino Solano of the state’s Autonomous University. But what Guerrero needs more, he says, is a rigorous federal response to such problems as its weak economy, poor health and education and the lethal competition among drug gangs. The fragmentation is in part a consequence of the government’s success in hunting down crime bosses. Mr Peña’s administration has so far “neutralised” 99 of the 122 it singled out in 2013. “The government has proved that it can catch capos,” says Alejandro Hope, a security analyst. Now it “needs to show that it can prosecute them and keep them in jail.” Daily chart: The world's most violent cities It must also dismantle their organisations. After beheading the gangs the government has failed to seize assets and to arrest the leaders’ closest accomplices, says José Antonio Ortega of Security, Justice and Peace, an anti-crime NGO. Edgardo Buscaglia of Columbia University calls for states to establish “economic investigative units”, which would work with independent prosecutors to find criminal assets such as factories and trucks. A judicial reform, enacted into law in 2008 and due to be fully implemented by June this year, should make justice fairer. This will replace closed-door criminal proceedings, in which judges render verdicts on the basis of written statements, with oral arguments between prosecutors and defendants’ lawyers. The reform strengthens defendants’ rights, including the presumption of innocence, which is inscribed in the constitution but often ignored in practice. It allows perpetrators of minor crimes to be punished with sentences other than jail time. If Mr Peña is to entrench the rule of law, corrupt politicians, as well as gun-slinging gangsters, will have to be held to account. His proposal for an “anti-corruption system” of independent watchdog agencies is working its way through Congress. Mr Peña himself has been embarrassed by conflict-of-interest allegations related to the financing of his wife’s house; an investigation cleared him of wrongdoing. If Mexicans are to take seriously their leaders’ crime-fighting credentials, politicians will have to police themselves better.World’s tallest tilde MASSIVE yet graceful, Edifício Copan partakes of the monstrousness of the city that surrounds it but is shaped by the sensuality of its architect, Oscar Niemeyer. Its curved form is meant to suggest the tilde above the “a” of São Paulo, Brazil’s biggest city. With 5,000 residents in 32 floors of flats stacked atop 72 shops and restaurants, the building has its own postcode. Two framed certificates in the office of Affonso de Oliveira, Copan’s “prefeito” (mayor), attest that in the mid-1990s the apartment block held a Guinness record as Latin America’s biggest residential building. It remains the city’s largest, most recognisable dwelling. In its 50-year history (its birthday is in May, if you count from the day city hall issued the first residency permit), Edifício Copan’s changing fortunes have at different times mimicked and diverged from those of São Paulo itself. These days, the building is doing better than its city. São Paulo’s 11m people, who produce a tenth of Brazil’s GDP, are suffering as the country enters its second year of recession, although not as badly as much of the rest of the country. Copan, along with the town’s centre, is thriving. Niemeyer’s modernist masterpiece, conceived during a wave of industrialising optimism in the early 1950s, never fulfilled the ambitions of its builders. Its name is short for Companhia Pan-Americana de Hotéis e Turísmo (Pan-American Hotel and Tourism Company). But the developer ran out of money in the mid-1950s and sold the entire plot to a bank, which now occupies the site reserved for the hotel. A planned terrace garden, dividing the residential tower from the shops below, never materialised. The blueprints were erased and redrawn so many times they became translucent, recalls Carlos Lemos, who supervised the construction. The first residents arrived in 1962. By the time they held their first condo meeting, in 1971, São Paulo’s elegant centre was in decline. Middle-class paulistanos, now rich enough to buy cars manufactured on the city’s outskirts, forsook the centre’s narrow streets. Businesses followed them to the broad avenues radiating south and east from the inner city. The city’s population swelled—from 6.6m to 9.6m between 1973 and 1991—crowding into favelas (shantytowns) on its periphery. The proportion living in such precarious neighbourhoods expanded from 1% to 9% over that period. Industry quit the city altogether in search of cheaper land, cleaner air and a refuge from crime. Between 1980 and 1985, as Brazil’s hyperinflationary “lost decade” was getting started, São Paulo lost 200,000 manufacturing jobs. Services grew, but not enough to compensate fully. By 1999 the unemployment rate had climbed to 18% and the murder rate had reached 69 per 100,000 people, among the world’s highest. Copan’s surroundings assumed a dystopian air of urban decay. Empty offices and flats became squats. Crack dealers and addicts terrorised the neighbourhood. Prostitutes offered quick consolation. When Mr de Oliveira assumed his mayoral duties in 1993, after training as a chemical engineer and spending three decades as a bureaucrat, he found a building in physical and financial disrepair. One in four flats stood empty and more than a dozen served as brothels. Mr de Oliveira, or Senhor Affonso, as he is universally known, promptly evicted the prostitutes, fixed the building’s finances and started fining rule-breakers. “Things have got a thousand percent better,” says Antônio Alberto, who brews espresso at the Café Floresta, a Copan fixture since 1972. Daniel Trench, a graphic designer who moved in four years ago, compares Mr de Oliveira to Rudolph Giuliani, New York’s crime-busting mayor in the 1990s. Copan and its neighbourhood are now chic. When Mika Lins, an actress, bought a three-bedroom flat in 2001, her friends said she was insane. Today the 28th-floor apartment, with a spectacular view of São Paulo’s concrete sprawl, is worth perhaps 1.1m reais ($280,000), ten times what she paid for it. Property prices have risen by a third as much in São Paulo at large. Now just 14 of Copan’s flats are vacant, and they “won’t be for long”, promises Mr de Oliveira. Even the studio and one-bedroom apartments in “Block B”, long considered the dodgiest of the six, are now thought to be bijou. Ms Lins is renting one for her mother. The revived condominium has helped spruce up São Paulo’s centre, and benefited in turn from the area’s new spirit of edgy respectability. Bar da Dona Onça became the building’s first hip restaurant in 2008. Pivô, a contemporary-art gallery, moved in four years ago. Cyclists have replaced streetwalkers in nearby streets. Mr Alberto gripes that he serves just 500 cups of espresso a day, a quarter of what he sold 15 years ago, but that is because Café Floresta is no longer the only source of good espresso in the neighbourhood. His fellow paulistanos, worried about recession and angry about corruption in Brasília—the purpose-built national capital that is Niemeyer’s most famous work—are likely to oust São Paulo’s mayor, Fernando Haddad, when local elections are held in October. He belongs to Brazil’s ruling Workers’ Party, which has been tarnished by a massive bribery scandal centred on Petrobras, a state-controlled oil giant. Mr Haddad’s constituents are not keen either on the cycle lanes that have helped revive the city centre, part of his ambitious plans to coax residentsout of their cars. Copan’s prefeito is more secure, but he still has plenty of work to do. Niemeyer’s curvaceous façade is crumbling, and is draped in blue netting to protect pedestrians from falling tiles. Restoration will cost 23m reais and will take at least three years. The building’s 1,600-seat cinema has been boarded up since its last occupant, a Pentecostal church, was forced to leave in 2008 because of fears that its structure was unsound. The building of Copan has “never really ended”, muses Mr Lemos. It is in permanent flux, like São Paulo itself.ALTHOUGH he has more than three years left of his current term as Bolivia’s president, Evo Morales called a referendum for February 21st to change the constitution to allow him to run for a fourth term in 2020. This excess of forward planning in a region accustomed to last-minute improvisation smacked of nervousness about tougher times ahead in Bolivia. It backfired: with nearly all of the votes counted, the “No” vote stood at 51.3%. Albeit narrowly, Bolivians have inflicted on Mr Morales his first serious electoral defeat since he was elected in 2005. This setback for Bolivia’s president will echo around South America. Despite his support for Hugo Chávez’s “Bolivarian revolution” in Venezuela and his unremitting anti-American rhetoric, Mr Morales is the most fiscally responsible of the left-wing leaders in the region. He is also the most popular and was the strongest of them politically, thanks to his ethnicity (he is of indigenous Aymara descent), his stress on social inclusion and recent pragmatic overtures to the private sector. Buoyed by natural gas and mining exports, the economy has grown at around 5% a year for a decade. Now it is slowing. Mr Morales’s government has been rocked by corruption scandals. “Perhaps our support is not what it was,” he admitted to El País, a Spanish newspaper, on the eve of the referendum. That goes a fortiori for the left elsewhere in the region. It has suffered electoral defeats in Argentina and Venezuela. In Ecuador Rafael Correa has said he will not run again next year. In Brazil the government of Dilma Rousseff is not certain to survive to the end of its term in 2018. This week João Santana, her campaign guru, was arrested on suspicion that he was paid with money from bribes. If substantiated that could prompt the electoral court to call a fresh election. In Chile, Michelle Bachelet, a once-adored president, languishes in the opinion polls. Three things are behind the left’s fall from grace. One is the end of the commodity boom. The governments in Venezuela (especially), Brazil and Argentina made no effort to save the windfall gains from the boom. Impelled by a refusal to risk unpopularity and electoral defeat, they carried on spending even as commodity prices began to fall. That is an old mistake. As Mr Morales says, he advised Chávez that “you can’t carry on subsidising so much”. He added that “to maintain the ideology, you have to guarantee [that people have] food”. The second factor is corruption, especially in Venezuela and Brazil. Of the left-wing governments only Uruguay’s is unscathed by scandal. Third, after a decade or more of left-wing dominance voters want fresh faces and the alternation of power. All this means that Mauricio Macri’s victory in Argentina’s presidential election last November may presage further electoral success for the centre-right. After a decade in which much of Latin America looked to China, Barack Obama will be widely applauded when he visits Argentina and Cuba next month. But governing has got harder for everyone in the region. True, the difference between well-managed countries, like Colombia and Peru, and those that made mistakes is significant: rates of economic growth of 2-3% and inflation of 2-7% feel much better than recessions and inflation of over 10%. But the days of limitless fiscal revenue and easy popularity are over. And corruption is not a monopoly of the left: witness Otto Pérez, the conservative president of Guatemala, who was toppled by a citizens’ movement last year and is on trial for embezzlement. Tackling corruption requires the patient work of building the rule of law. And boosting economic growth demands the hard grind of improving productivity and competitiveness, through investing more in infrastructure, better education, more efficient labour markets and so on. Above all, these tasks need leaner but stronger and more effective states. How to get there? “The most important economic problem today is political: that the various spheres of society reach agreement to put much more stress on productive transformation,” counsels Enrique García of CAF, a development bank. That is something Latin America has been poor at. In the past the right ignored inequality and poverty. The left can claim credit for placing these issues at the heart of the political agenda, where they belong. But the commodity boom also served to give old ideologies a new lease of life. Too many of the left’s leaders ruled through the politics of confrontation rather than consensus-building. The region is now in for a period of shorter, more volatile political cycles in which the winners will be those who succeed in marshalling support for difficult but overdue changes. A CITY under siege can resist many things, but not thirst. On February 22nd both the national government and that of Haryana, a state that rings Delhi, the Indian capital, on three sides, crumpled after rioters sabotaged a canal that supplies nearly half the water to the sprawling metropolis. Some 28 people died as police backed by soldiers struggled to control arsonists and looters, as well as more peaceable protesters, who blocked roads and railways into Delhi. But with taps running dry it was easier to capitulate to the rioters’ main demand, which is to allow the Jats, a caste-like community that is powerful in Haryana, to gain “reservations”—that is, a share of state favours formally reserved for the supposedly poor and downtrodden. It is not the first time that a relatively privileged group among India’s 3,000-odd castes has resorted to threats and blackmail to win inclusion in an official category known as “other backward classes”, or OBCs. Such protests have become alarmingly frequent. Last August in Gujarat a protest by the Patidars, a caste which, like the Jats, is traditionally composed of yeomen farmers but has increasingly joined the urban middle class, brought a crowd of perhaps 500,000 people on to the streets of Ahmedabad, the state’s main city. Ensuing riots left a dozen people dead. In late January the Kapus of Andhra Pradesh set railway carriages ablaze. The Gujjars of Rajasthan are another ethnic group, many of whose members, no longer wholly rural, are prospering. Accounting for 6-7% of the state’s people, they staged protests in 2008, 2010 and again last May. At stake are the spoils from a policy of identity-based benefits, the equivalent of America’s “affirmative action” programmes. India’s elaborate system of positive discrimination stems from the constitution adopted in 1949. Its chief architect, B.R. Ambedkar, a brilliant jurist, was born a Dalit, that is, from one of the castes regarded as “untouchable” and kept wretched by untold generations of discrimination. He envisaged an active role for the new state in righting those wrongs. As the system evolved at state and federal levels, quotas for government jobs and places at universities were reserved for “scheduled castes”, meaning Dalits, along with a smaller portion for “scheduled tribes”, that is, members of poor, remote communities outside the caste system. The quotas have gone some way to relieving social stigmas and materially advancing India’s poorest groups. But the constitution left open another, vaguer category. Article 15 mentions “socially and educationally backward classes” that might also become eligible for aid. First in state laws and later in national ones, Indian governments have recognised myriad groups as OBCs, deemed to suffer some disadvantage compared with the uppermost castes, and deserving of a helping hand. In 1990 the federal government set national criteria for defining OBCs, fixing their quota at 27% and capping the overall reservations for all three groups at 50%. Further tinkering has created an increasingly elaborate structure of reservations. Some states certify hundreds of caste groupings as OBCs, while others have pushed their quota closer to 70%. Government commissions that vet applications for OBC status have grown increasingly imaginative, uncovering such subcategories as “backward-forward” castes, parts of a caste group that have fallen behind the rising status of other parts, or the so-called “creamy layer”, ie, members of an OBC who are denied benefit because their family income is above a defined maximum (about $10,000). Caste down A continent masquerading as a country: Explore India in our interactive map Increasingly castes are clamouring to be recognised as lowly in order to reap whatever benefits accrue from being counted in the bottom half. It has been a boon to a certain kind of politician. The rapid economic growth of recent years, accompanied by growing social mobility, has taken castes from the places or professions that first defined them. Yet caste persists as a source of identity and as a locus for various ill-defined grievances. The Jats, who describe themselves as an ethnic group rather than a caste, take pride in a tradition of martial prowess. Spread across northern India and Pakistan, they make up nearly a third of Haryana’s people. With India’s urban economy offering more chances than rural life, those Jats left tilling the soil have suffered a reduction in their status. But they have used their voting strength to push for reservations. Before state elections in late 2014 the state and national governments, then both controlled by the Congress party, granted their wish. The promised inclusion would have reserved around 2,000 state jobs for Jats, who would otherwise have had to compete for them. But then Congress lost power to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). And Indian courts anyway blocked the move, arguing that Jats do not meet the criteria for backwardness. What precisely triggered the latest rumpus in Haryana is not clear. Congress supporters point to statements from BJP leaders dismissing Jat demands. The BJP hints instead that Congress may have instigated the riots to embarrass it. Bad as such political wrangling is for India, it is not so bad as the precedent set by caving in to the Jats. Pressed by the government of the prime minister, Narendra Modi, to resolve the embarrassing issue, but wary of angering other OBCs, Haryana’s state government looks set to finesse the problem by granting Jats a special, extra quota of perks. At Ambedkar’s insistence, the preamble to India’s constitution included a call for fraternity along with justice, liberty and equality. Its framers envisioned reservations primarily as a weapon to target social exclusion, and saw it as a temporary measure. Their long-term goal was to do away with the iniquity of caste barriers altogether. Instead, by appealing to one category or another for votes, India’s politicians have perpetuated and entrenched a system that fragments the country into jealous islands of class privilege.Robot Taekwon V comes out A GIANT model of Robot Taekwon V, a 1970s South Korean superhero, glares at the salarymen passing Figure Museum W, a cross between a museum and a theme park that opened a year ago in a plush business district of Seoul, South Korea’s capital. It boasts a kaleidoscopic display of 800-odd artefacts mainly from the universe of Japanese manga (comic books) and anime (animation), and American cartoons. Most of its visitors are adult men. The museum’s enthusiastic young guide says it is “heaven for deukhu like me”. The term comes from the Japanese otaku, and denotes those who pursue obsessive interests—think a “nerd” or an “anorak” with few social skills and a fetish for some aspect of popular culture. In South Korea, deukhu has long been a slur. Many associate it with a dangerously unpatriotic indulgence in Japanese cultural exports, many of them banned in South Korea from the end of Japan’s imperial rule in 1945 until as recently as the 1990s. More broadly deukhu were assumed to lead idle, unproductive lives, shut away in dingy flats playing video games or scouring the web for their next frivolous curio. Now attitudes are shifting. The social-media networks of cool 20-somethings are abuzz with the hashtag deukmingout: coming out as a fanatic. A South Korean daily declared the Figure Museum W to be “a Mecca” for geeks going public. A 28-year-old deukhu, a fan of a South Korean pop star, Kim Jun-su, has started a blog about her coming-out. In it she argues that deukhu pursuits can be highly productive: the example of her idol has inspired her to get fit and to take up the piano and guitar. “I work even harder in my day job to prove a deukhu can be successful,” she says. Kim Yong-sub, who has written a book on South Korean trends in 2016, says that as more prominent deukhu have created content from their pastimes—by writing online comics, for example, known in South Korea as webtoons—they have aspired to “a new social standing and role”. Ji Jin-hee, a dashing 44-year-old actor, revealed that he bought piles of secondhand Lego to build models and sell them for a small fortune (he appeared on the cover of Elle Korea surrounded by his creations). Other Korean celebrities have been admitting to their own eccentricities: fans now affectionately refer to Shim Hyung-tak as “Shimdakhu” after the actor disclosed a passion for Doraemon, a Japanese robot-cat cartoon character beloved of East Asian children. A member of a hip-hop group, Block B, revealed that he kept 700 tropical fish. Stars are helping to push the idea that geekishness is cool. But beyond that, Mr Kim says, is the growing cachet of not following mainstream taste: a turnaround for South Koreans under powerful social pressure to conform. As more people pursue their individual preferences, they become more accepting of others’ too, for example, of the rise of the samchonpaen (“uncle fans”), middle-aged men who are unabashed groupies of teenage pop bands. Since November “Super-skilled People”, a television show, has invited deukhu, from bread enthusiasts to weapons buffs, to show off remarkable abilities or specialisms. The studio’s audience members all wear smiling paper bags over their heads—representing those who have yet to do their deukmingout.WHAT meagre challenges Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has faced in office have come not from the opposition but from his own side. So it is a triumph of hope over experience that the biggest opposition grouping, the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), thinks that will change. The party that underwhelmed in office from 2009 to 2012 has announced a merger with the third-biggest opposition party, the Japan Innovation Party (JIP). The move is part of the DPJ’s attempts to remake itself after its recent utter defeats and to be better prepared not only for scheduled elections for the upper house of the Diet (parliament) in July but even for a snap general election for the lower house that Mr Abe may call at the same time (or sooner). The last time Mr Abe called a snap election, for December 2014, the DPJ failed so much as to get a real campaign going. Fool me twice: this time it has chosen a slate of candidates for the lower house and hammered out co-operation agreements with other opposition parties, including the Japan Communist Party. But it will be an uphill task, given that in opinion polls only a tenth of the public supports the DPJ. A full two-fifths support the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. And even after the JIP’s two-dozen lawmakers are absorbed, the combined group will hold a mere fifth of the seats in the lower house and less than a quarter in the upper. The question is what the JIP brings to the party. It had the stuffing knocked out of it when its charismatic right-wing founder, Toru Hashimoto, split away to form an Osaka-based party last year. To many inside the DPJ, it seems too much that their leader, Katsuya Okada, has given in to the JIP’s demand to rename the merged party. A new name could hurt prospects at the polls: in both houses (though differently) a proportion of seats is allocated via party lists, and voters might forget a new name—not that one has yet been agreed. Still, says Akihisa Nagashima, a DPJ heavyweight, much more important to remember is that voters punished the party last time not because they could not remember its name but because of its unconvincing message and lousy campaigning.AT SIX o’clock on a Thursday evening the most important road in Manila, known as EDSA, has become a car park. Five lanes heading north and five heading south are clogged with cars and buses, many of them pointlessly honking their horns. “Traffic in Manila is not ordinary”, says a taxi driver, wearily. He means that it is extreme, not that it is rare. When people meet in Manila, they talk about traffic. “It rules everything”, says Julia Nebrija, a cycling advocate. Some stories are funny, like the one about the transport official, Francis Tolentino, who missed a live TV interview because he was stuck on EDSA, or the one about the archbishop who was so fed up with one jam that he got out of his car and started directing traffic. Business people tell more worrying tales. As commutes grow longer, productivity is suffering, says Jaime Ysmael of the Ayala Corporation, a conglomerate. Filipinos will vote for a new president in May, and the candidates are trying to blame each other for the parlous state of Manila’s roads and public transport. The very fact that one of them, Manuel Roxas, used to be transport secretary was held against him in a televised debate on February 21st. The candidates tout diverse plans, from building more roads to increasing taxes on second cars to moving government offices out of the metropolis. Such is the level of angst that anybody who cracks Manila traffic would have a good shot at the top job. Even with a perfect transport plan, Manila would probably have a problem. The population of the entire capital area rose from 18m to 23m between 2000 and 2010. It is dense: Shlomo Angel of New York University, who measures cities, estimates that it crammed 274 people into each hectare a decade ago, compared with 64 per hectare in Paris—and Manila will have got only more squashed since. What is more, the capital has an unfortunate hourglass shape. The middle, which contains the main business districts, is pinched by Manila bay to the west and Laguna lake to the east. Suburbs sprawl to the north and south. So traffic is funnelled, and the funnel often blocks up. On top of that, Manila’s transport plans have been terrible—among the most foolish adopted by any great city. The Philippines has a complex history: it was a Spanish colony for four centuries, then an American one. It is as though Manila has taken the worst aspects of American urban planning and applied them to a dense, Spanish-style metropolis before adding not a few mistakes of its own. It has the jams it deserves. The city’s first fault is its failure to build an extensive, high-volume public transport system. Seven metropolitan railway lines have been planned but only three have been built since work began in the early 1980s, and the connections between them are poor. At rush hour, the queues just to get into the stations are long. If Manila has too few trains, it probably has too many buses. Hundreds of small operators ply the roads—the fruits of a radical liberalisation in the 1990s. EDSA alone is served by 266 bus companies, while 1,122 operate somewhere in Manila. Competition and plentiful supply should be good for passengers, except that drivers are paid partly based on the number of fares they collect. So they race each other to busy stops and then loiter for as long as they can, blocking other drivers. Yet the biggest reason Manila’s roads move so slowly is that so many people now drive. The economy of the Philippines grew by 5.8% last year, and a swelling middle class is buying lots more cars (see chart). Driving, nicer and often quicker than public transport, is encouraged by minimum-parking rules, imported from America, which oblige developers to provide lots of parking spaces. Cars are thought to carry about 30% of people in the metropolis but account for 72% of traffic. Road transport in Manila is commendably diverse. As well as cars and buses it has motorbikes with sidecars and perhaps 50,000 Jeepneys—stretched Jeeps that can hold more than a dozen passengers each. Yet many roads are tightly restricted. Buses are often kept out of the smarter business districts, and some are barred from EDSA at rush hour. Gated housing developments ban all vehicles without residents’ stickers, forcing drivers around the edges. That seems increasingly bizarre, since some of those leafy suburban developments now lie next to booming business districts. Yet the armed guards will probably stay. China’s government announced this week that gated communities should stop blocking traffic, only to retreat following an outcry. And China is not a democracy, unlike the Philippines. Belatedly, Manila is trying something sensible. In December the Philippines approved a “rapid bus” route in north-east Manila, with buses travelling along dedicated lanes. Similar systems have worked well in Brazil and China. Karl Fjellstrom of the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy, a New York outfit, says he looks for three things when assessing whether a city is suited for a rapid bus system: traffic congestion, demand and physical infrastructure (that is, wide roads). Manila scores highly on all three. So perhaps the city will unblock. But Manila will need to be both clever and quick if it is to start moving again. A combination of fast growth and dismal planning got it into a jam. If the second cannot be changed, the first comes into question.They cheered Sam Rainsy in 2013 TWO recent college graduates now working for the Cambodia branch of an NGO, the Asia Foundation, spend their free time in typical 20-something ways: watching films, playing video games and hanging out with friends. How different were the lives of the parents of the two graduates when they were the same age as their children are now, under the dark rule of the Khmer Rouge. Those of Menghun Kaing eked out a living farming, with no prospect of university, while the father of Daramongkol Keo spent 18 months in hiding from the brutal regime in the forest, extinguishing his campfire whenever he heard soldiers approaching. Like many from that generation, the parents rarely talk about the past. To survive in those days, Ms Menghun Kaing explains, people had to “work hard and not say anything, just keep everything to themselves.” Today about one-third of Cambodians, and a much higher proportion in Phnom Penh, the capital, have internet access, mainly via smartphones. Young Cambodians are coming of age in a still-poor but quickly developing country: with gross national income of $1,020 per person in 2014, Cambodia is on the threshold of the World Bank’s definition of a lower-middle-income country. Two-thirds of Cambodians are under 30 and thus were born long after the Khmer Rouge regime was toppled by Vietnamese forces and Cambodian rebels in early 1979. Memories of the horrors of the Khmer Rouge period are fading. Young people’s concerns are coming to resemble those of the young in any other country. They worry about the environment: Cambodia is suffering rapid deforestation, often following illegal land grabs by well-connected businessmen. They want better education and job prospects. And they want clean government. Too bad many of their politicians are stale, often corrupt and mired in battles from the past. The country’s central political figure, Hun Sen, the 63-year-old head of the Cambodia People’s Party (CPP), is a former Khmer Rouge commander turned rebel whose early rise to political power was sponsored by the Vietnamese. Recently, even Asia’s longest-serving autocrat has felt the need to woo younger Cambodians by turning more emphatically to social media. Facebook, which he took to in September, shows him not only meeting world leaders—last week he was at a summit for South-East Asian leaders hosted in California by Barack Obama. He is also to be admired playing with his grandchildren, sitting on the ground in a shell suit eating noodles, and padding along the beach in a bathrobe and flip-flops. But the velvet glove slips off easily. Mr Hun Sen’s government has locked up opposition politicians on flimsy charges, pursued individuals through the courts for defamation, blocked the websites of NGOs, and introduced draft laws on cybercrime and telecommunications that would criminalise the publication of material “deemed to generate insecurity [and] instability.” The Corruption Perception Index compiled by a pressure group, Transparency International (TI), ranks Cambodia 150th out of 168 countries, and bottom in South-East Asia. The government has been either unwilling or unable to clean up Cambodia’s rotten judiciary—the chief problem in curbing corruption, according to Kol Preap, who heads TI in Cambodia. Nor has it stopped land grabs and illegal logging that are wreaking havoc in the countryside. Leading the opposition to Mr Hun Sen, as he seems to have done for years, is Sam Rainsy. A cosmopolitan 66-year-old former banker from a political family, he heads the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP). His party has often accused Mr Hun Sen of being too close to Vietnam, Cambodians’ historically overweening neighbour. But to end months of rioting following an election in 2013 that many believe was rigged, Mr Sam Rainsy began a curious rapprochement with Mr Hun Sen, having returned from exile in Paris shortly before. It was too unlikely to last. The strains grew until, in November, Mr Hun Sen snapped on hearing Mr Sam Rainsy comparing himself to Myanmar’s Aung San Suu Kyi, with the implication that history was not on Mr Hun Sen’s side. A court dusted off an old arrest warrant for defamation, parliament stripped Mr Sam Rainsy of his lawmaker’s immunity and he has not returned to Cambodia since. The pattern has grown familiar: Mr Hun Sen woos his old foe home, only to threaten him with jail, whereupon Mr Sam Rainsy returns to Paris. Some think that Mr Sam Rainsy has carved out a rather too comfortable life for himself as a professional opposition politician. Not all in the CNRP leadership admire him. And though he retains a devoted following, some younger activists are turning away. Disappointment among them set in last November when hundreds of protesters got ready, at the height of Mr Hun Sen’s fury, to greet Mr Sam Rainsy at the airport on his return from a trip to East Asia. But he suddenly cancelled his return and flew to France instead. He says he did this to avert bloodshed and deny Mr Hun Sen an excuse to crack down. But younger activists wonder how the opposition can organise around their central figure if he is absent. Some of the energy has therefore gone out of the opposition-centred enthusiasm for political change that was palpable at the time of the last election. As for ordinary Cambodians, many still tell opinion pollsters that they approve of their country’s direction and trust that the CPP under its fatherly leader will implement reforms that will spread prosperity, lessen inequalities and entrench the rule of law. That may be taking a lot on faith. Sophal Ear of Occidental College in California says that the chances of the governing party instilling a proper rule of law “are, unfortunately, dismal”.
