THOUGH parts of Asia are racked by long-running insurgencies, terrorist groups, banditry or low-level civil wars, it is striking that the continent has not suffered a full-scale war between countries since China’s brief and bloody punitive invasion of Vietnam in 1979. All the more striking, then, that the region now accounts for almost half of the global market for big weapons—nearly twice as much as the war-ravaged Middle East, and four times more than Europe. This week the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, which maintains a database of arms transfers, published data showing that six of the ten largest importers of heavy weapons are in Asia and the Pacific: India, China, Australia, Pakistan, Vietnam and South Korea. From 2011-15 the region as a whole bought 46% of global arms imports, up from 42% in 2010-14. Asia is not witnessing a classic arms race between two great powers and their allies, of the sort Britain and Germany engaged in before the first world war, or a cold-war contest like that between America and the Soviet Union. But certainly Asian countries are competing to modernise their military forces. The “Military Balance”, an annual report by the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), a British think-tank, noted this month that most have seen “sustained, multi-year increases in defence spending”. China’s rise and recent assertiveness are most often cited for the arms build-up. In the East China Sea, tensions have grown between China and Japan over the uninhabited Senkaku, or Diaoyu, islands. Since 2012 China has been sending ships and planes close to the islands in ways designed to challenge Japan’s claim to be administering them. In the South China Sea, China finds itself at odds with a number of South-East Asian countries, especially the Philippines and Vietnam, over even tinier islets, rocks and reefs. By means of massive artificial island-building over the past two years, disregarding the concerns of rival claimants, China seems simply to be taking what it thinks is its own. That helps explain, for example, why Vietnam’s arms imports in 2011-15 were eight times higher than in the previous five years, taking its share of the global total to 2.9%. The country has bought eight combat aircraft, four fast-attack craft and four submarines. A further six frigates and two submarines are on order. Even were China not filling in the sea so enthusiastically, its military build-up would probably provoke a reaction. In particular the rapid expansion of its navy, with the apparent intention of eventually upsetting American primacy in the western Pacific, represents a big shift in the strategic order. Other regional navies are also modernising—above all by buying submarines. Besides Vietnam’s purchases, India has ordered six from France, and Pakistan has bought eight from China, which is also providing two to Bangladesh. Germany is to deliver two to Singapore and five to South Korea, which has sold three of its own manufacture to Indonesia. Australia is to buy between eight and 12, with fierce competition for the order between France, Germany and Japan. But Tim Huxley, Asia director of the IISS, says it is misleading to see military spending in the region as “all about China”. Rather, it points to a much longer trend reflecting the region’s rapid economic growth and increased wealth. Countries have a range of external and internal security concerns. For example, despite its tiny size, Singapore is much the biggest defence spender in South-East Asia, outspending even Indonesia, with 45 times more people. Yet Singapore has no territorial claim in the South China Sea. Rather, its (unstated) fears have more to do with potential instability in its own immediate neighbours. Peninsula of provocation: A timeline of clashes between North and South Korea Also encouraging continued military spending is that none of Asia’s big strategic fissures, dating back decades, is really narrowing. India and Pakistan have been arguing and at times going to war over Kashmir since 1947. For China, victory in the civil war in 1949 was incomplete, because Taiwan remained outside its grip, and it has never ruled out the eventual resort to military force to achieve “reunification”, if peaceful means run out of steam. The Korean war ended in 1953 with an armistice but no peace treaty; North Korean dictators—three generations of belligerent Kims—have stoked tension ever since. China’s invasion of northern India in 1962 and subsequent withdrawal left the two countries’ competing claims over each other’s territory unresolved. At times back-channel talks over Kashmir have led to hints of a breakthrough between India and Pakistan. But none of these disputes—nor those in the South and East China Seas—is subject to anything resembling a peace process, and none is discussed in more than broad-brush terms at any of the various regional security talking shops. Armies, lobbying for a budget to buy the latest kit, can always point to the risk that a dispute might flare up into conflict; and to the need to build up a deterrent capacity. THAAD’s the way they don’t like it One country’s deterrence, of course, can be another’s threat. In response to North Korea’s nuclear and missile tests this year, for example, conservative politicians in South Korea are again calling on the government to develop its own nuclear deterrent. They are very unlikely to have their way. But the South has been in talks to deploy an American anti-missile system, known as Terminal High-Altitude Area Defence, or THAAD. This in turn alarms China, which argues that the associated radar threatens its own security and has lobbied hard to dissuade South Korea from adopting THAAD. Another aspect of China’s assertiveness is its readiness to intervene in other countries’ security policies. It has even suggested to Australia that it should think twice about buying Japanese submarines, because of historical sensitivities over the second world war. This diplomatic expansionism, however, tends to have much the same effect as the sea-filling kind: raising alarm and hackles, and driving China’s neighbours closer to America—and to suppliers of heavy weaponry.CHINESE demand for the world’s commodities may be sputtering, but not for the most vital ingredient of football: its players. In recent weeks, the country’s football clubs have been on their biggest ever spending spree, signing up foreign talent for sums which, by Asian standards, have been jaw-dropping. One local newspaper in China said anyone who paid attention to Chinese football would conclude that the clubs had “gone mad”. Jiangsu Suning, a club owned by an eponymous retail chain, broke a record on January 27th when it paid £25m ($35m) for Ramires, a Brazilian midfielder (known only by his forename) who had been playing for Chelsea, an English team. That was the most an Asian club had spent on a footballer. Seven days later Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao took Jackson Martínez from Atlético Madrid, a big Spanish team, for $45m. Within a couple of days Jiangsu had smashed the record again, paying a Ukrainian team, Shakhtar Donetsk, $53m for Alex Teixeira, another Brazilian midfielder. By the time China’s two-month-long winter transfer-period ends on February 26th, its top-division clubs will have spent a net amount of around $300m (the amount spent on buying players minus the amount received for selling them). That is more than the combined net outlay of all the clubs in Europe’s top five leagues during the winter period. The net spending of clubs in the English Premier League was the second highest ($220m); those in China’s second division ranked third, at $55m. President Xi Jinping may be less inclined to call this mad. Oddly for someone with so much else to worry about, from reviving a slowing economy to fighting corruption, he has set much store by football. A year ago a committee charged with overseeing wide-ranging economic and social reforms turned its attention to an area of great concern in the football-loving nation: its dismal performance in the game. The committee, headed by Mr Xi, endorsed the Communist Party’s first ever plan for “football reforms” (with “Chinese characteristics”, naturally). These, it said, were aimed at ending the “backward” state of football in China and helping the country realise its “dream of sporting great-powerdom”. The plan says the number of football academies should increase tenfold to 50,000 by 2025. It decrees that football be made compulsory at school. Football is particularly important for Mr Xi. He has been a fan since childhood. For a while after he took over as China’s leader his office, or at least the room said to be such in official photographs, featured the above picture of him as vice-president kicking a ball in Ireland. Mr Xi’s reform plan says football can help boost patriotism and a “collective spirit”—attributes Mr Xi is keen to inculcate in a society fractured by rapid economic change. Chinese businesses are keen to play along. Four companies have taken over a first-division Chinese football club in the past two years. In October China Media Capital (CMC), a venture-capital firm, agreed to pay $1.3 billion for five years of television rights to the Chinese Super League (CSL), more than 25 times the amount paid by state television for the football season in 2015. (On February 23rd, the firm resold the first two years of rights at a 35% profit.) In December CMC bought a 13% stake in Manchester City, an English club, weeks after CMC’s chairman accompanied Mr Xi on a tour of the club’s facilities. Wang Jianlin, China’s richest man, recently snapped up a 20% stake in Atlético Madrid. Dalian Wanda, a firm owned by Mr Wang, is spending millions of dollars on the coaching of 180 Chinese players at world-class facilities in Spain. Money talks As well as signing up expensive foreign players, CSL clubs have been recruiting former managers of the English and Brazilian national teams. Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao employs dozens of coaches from Real Madrid to train the 3,000-odd youngsters enrolled at its academy. The drawback of working for a little-known team can be offset by a big pay-packet (Ezequiel Lavezzi, an Argentine forward from Paris St-Germain, a French team, recently joined a provincial squad in China for a reported salary of more than $300,000 a week). The CSL appears likely soon to eclipse Major League Soccer in America as a destination of choice for footballers who are more after money than prestige. Mr Xi sees the game as a useful tool of diplomacy (his overseas visits often involve football-related events). But China’s league is still a long way from exerting the kind of soft power that the English Premier League bestows upon Britain (ask any taxi driver in China). Mr Xi has said he dreams of China winning the World Cup. England itself has no blueprint for that.AFTER more than three decades of often brutal interference by the government in citizens’ reproductive choices, it seemed something of a breakthrough when, in October, it decided to allow all couples to have two children. Previously, many had been limited to just one. Last month there was a further concession: children born in violation of the erstwhile rules would be given the registration document that is needed for everything from getting a place at school to opening a bank account. For children born out of wedlock, however, the nightmare of bureaucratic non-recognition persists. Attitudes to sex have been changing fast in China, but not the taboo surrounding extramarital births. The government imposes stringent penalties on the very few unmarried women brave enough to have children. Giving birth requires permission from family-planning authorities. They will not give it without proof of marriage. Violators usually have to pay the equivalent of several years’ working-class income. Then there is the problem of registering the child. Until last month it was impossible for many of those born in violation of family-planning rules to get identity papers. Now it is easier, as long as both parents can prove they are related to the child. But a mother who does not know who the baby’s father is, or who cannot convince the father to submit to a DNA test, is out of luck. The child cannot be registered. Hence it cannot obtain other vital documents such as an identity card (essential, not least, for travel on long-distance transport). To avoid such horrors, some unmarried women leave China in order to have their children. Their babies would then have foreign proof of birth, and a chance of growing up normally abroad. Xiao Min, a successful 36-year-old businesswoman who lives in Shanghai, decided to stay put. Her relatives acquiesced to her decision two years ago to have a child even though she had not found a husband. “I’m lucky to have so much support and a career that allows me to hire a full-time nanny,” says Ms Xiao. “I do not want to hurry to find someone to marry just so I can have children.” Ms Xiao is also lucky because she managed to persuade a friend to donate his sperm and enter into a sham marriage with her. Armed with a marriage certificate, she had a baby daughter without paying a hefty fine, or “social maintenance fee” in official language. (In July, when asked by reporters why single parents were punished this way, a senior family-planning official insisted the fines were needed to maintain “reproductive order”.) Most women, however, try their best to avoid extramarital births altogether. Abortions are readily available. Those who do not want to terminate their pregnancies are sometimes forced to do so by officials. Mei Fong, a former Beijing correspondent of the Wall Street Journal who wrote a book about the one-child policy, says the cost of raising a child on one’s own is such that it is usually only rich people who try. “I want to make my parents happy and I want to have a baby,” says a 30-year-old woman in Beijing who works as a low-paid office assistant. “But if I’m not married and can’t pay the fines, the child would become like a ghost, without legal standing. How could I do that to my own child?”  Big Gun takes on a big’un MOST of China’s rich try to keep their heads down and avoid offending the Communist Party. Ren Zhiqiang (pictured), a retired property developer, is an exception. He is not only wealthy, but also has a microblog account with 38m followers—roughly the number of people living in California—whom he regales with snide comments on the country’s politics. What gives these added sting is that he is a party member. Adoring netizens call him “Big Gun Ren”. Despite President Xi Jinping’s onslaught on dissent since he took power in 2012, Mr Ren has kept up his criticisms. This makes him all the more extraordinary. In recent days his microblogs have taken on Mr Xi himself, commenting scornfully on the president’s inspection tour on February 19th of the party’s main mouthpieces: the People’s Daily, Xinhua News Agency and China Central Television. Mr Xi reminded them to toe the party line, or, as he put it, to keep “the surname ‘Party’”. Mr Ren took issue. “When all media have surnames and do not represent the people’s interests, the people will be cast aside into a forgotten corner!” he complained on his microblog hosted by Weibo, a Chinese social-media site. In another post Mr Ren asked: “Since when has the people’s government been turned into the party’s government?” He said that taxpayers’ money should not be wasted on things that do not provide them with services. Mr Ren’s posts were quickly deleted. A website run by the party committee of Beijing’s city government published a commentary that accused him of displaying “brazen anti-party spirit” and of representing a “capitalist troublemaking faction” trying to create Western-style government in China. Mr Ren appears unfazed. Another of his posts hinted that he would like to take the website and its owners to court. Plenty of other bloggers have fallen foul of the law for taking digs at the party. But Mr Ren’s prominence may afford him (and even his Weibo account, to which he has posted more than 90,000 times) some protection. He even remains an adviser to the capital’s government—one of the few worth listening to.TWO of the largest regional trade accords in history were agreed on last year. The Trans-Pacific Partnership involves 12 countries in Asia and the Americas, and was the subject of headlines and heated debate. But most people have never heard of the Tripartite Free Trade Area (TFTA), which covers 26 African countries. It will create the biggest free-trade area on the continent, “from Cairo to the Cape”, as its supporters boast. Many in the developing world see global trade as rigged in favour of rich countries. But African regional integration is all the rage. The continent features 17 trade blocs. The TFTA aims to join up three of them: the East African Community (EAC), the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA). At a conference on African business on February 20th-21st in the Egyptian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh, several leaders called for a united African market. An abundance of borders has long divided the continent’s 54 countries, limiting economies of scale. Fixing common problems such as a shortage of roads takes teamwork—and in turn should lead to more integration. Average transport costs in Africa are twice the world average and are thought to harm trade on the continent more than tariffs and other barriers. A shame, then, that regional economic deals are often poorly implemented. An African firm selling goods on the continent still faces an average tariff rate of 8.7%, compared with 2.5% overseas, says the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). That is one reason why intra-African trade as a percentage of total African trade is well below what is seen in other poor regions (see chart). Nearly all African countries are party to more than one regional agreement. These overlapping allegiances can tie them in knots. Members of COMESA, for example, impose a common external tariff on goods of non-members. But several members are also in the SADC free-trade area, which requires lower tariffs on goods from some non-COMESA states. The TFTA is meant to iron out these differences, but the details are still to be decided. African countries vary in size, geography and resources, so trade deals affect each differently. Manufacturing tends to cluster in powerhouses such as Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa. Small agricultural producers fear being swamped with food from larger neighbours. There are no mechanisms for helping the losers. So it is difficult to convince countries to make sacrifices in order to increase trade. Whether to protect their dominance or avoid hardship, most countries revert to protectionism. Take the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It is meant to be a customs union, but has an extensive list of exceptions. Two decades after it promised free movement of people, goods and transport, implementation is poor. East Africa does better, but Karim Sadek, the director of Rift Valley Railways in Kenya and Uganda, says that not having to stop at the border would make his life easier. “You get used to the inefficiencies.” Non-tariff barriers are not only an African problem. Product standards and rules of origin are used by America to block Mexican goods under NAFTA. But evidence cited by UNCTAD suggests that the reduction of tariffs in Africa has led to an increase in the use of other obstacles. In SADC such protectionism has resulted in more imports from non-SADC countries. Clothes, for example, are required to be both manufactured and sourced in SADC countries to qualify for preferences. Since few textiles are produced in the region, the rules have stifled trade in garments. Bureaucracy is expensive to overcome. According to research by Nick Charalambides of Imani Development, a consultancy, Shoprite, a South African retailer, spent $5.8m dealing with red tape in 2009 in order to gain $13.6m in duty savings under SADC. Others avoid the hassle of customs: informal trade is thought to provide income to over 40% of Africa’s population. Why countries are so keen to agree new trade deals Some think Africa needs to approach trade differently. “The first question that should be asked is: what can we trade with each other?” says Bineswaree Bolaky of UNCTAD. Often the answer is: not much. Most African countries produce a narrow range of goods and have export sectors geared towards supplying rich countries. Few have significant manufacturing bases and, unlike in developing Asian countries, there is little trade in inputs or services that might lead to African chains of production. The volume of intra-African trade is so small that fixing these problems, and upgrading the continent’s infrastructure, may not seem worth the expense to some countries. So UNCTAD recommends creating an integration fund, financed by relatively rich African states, to pave new roads and build export capacity in poorer countries. The African Development Bank handed out over $1 billion in the past two years with the explicit aim of boosting intra-African trade. But that risks becoming an objective in and of itself. “You still need to be flogging stuff to big countries,” says Alan Winters of the University of Sussex. In their zeal to integrate, African leaders may also be using the wrong model. Broad and shallow agreements are the norm, but the continent’s most successful economic bloc consists of just five countries. EAC members keep good data, and a public scorecard holds them accountable for non-tariff barriers. “There you have a small group of countries that is taking it seriously and making some progress,” says Jaime de Melo of the University of Geneva. Talk of a common currency in East Africa and even a political federation do not seem far-fetched. It is a stretch to think that the TFTA will lead to anything similar.A good system, but overwhelmed “THE animals die first” is a common refrain from many Ethiopians living in Tigray and Afar, two northern states, as the country experiences its worst drought in decades. Crop production in these regions has dropped by 50% or more in some areas, and failed completely in others. Hundreds of thousands of domestic animals are reckoned to have perished. The rapidly changing skylines of Ethiopia’s modernising cities notwithstanding, about 80% of its population still live off the land. Yet despite the drought there are not yet scenes reminiscent of the famine of 1983-84 when as many as 1m people died. That reprieve may not last. Those working for NGOs, which are now scrabbling to raise funds for relief, point out that in previous dry spells, hunger intensified from April onwards because by then people have eaten through their last food stocks or what little was harvestable. “The present situation here keeps me awake at night,” says John Graham, the country director for Save the Children, a charity. Unlike in 1983, when brutal government policies increased the number of deaths, Ethiopia’s present rulers have done much to mitigate the impact. Their Productive Safety Net Programme provides jobs for about 7m people who work on public-infrastructure projects in return for food or cash. There are also a national food reserve and early warning systems throughout the woredas, local-government districts. Ethiopia even managed to accelerate the building of a new railway line—the country’s only one—to bring food supplies from Djibouti on the coast of the Horn of Africa. But the country’s ability to help itself may soon reach its limit. Estimates of the number of people affected by drought doubled between June and October in 2015 to 8.2m, and are now pushing beyond 10m (of a population of about 100m). The government faces criticism for not acknowledging sooner that it needs help. Ethiopians—both official and lay—are sensitive about their ancient, diverse country’s persistent association with misery and pestilence, while equally proud of its economic turnaround. There is also a sense that the government has not been found wanting with this drought; rather that it has simply encountered events beyond its control. The El Niño phenomenon is causing unusually heavy rains in some parts of the world and drought elsewhere. Herein lies a challenge for Ethiopia: it is competing for international funds with other grave humanitarian crises, such as the wars in Syria and Yemen, and the international migrant emergency. Moreover, the international system’s cogs started turning late, after the government initially tried to go it alone. Ethiopia may also be up against donor fatigue. The estimated $1.4 billion needed to combat the drought’s impact remains less than half funded. Further concerns stem from the possibility that El Niño will also affect Ethiopia’s next rainy season. The UN reckons such a situation could result in more than 15m Ethiopians suffering food shortages, acute malnutrition or worse by mid-2016.PEACE in our time or a cynical diplomatic fudge? The best that can be said of the provisional agreement on a “cessation of hostilities” between at least some of the warring parties in Syria, hammered out (again) on February 22nd between John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, and Sergei Lavrov, his Russian opposite number, is that it appears to have slightly more solid foundations than a similar attempt earlier this month. The agreement, which is due to come into force on February 27th, was endorsed by Vladimir Putin in a rare television address after he conferred by telephone with Barack Obama. As The Economist went to press, details of how it would be implemented were still being worked through. It looks likely that at least one of the requirements of the UN peace plan outlined by the UN Security Council late last year may be fulfilled: the lifting of sieges of rebel-held towns by government forces and the delivery of humanitarian aid to their starving populations. Some aid convoys began to roll from Damascus last week and more will follow. Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s president, has also promised to hold (meaningless) parliamentary elections on April 13th. Just about everything else remains unclear. The Russians have given themselves and Mr Assad plenty of latitude in the way they wish to interpret the agreement. The Syrian regime refuses to describe it as a ceasefire, instead referring to a mere suspension of combat operations. In practice, it may not even amount to that. Islamic State (IS) and Jabhat al-Nusra (JAN), al-Qaeda’s Syrian affiliate, are officially designated as terrorist groups by both Moscow and Washington, and are thus explicitly excluded from the agreement. But JAN, intermingled with other rebel groups, is active on almost every front in the civil war, from Daraa in the far south of the country to Aleppo in the north. JAN is also the leading player in a rebel alliance that includes Ahrar al-Sham, a powerful Salafist outfit, and other less extreme groups. It controls most of Idlib province to the west of Aleppo. Having largely completed the encirclement of Aleppo, the regime’s next priority is to cut off and squeeze Idlib. Fabrice Balanche of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy argues that if Russia continues air strikes against JAN, as the agreement entitles it to, it will be impossible for other groups fighting alongside it to respect the ceasefire. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts Before the assault on Idlib can begin in earnest, regime forces will need to lock in the gains of the Russian-backed assault of the past few weeks. The offensive has retaken swathes of rebel-held territory and cut off supply lines to Aleppo from Turkey with the help of Syrian-Kurdish YPG fighters, whom the Americans regard as their principal ally on the ground against IS. Such has been its speed that Mr Assad’s forces are in need of a breather. The timing of the ceasefire will thus be very convenient if it allows them to construct defensive lines against possible counter-attacks and foments division between those of their enemies abiding by the agreement and those ignoring it. Mr Putin’s willingness to use hard power, and the West’s fear of confronting him, are allowing him to call the shots. A ceasefire on his terms, at a moment of his choosing, looks uncomfortably like a version of the Minsk 2 agreement struck a year ago to bring an end to the fighting in eastern Ukraine. Soon after, the town of Debaltseve fell to Russian-backed separatists after a devastating artillery assault. Since then there have been thousands of ceasefire violations by pro-Russian forces. Around 1,000 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed. As things stand, the ceasefire meets all of Mr Putin’s diplomatic and military requirements. It confirms the survival of Mr Assad’s regime, potentially divides the rebels, puts Turkey on the back foot and panders to Western concerns by promising a more concerted effort against IS and the possibility of a political settlement that helps staunch the flow of refugees into Europe. From the perspective of Moscow and Damascus, what’s not to like?Cleopatra married her brothers MAHA SAAD ZAKI, a professor of clinical genetics, ushers Ahmed, Fatima and their family into her room at Egypt’s National Research Centre. At least three of their six children have a rare neurological illness that manifests itself around age four, causing mental retardation, loss of the use of their limbs and, later, death. The couple’s nine-year-old daughter slumps, twitching. This congenital illness has appeared because, as well as being husband and wife, Ahmed and Fatima are also first cousins (their names have been changed). Cases like these are all too common in the Middle East and north Africa. Marrying a close relative markedly increases the chance that both parents are carriers of dangerous recessive genes, which can then cause disease when a child inherits a copy of the gene from both parents, as will happen in 25% of cases. The gamut of such illnesses runs from known ones such as microcephaly (in which children have unusually small heads) cystic fibrosis and thalassaemia, a blood disorder, to wholly new disorders. “Ninety percent of the cases I see are caused by consanguineous marriages,” says Ms Zaki. Statistics on the prevalence of marriages between close relatives today are scarce. Once common practice in Western societies, estimates suggest the Middle East, along with Africa, continue to have the highest levels in the world. In Egypt, around 40% of the population marry a cousin; the last survey in Jordan, admittedly way back in 1992, found that 32% were married to a first cousin; a further 17.3% were married to more distant relatives. Rates are thought to be even higher in tribal countries such as Iraq and the Gulf states of Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Kuwait. Today the first reason men and women look to wed within the family is because they know a lot about their relatives: who they are, what they earn, any past blunders. And large families mean they have lots of them. “People are looking for ethics and manners,” says Atef al-Shitany of Egypt’s health ministry. Tying the knot within also ensures property remains in the family. In Upper Egypt, a rural farming area, rates are the highest in Egypt. Unlike in the West, there is no social stigma; quite the opposite. A 38-year-old Egyptian woman, who has two sons with micro-syndrome (which causes cataracts, small genitalia and learning difficulties) due to her marriage to a cousin, says relatives nonetheless criticise her for allowing her 18-year-old daughter to get engaged to a “stranger”—the fiancé is not a relation. Many wrongly think that maternal cousins are not blood relatives. Prevailing Islamic belief reinforces intermarriage, although it happens among Christians too. The Koran allows marriage to anyone but parents, siblings, aunts and uncles, nephews and nieces. Indeed, Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad, married her cousin, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, notes Ahmed Mamdouh of Al Azhar, an Egyptian university. Many in the region, though, simply do not know of the risks of marrying a family member. A small survey in Saudi Arabia found that participants were 50% less likely to view marrying a cousin positively when warned of the problems. “We wouldn’t have married if we had known,” says Ahmed. To reduce genetic disorders, some countries have made blood tests mandatory for fiancés, which have helped reduce incidence of diseases such as sickle cell anaemia. In Tunisia, the government mandates premarital counselling for all those betrothed to a relative. In Egypt, where education is often rudimentary, there is much more work to be done. Couples that do know of the risks often believe—sometimes because their doctor tells them so—that basic blood tests rule out the risk of any genetic illness. “The only way to avoid the suffering is not to marry relatives,” says Ms Zaki. “But that will be impossible to achieve here.”ON FEBRUARY 23rd, a committee of Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, began debating a new law which will allow it to suspend its own members for “expressing support for terrorism”. While the law is not specifically directed at any political faction, its thrust is clear. It was tabled by the government in response to a meeting three weeks ago between three Israeli-Arab Knesset members and the families of a number of Palestinians who had been killed while attacking Israelis. The members of Balad, an Arab-nationalist party, also took part in a moment’s silence in memory of the young Palestinians. By calling them “martyrs”, the MPs enraged many Jews who regard the killers as terrorists; in one incident, assailants killed two Israelis on a bus. While the meeting was undoubtedly provocative, the move by the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, to adopt powers to banish the Arab MPs from parliament is seen by his critics as an assault on Israel’s democracy and an attempt to disenfranchise Israel’s Arab minority, who make up 20% of the population (excluding Palestinians in the territories occupied in 1967). The law has been criticised by Israel’s president, Reuven Rivlin, a member of Mr Netanyahu’s right-wing Likud party, who made a rare intervention in the legislative procedure on February 15th, saying that the law “sins against the meaning of the Knesset…. it sins against the voting public.” Mr Netanyahu is surely aware that the law is unlikely ever to pass all the necessary legislative stages of the Knesset; if it does, it is liable to be struck down by the Supreme Court; and even if it gets past the court it is unlikely ever to be used because it requires a three-quarters majority of the Knesset to agree to any suspension. Yet it is part of a verbal campaign Mr Netanyahu stands accused of waging against Israel’s Arab minority since last year’s general election. In a message broadcast on election day, Mr Netanyahu warned right-wing voters that “Arab voters are flowing in droves to the polls.” He later expressed regret over that message but recently he linked an attack in Tel Aviv, in which an Israeli Arab murdered three Israelis, to “lawlessness” in Arab towns. He also instructed two conservative ministers to draw up a list of tough conditions that Arab local councils must adhere to in order to get money from a $3.8 billion programme designed to improve conditions in the Arab sector. The complete, complex and convoluted history of Israel's Knesset, in one graphic Most Israelis take great pride in their democracy, which is committed to equal rights for Jews and non-Jews, and features the representation of Israeli Arabs in such bodies as the Supreme Court. Some argue that the suspension law undermines this; as does another law being proposed by the Netanyahu government, which will force NGOs that receive most of their funding from foreign governments to say so prominently in all their publications. This, too, is ostensibly a community-blind law, but in reality targets human-rights and pro-Palestinian groups, as they tend to be the ones receiving such funding. Settlers’ groups are also often funded from outside Israel, by Jewish philanthropists and evangelical Christian movements; but the law will not affect them, as their money does not come from governments.Protest vote? IRAN’S holiest city, and also its second-largest, has long been a conservative bastion. In parliamentary elections in 2012 Iran’s most right-wing party, the Paydari or Stability Front, won all of Mashhad’s five seats. In local elections the year after it won an outright majority and left the reformists with none. But after the nuclear deal and the lifting of sanctions, reformists backed by the city’s businessmen are attracting packed audiences to their hustings for elections due on 26th February. The conservatives may have expanded the complex around the shrine of Reza, Shia’s eighth imam, but only the reformists can attract the foreign investment the city needs to fill it. Their demands include a new railway to halve the time of travelling the 900 kilometres (560 miles) from Mashhad west to Tehran, the capital; highways designed to turn the city into Central Asia’s conduit to the Middle East; and leisure centres to diversify a rigidly spiritual form of tourism. Some suggest promoting the city not just as Imam Reza’s burial place, but also Harun al-Rashid’s, the eighth century caliph who presided over the golden age of Sunni Islam. “We have to replace the anti-Westerners,” says a businessman who says the conservatives blocked his joint venture with an Italian company, worth €400m ($440m), for a theme park. Economic demands often turn cultural. Several female candidates are campaigning for an end to the glass ceiling on senior government posts. “Stop sanctions on happiness,” cries a local economics professor and reformist candidate, vowing to fight a ban on concerts, upheld by Ayatollah Ahmad Alamolhoda, the city’s main preacher. One rally ends with a band with a female drummer performing renditions of Hafez, the most revered Persian poet, on stage. The more daring supporters don green veils or T-shirts (under jackets they can quickly zip up), harking back to the mass protests, or Green Revolution, that followed a rigged presidential election in 2009. Either as a reminder of or a precaution against a repeat of the violence, organisers distribute sticking-plasters which supporters wear on their index fingers. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal The conservatives have struck back, casting doubt on the reformists’ patriotism and mocking the support they have received from the BBC’s Persian service. “Don’t vote for Britain,” read posters hanging from Mashhad’s lampposts, underlining the widely-held view that perfidious Albion continues to scheme. But in Paydari’s campaign office, the mood is more sombre. A campaign manager insists that, post-sanctions, hardliners also favour foreign investment. He fears the perception, even among the party’s traditional constituency, is that they are out of step with the times.
