AS RECENTLY as two years ago the Kurds of Iraq were riding high, at the peak of a well-deserved social and economic recovery following decades of hardship and isolation under Saddam Hussein. The region seemed an island of stability even as the rest of Iraq was convulsed by violence following the American invasion and overthrow of the Iraqi leader. But the Kurdish miracle is dissipating. The Kurds have suffered a triple blow: the freezing in 2014 of their take of the federal budget, which constitutes 95% of the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG)’s overall budget; the emergence of Islamic State (IS) which took control of Mosul, just 85km (50 miles) from the capital, Erbil, making travel to Kurdistan’s oil facilities slower and more hazardous; and a steep drop in oil prices. Today the skeletons of unfinished buildings and half-empty watering holes bear witness to those once-high hopes. The residents are increasingly unhappy. Although the 70% drop in oil prices or the war against IS could not have been predicted, the severity of the crisis could surely have been mitigated. History has been harsh to the Kurds, scattered across several countries without their own state. In the 1980s Saddam used poison gas against them; in the 1990s, though they were protected by a Western no-fly zone, he was determined to cripple them financially. UN sanctions following his invasion of Kuwait had harmed the whole country; and a three-year civil war between Kurdish political factions left them drained. But in 2003, following the removal of Saddam, a Kurdish renaissance began and lasted a decade. Even in Iraq’s darkest years, 2006 and 2007, when al-Qaeda battled the Americans in the Sunni heartlands, Kurdistan’s impressive 10% annual growth rate set it apart. Foreign and domestic investment rose. The oil industry and property boomed; tourism, though still small, picked up; and the number of expatriates rose. Foreign businesses flocked to Erbil. Yet during this time, opportunities were squandered. “They entered into the financial crisis with a regional economy that was structurally weak and overwhelmingly reliant on high oil prices,” says Patrick Osgood, Kurdistan bureau chief for Iraq Oil Report, a subscription news service. Some 60% of Iraqi Kurdistan’s population is dependent on the public payroll, and most of them have not received their full salaries for months. Though Kurdish officials blamed Baghdad’s budget freeze (which has since been relaxed), the KRG’s inability to make up for it through increasing oil sales played a role. A feather-bedded public sector has also limited the development of a more vibrant private one. The relative security of working for the government has made it much less attractive for public employees to move to the private sector—a carefully crafted strategy, many reckon, by government parties keen to buy loyalty. “No party pushed for private-sector development because it was not in their interest,” said Roger Guiu, a research fellow at MERI, a Kurdish think tank. “It’s not a matter of firing people from the public sector, it’s making employment in the private one more attractive.” Less reliance on the public jobs might have led to less dissatisfaction and ultimately prevented the social unrest now rippling through the region as the government has run out of money. In the cities of Erbil and Sulaymaniyah, and in other smaller towns, residents have in recent weeks taken to the streets to rail against both government corruption and unpaid salaries. New austerity measures have angered many after the KRG announced in January that it would cut high wages by 75% and lower ones by 15%. Meanwhile official estimates report that the poverty rate has risen to 12%, up from 3% three years ago. A 30% increase in the population brought about by Syrian refugees and internally displaced Iraqis has also caused problems, including an unmanageable increase in demand for water and electricity. The continuing war against IS means that despite the collapse of oil revenues and Baghdad’s freezing of the federal budget, military spending has increased, though officials refuse to give numbers. Peshmerga soldiers on the front lines have been exempt from the austerity measures and still supposedly get their full salary. But even Kurdish soldiers have suffered from salary delays—with predictable results. Some fighters are exchanging the front line for boats from Turkey to Greece, in striking evidence of just how depleted the West’s strongest ally in Iraq has become. Deserting soldiers are just some of the 37,000 Kurds who have left Iraq for Europe since 2014. Most of them cite government corruption and financial hardship as their reason for migrating. As the battle against IS nears its third year, exasperation is increasing and expatriates are trickling away. The government is offering no reforms that look likely to revive the economy. It does not help that the region is also in constitutional crisis: the president of the KRG, Masoud Barzani, served two terms that came to an end in 2013, and was then granted a two-year extension by the Kurdish parliament. That prolongation expired last August, and yet he remains in office—in the 11th year of an eight-year term.HIS sleeping bag around his shoulders, Khaled, a 28-year-old truck driver, sits in a corner of Victoria Square, a gathering point for migrants in central Athens. He is waiting for a smuggler to help him cross Greece’s northern border with Macedonia, closed since February 21st to Afghan migrants like him. Across the square, Mahmud, a restaurant manager who has come from Aleppo with his wife and three children, fears that the route to Germany may soon close for Syrians too. “We mustn’t get stuck in Greece,” he says firmly. That may be hard to avoid. Last week Austria restricted arrivals to 3,200 per day, of whom 80 may apply for asylum. Macedonia, Serbia and Croatia are clamping down too. By February 23rd a backlog of 4,000 migrants had gathered at the Greek-Macedonian frontier; Greek police turned back dozens of buses carrying new arrivals. On February 24th ten countries along the migration route met in Vienna to discuss further steps. Greece was not invited. At the port of Piraeus, where ferries bring the migrants who arrive in Greece’s Aegean islands, aid workers urged Afghans to remain in government-run reception facilities rather than attempt the journey north. For months experts have warned that if northern Europe restricts refugee flows without an overall plan for handling migration, Greece faces disaster. The United Nations predicts 1m arrivals this year. Alexis Tsipras, the prime minister, worries that Greece will become “a black box” for migrants. As razor wire goes up across the Balkans, his fears may be about to come true. The crisis could hardly have come at worse moment for Mr Tsipras. His left-wing Syriza government faces a revolt by lawyers, doctors and farmers against reforms demanded by Greece’s international creditors. Farmers angry at moves to raise their income taxes to the same level as other Greeks blocked highways with their tractors, closing border crossings with Bulgaria and Turkey. A meeting on February 22nd with Mr Tsipras proved fruitless. Two days later the supreme court prosecutor threatened to investigate protest leaders; the blockades were quickly removed. While the farmers’ rebellion may have been crushed, lawyers are on strike over a new pension scheme, which they say would force them to pay more than 30% of their income in employee contributions. George Katrougalos, the labour minister, wants to raise employers’ contributions instead, claiming that pensions are among the last income sources for Greek families hit by the country’s long recession. But Greece’s creditors from the EU and International Monetary Fund say the pension system is on the verge of bankruptcy. They want an across-the-board benefits cut of at least 10% before releasing the next tranche of funding from the €86 billion ($95 billion) bail-out Greece concluded last year. That leaves the Greek government on the edge of insolvency as the migrant crisis is about to explode. Two decades ago Greece comfortably absorbed almost 1m economic migrants from the Balkans. This time, after six years of recession, the unemployment rate is above 25%. Mr Tsipras’s inexperienced government has struggled to take care of migrants in transit, let alone provide facilities for those who stay longer than a few days. It took a threat of immediate expulsion from the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone before Greece fulfilled its obligation to provide “hotspots” on five islands where migrants could be processed according to EU regulations. With local mayors raising “not-in-my-backyard” objections, nothing happened until the defence ministry took over; army contractors built the facilities in less than a month. Greece has already agreed to host up to 60,000 asylum-seekers who enter an official programme to relocate them to other EU countries. So far most have ignored the offer and pressed on with the journey. In any case, according to current plans, EU countries would take in only 13,000 migrants from Greece in the next six months. Some in Syriza used to argue that providing poor facilities for migrants would encourage them to move along. But thousands of Tunisians, Moroccans and Pakistanis blocked at the Macedonian border earlier this month are now settling in. Greece cannot afford to deport them. One priority, says a Syriza official, is to keep migrants as far as possible from tourist resorts. In Kos, an Aegean island popular with German holidaymakers, summer bookings have collapsed because of fears it will be overrun. Sports facilities and disused military camps on the mainland are being refurbished as temporary refugee camps. But the country’s total capacity is no more than 70,000 (see chart), and more than 2,000 migrants are arriving daily in Piraeus. The numbers will rise as the weather improves. If the northern border closes, Greece will fill very quickly.Willkommen this ANTI-MIGRANT violence in Germany has become so severe over the past year that it is a miracle that no refugee has yet been killed. In one case, inebriated thugs threw a Molotov cocktail through a window into a room where an 11-year-old refugee would have been sleeping, had he not crept into bed with his mother in another room. Another xenophobe fired a gun into a refugee home and hit a Syrian man in the leg. Elsewhere, someone lobbed a hand grenade into a processing centre for asylum seekers. It did not go off. There were 13,846 “right-extremist” crimes in Germany in 2015, according to preliminary estimates, about 30% more than in 2014. Of those, 921 were violent. This year the pace has accelerated, especially in the former East Germany. On February 18th about 100 people in Clausnitz, in the eastern state of Saxony, tried to block a bus carrying 20 refugees, including children. In another Saxon city a cheering crowd interfered with firefighters dousing flames in a building being converted into an asylum home. One police chief warns of a “pogrom atmosphere”. Fears of a xenophobic backlash in otherwise-tolerant societies have been rising since the refugee crisis began, and not only in Germany. Right-wing populism is also growing in the Netherlands, as well as in Sweden, which like Germany entered the crisis with liberal asylum policies that are now being tightened. But Germany has taken by far the most refugees, with 1.1m arriving last year alone. And because of its history, Germany is extra-vigilant about extremism on the far right. The supreme court will soon consider an attempt by the 16 federal states to ban the NPD, a party that looks and smells like a neo-Nazi party. Germany also has a small subculture of violent, explicitly neo-Nazi networks. When it comes to less extreme populism on the right, however, Germany is an exception in the European Union: it has no far-right party as firmly established as France’s National Front or Austria’s Freedom Party. Germany’s political mainstream long seemed to have been inoculated by the Nazi past. As recently as 2014, a biannual survey of right-wing attitudes in Germany found that xenophobia, chauvinism, anti-Semitism and authoritarian longings were declining. Rightist worldviews were held by just 2.4% of the population, down from almost 10% in 2002. Yet even at the time, Andreas Zick of the University of Bielefeld, a co-author of the study, said the middle was fragile: xenophobia could increase again in a crisis. It probably started growing in 2014, even before refugee numbers surged, when the “Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the Occident” movement, or Pegida, began weekly marches through Dresden. After waning last spring, it has waxed again with the refugee crisis. Meanwhile the populist Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, founded in 2013 to oppose euro-crisis bail-outs, has veered to the xenophobic right. Pegida and the AfD have similar supporters. Pegida marchers tend to be older middle-class men anxious about social decline and cultural alienation, says Hans Vorländer, co-author of a new book on the movement. Pegida and the AfD have not merged, he says, only because their leaders loathe each other. But the AfD has ridden the anti-refugee backlash to score more than 10% in national polls. It is likely to do well in three regional elections on March 13th and to enter the federal parliament in 2017. Mr Zick thinks it has a potential voter share of 20%. Germany seems at last to be like the rest of Europe in having an entrenched populist party on the right. Worse, the data Mr Zick is collecting for his next study, due in May, suggest that the middle of society is becoming radicalised. This is most evident in the rise of verbal aggression. A leader of the AfD recently suggested that border guards should “make use of their firearms” to keep refugees out. Facebook and Twitter are abuzz with hate speech. This “radicalisation of rhetoric blurs the boundaries between physical and verbal violence,” says Mr Vorländer. Heiko Maas, Germany’s justice minister, is worried. He has invited his counterparts in the 16 states to a summit on March 10th to think up strategies against extremism. But as refugees continue to arrive, Germany’s tolerance and moderation are being tested as never before in its post-war history. The firewall it has built between respectable conservatism and the extreme right may be breaking down.EUROPEANS can sometimes seem like a miserable bunch. The continent has produced downbeat writers such as Jean-Paul Sartre (“hell is other people”) and philosophers such as Slavoj Zizek (“What does love feel like? Like a great misfortune”). But although there are many reasons for Europeans to feel gloomy at present—from a migration crisis stretching from Greece to Germany to the possibility that Britain, one of the fastest-growing economies in Europe, may leave the European Union—many, instead, seem to be becoming ever cheerier. Most Europeans are, on average, at their happiest since the financial crisis. In 2008 76% of EU citizens said they were satisfied with their lives. That number is now 80%, according to the Eurobarometer survey, which has tracked self-reported happiness for over four decades. Those in northern European countries, such as Denmark and Sweden, are consistently the most content. But some countries have bucked the trend. According to Ruut Veenhoven, a professor at Erasmus University in Rotterdam who has been analysing data on happiness for decades, people in Greece and Portgual have become gloomier over the past three decades (although they have started to perk up over the past few years). Some general themes stand out. According to Eurostat, the EU’s statistical office, the only metric consistently correlated with European happiness is relative income. Moving one step up the income ladder increases happiness in every country in the EU; the difference in happiness between the bottom quintile and the second quintile is the largest. European men tend to be slightly happier than women, though not in Britain or Denmark. Those who go to university tend to be happier (not controlling for income). But some big differences also emerge. Europeans are generally happier when they are younger. However, richer countries see an uptick of joyfulness in old age: Germans are happier when they are over 75 years old than when they are between 25 and 34, and the Swiss are happier when they are over 75 than when they are teenagers. (Britons, Swedes and Danes are happiest when they are between 65 and 74.) The Portuguese seem to have the worst mid-life crises, whereas Greeks, Bulgarians, Romanians and Slovenians all become glummer as they get older. Where and how Europeans live also determines their happiness. In all countries, people are least happy if they live on their own. By the same token, in most countries those with children tend to be happier, with the exception of Britain, Denmark, Ireland and Switzerland, where people tend to be happier when childless. Overall, Europeans tend to be most content if they live in towns or suburbs as opposed to cities or rural areas. Northern Europeans tend to be cheerier the farther they are from cities (and hence from other people). In most parts of southern and eastern Europe, however, the opposite is true. What makes city-dwellers happier varies from one city to the next. According to the most recent data from Eurobarometer, most city-dwellers have become slightly happier (see map). The highest correlation with life satisfaction in cities is a feeling of safety. But in Stockholm, Amsterdam and Vienna it is those who think foreigners are well integrated who tend to be happiest. Parisians and Berliners who rate their cities’ cleanliness highly are the most content. In Reykjavik, curiously, the telltale sign of happiness is being satisfied with the public transport system. Those places which are happiest appear to have good governance. This may suggest a lesson to politicians: reducing unemployment and boosting wages will undoubtedly increase happiness. But clean pavements are important, too.OLD habits die hard. So it proved with David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, after his mini-victory at last week’s European Union summit in Brussels. Bounding energetically to the press-conference lectern after two gruelling days of talks over the terms of Britain’s EU membership, Mr Cameron opened his post-summit remarks not by trumpeting the emergency brake on euro-zone integration he had just secured, nor by crowing over his success in denying benefits to EU migrant workers. Instead, he highlighted the carve-out he had won for Britain from the EU treaty commitment to “ever-closer union”, a golden oldie that has infuriated British Eurosceptics for decades. Like a vestigial piece of junk DNA in the genome, this phrase has survived every change to the EU treaties, exerting no influence on its host today but providing a window to its past. The ambition of fostering “ever-closer union among the peoples of Europe,” inserted into the preamble of the 1957 Treaty of Rome, the EU’s founding document, speaks to the post-war need for reconciliation in a scarred continent. Its deliberate ambiguity—defining a journey, not a destination—is well suited to a club that prefers debating the scope of its power to exercising it. Defending the phrase is the last test of the classical Euro-federalist. Chief among this dwindling crowd is Belgium, which has long seen a federal Europe as an antidote to its own national and linguistic divisions. Charles Michel, the Belgian prime minister, feared that a British exemption to ever-closer union could kill the idea for the rest, and vowed to defend it to the hilt. Messrs Cameron and Michel therefore disagreed on whether ever-closer union was a good thing, but very much agreed that it mattered. (Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, joked that Mr Michel would be better off pursuing an “ever-closer Belgium”). That their theological struggle was quickly solved shows how Europe has changed. Once, Britain would have joined an almighty battle against the perfidious federalisers, as several of Mr Cameron’s predecessors did. Today he is happy for the rest to get on with the job, so long as Britain is left out; indeed, Mr Cameron acknowledges that the euro zone must integrate further to guarantee its survival. Thus did Mr Michel win his tweaks to the text and Mr Cameron his special dispensation for Britain (and a promise that the exception would be inserted into a future EU treaty). Some old-timers wrung their hands to see a founding European principle jettisoned so easily, if only for one troublesome member. But the debate left other European leaders confused, and rightly so. “Ever-closer union” has never been more than the weathervane of the European project, whipped about by the prevailing political winds. The grand projects of integration, such as the single currency or the passport-free Schengen area, have sprung from the ambitions of leaders and the mood of the times, not from any mystical force of treaty language. If lofty phrases have never driven Europe’s integration, they can scarcely slow its unravelling. The migrant crisis has tugged at European unity like nothing before, and the treaty provides little protection against unilateral border closures or the failure of some European countries to accept refugees from others. It is this, rather than a trio of fine words in an increasingly threadbare document, that should trouble the federalists. Instead, we are left with two peculiar phenomena. The Belgians cling to the comforting maxims of yesteryear just as events render them obsolete. And Mr Cameron brags, as he did to the House of Commons this week, that thanks to his deal Britain will never become part of a “European superstate” that no one is trying to build. Back in the real world, the migrant crisis has exposed differences between European countries that will linger long after the immediate danger has passed. The bonds of trust that hold together projects like Schengen have frayed. Governments no longer merely disagree; some seem unable even to understand each other. That could jeopardise the traditional instruments of solidarity inside the EU, such as transfers from rich countries to poor. Retreat to the core In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union All is not lost, say optimists. There is an old maxim in Brussels that the European project advances only in times of crisis. And such is the despair that the German notion of Kerneuropa, or “core Europe”, is resurfacing, in which those countries willing to forge ahead should not be hamstrung by the reluctance of others. “It has become impossible to work together at 28 [member states],” says one EU diplomat. “Perhaps we have to think about smaller groups.” The foreign ministers of the six original signatories to the Treaty of Rome met recently for a discussion on Europe’s future, and further such gatherings are planned. Some think a departure of the foot-dragging Brits could hasten a process of tighter but smaller integration—although a Brexit seems at least as likely to embolden Eurosceptics elsewhere. In any case, the appetite for big steps seems diminished. The euro zone is an obvious candidate for integration. Worries over wobbly lenders, especially in Italy, highlight the need to complete the half-built banking union (although there remain big differences over a common European deposit-insurance fund). There are plenty of other ideas, from a tougher central fiscal authority to common debt instruments. But many are incompatible with one another, and creditor countries like Germany have no desire to increase their liabilities. The migrant crisis, which has made a mockery of borders, looks tailor-made for a common European approach on interior as well as foreign policy. No one wants Schengen to die. But for now those countries affected by the flows are unable to co-ordinate their response and those that are not see no reason to trouble themselves. So crises may present opportunities for Europhiles, but they are still crises. Instead of the hoped-for integration and stability, the EU’s troubles might just lead to exhaustion and collapse.MINISTERS frequently reverse decisions taken by their predecessors, sometimes wisely, often not. But it usually happens after an election has produced a change of government. What is remarkable about the justice ministry since last May is that the new Tory Lord Chancellor, Michael Gove, has been systematically undoing many signature policies of his Tory predecessor, Chris Grayling. The two are now allies in the campaign to leave the European Union (see article). But on matters of justice they seem to disagree on almost everything. The latest example was Mr Gove’s decision to scrap a second round of cuts in legal aid for criminal cases. Mr Grayling wanted to reduce the number of firms of solicitors paid to offer 24-hour help at police stations to suspects from 1,600 to just 527, and to trim legal-aid fees in criminal cases by a further 8.75%. Lawyers fearing a loss of business complained loudly and threatened to sue. Mr Gove has shelved both measures. In December he scrapped a mandatory criminal-courts charge that Mr Grayling, arguing that criminals should help pay for the administration of justice, had imposed on guilty defendants. Over 50 magistrates quit, complaining that they were unable to waive the charge even when defendants were unable to pay. Worse, they claimed that in some cases defendants were encouraged to plead guilty even when they were innocent, to avoid the risk of incurring a higher court charge. The House of Commons justice committee condemned the charge for similar reasons. Last autumn Mr Gove cancelled a £5.9m ($9m) contract for the justice ministry’s commercial arm to advise Saudi Arabia’s prison authorities. Indeed, he went further, scrapping the commercial operation set up by Mr Grayling, on the grounds that it was allowing prison and judicial systems in authoritarian countries to claim a British seal of approval. He also abandoned plans by Mr Grayling to build a new secure college for teenage prisoners. And he overturned a ban pettily introduced by his predecessor on books for prisoners. What is going on? In part Mr Gove’s reversals may reflect some easing of the pressure for more public-spending cuts. But more important is that Mr Gove has taken a less confrontational attitude to the judiciary and the legal profession than did the hardline Mr Grayling, who was the first non-lawyer to be Lord Chancellor in over 400 years (Mr Gove himself is the second). Mr Grayling seemed to go out of his way to make himself unpopular. In contrast Mr Gove has been readier to listen to grumbling by judges and lawyers. The changes over the past six years of Tory-led government have been substantial. Judges’ pay has been frozen and their pensions cut, prompting some to sue the government. In spite of Mr Gove’s relative leniency, the legal-aid budget has been slashed by over one-third in real (inflation-adjusted) terms, from over £2.2 billion in 2010 to £1.6 billion in 2015. In many areas, especially of civil and family law, legal aid is no longer available. One result has been a big rise in the numbers choosing to represent themselves, clogging up courts that are ill-designed for litigants in person. Meanwhile spending on the court system has been reduced, many have been closed and court fees have increased. Not surprisingly, practitioners have squealed. Last year Justice, a lobby group, pronounced that “our justice system is in crisis”. In his annual report in January the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Thomas, declared bleakly that “our system of justice has become unaffordable to most”. He added that judges’ morale was low, their workload had hugely increased and they were concerned over the adverse effects on access to justice of the recent changes. The justice ministry counters such pessimism by pointing out that the legal-aid system in England and Wales is still one of the world’s most generous. Other countries are said to consider the British system to be among the fairest and best of all. But Mr Gove also has an agenda, not of further spending cuts but of something that is more urgently needed: reform. The ministry says it is spending over £700m to modernise the courts and tribunal services. As the Centre for Justice Innovation, a think-tank, has put it, “Walking into a court today, it can still feel like the communications revolution never happened.” There is belated talk of online courts to settle disputes, with a judge present but no lawyers. Relate, a charity, is launching an online divorce or separation model based on the pioneering Dutch Rechtwijzer system. Better technology could be used to allow more disputes to be resolved by mediation or arbitration, not in costly courts. Although some lawyers resist change, many senior judges do not. Nobody expects a return to the days of more generous public funding. Lord Thomas is eager to make greater use of technology to settle cases. Lord Briggs has called for an online court to start work as a matter of urgency. And Lord Jackson wants the early introduction of a system of fixed costs for all civil claims worth up to £250,000. Mr Gove has noted that the justice system divides the country, in effect, into two nations: a rich, international class who like to settle cases in London under the gold standard of British justice; and everyone else, left to put up with a creaking, outdated system. He has even floated the idea that highly paid solicitors in London’s “magic circle” firms might be required to pay a levy towards the cost of the judicial system from which they benefit. His biggest challenge will come when he confronts restrictive practices that have long raised costs and diminished competition. At the top end of the market, prices for legal services in Britain are among the highest in the world. The number of qualified lawyers has increased in the past two decades, but outdated restrictions make it hard for new types of provider, including accounting firms, to enter the market. Bodies such as the Law Society and the Bar Council often act as much to protect their members’ interests as to regulate them. Mr Gove has experience, as education secretary, in dealing with entrenched interest groups. Lawyers, heavily represented in Parliament, are an even more formidable lobby than teachers. Under Mr Grayling both solicitors and barristers staged walkouts. Mr Gove may have won plaudits for being readier for dialogue than his predecessor. But his popularity with the special interests within the justice system could yet prove short-lived.Boris and Dave, needling each other MUCH is at stake in Britain’s referendum on European Union membership on June 23rd, from the health of the economy to the future of the United Kingdom itself, as Scotland threatens to break away following Brexit. Now there are fears that one particularly old and venerable institution might not survive the referendum campaign: the Conservative Party. Europe is the issue that has divided the Tories more bitterly than any other over the past 50 years. The referendum, promised by David Cameron in 2013, was supposed to be the safety valve that would stop the party exploding. A united Tory cabinet would allow a passionate debate, win, and move on. But the plan failed to survive first contact with the enemy—and even to anticipate who the enemy would be: one Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, Mr Cameron’s old chum from Eton and Oxford and the Tories’ most effective campaigner. Even before Mr Johnson belatedly declared himself an “outer” on February 21st, there was surprise that fully half a dozen cabinet ministers were prepared to defy Mr Cameron and campaign to leave the EU. They include Michael Gove, the justice secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions minister (and a former party leader) and Chris Grayling, the leader of the Commons. The unscripted Mr Johnson will give the campaign some zest; bookies shortened the odds of Brexit on his declaration. Tory MPs campaigning to leave are delighted: “We are a lot closer than we thought we would be at this stage,” says Philip Hollobone, the MP for Kettering. More worryingly for Mr Cameron, Mr Johnson will encourage other MPs and party members to defy the government. Some 130-150 of the 330 Tory MPs could join the campaign to leave. In local constituency associations, the bias towards leaving is more pronounced. Mr Hollobone, for instance, believes that about 85% of his own activists will vote to leave. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union This makes the party divided, with the grassroots pitched against the leadership. The Conservatives have a dismal record of splitting on such issues, going back to spats over free trade versus imperial preference in the late 19th century. The party was badly divided again in the 1990s, its own MPs bringing a traumatic end to Margaret Thatcher’s 11-year premiership and then wrangling over Europe throughout that of her successor. One consequence of that fratricidal warfare was to help Labour into Downing Street for the following 13 years. This is the fear for Tories as they prepare for months of argument, their divisions highlighted by the relative unanimity of the other big parties in favour of remaining in the EU. Yet as Tim Bale, a historian of the party, points out, the split is now less stark than in the 1990s. Then, the argument within the Tories was between Eurosceptics and those, such as the then-chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, who were fiercely pro-European. Now it is between “hard Eurosceptics and soft Eurosceptics”, the latter arguing to stay on the grounds that they have detached Britain sufficiently from the EU to minimise the damage. A Tory leadership contest is due before the next election, which should give both sides a chance to air their differences. Mr Johnson will be well positioned to run: he is the only one of Mr Cameron’s likely successors to be on the Leave side, meaning he may hoover up the votes of Eurosceptic MPs and party members. But as John Barnes, a Tory councillor, warns, things could still go “very sour” if either side personalises the debate. The hatred that the Thatcherites reserved for those who conspired against her did much to poison the wells during the 1990s. The party is keen to avoid a repeat: Lord Hague, a former leader, has warned that any minister who criticises a colleague will be sent off as “the new special representative to warlords in the Khyber Pass”.Forever the energy of the future BRITAIN has been often criticised for the unpredictability of its energy policy. It should take a lesson from Paris. The national utility, Électricité de France (EDF), reliably puts off a final decision on whether to build Britain’s first nuclear-power station in a generation year after nail-biting year. On February 23rd its boss, Jean-Bernard Lévy, clarified that his latest promise to come up with a verdict “very soon” meant “this year”, four years after the initial deadline in 2012. It may now be best for Britain if EDF calls it quits—however improbable that is. The stakes are high. The £18 billion ($25 billion) project, Hinkley Point C in Somerset, would be a huge engineering work, bigger than the London Olympic Park and on a par with Crossrail, a railway running under central London. It would provide about 7% of Britain’s electricity, and because nuclear energy generates little carbon dioxide, it is central to the government’s commitment to clean power. It is also symbolic of a “nuclear renaissance” after the failure of a state-run industry that limped along from the 1950s to the 1980s, and equally fraught private ownership during the next two decades. It is meant to show how private investment, with a helpful state behind it, is the best model, giving a renewed lease of life to the nuclear industry, says a new book, “The Fall and Rise of Nuclear Power in Britain”, by Simon Taylor, of Cambridge University’s Judge Business School. Yet as the book witheringly points out, the result would be “the most expensive power station in history”. The projected costs are comparable to those of the Three Gorges power station in China, which has about seven times the planned generating capacity—albeit non-nuclear. They may rise if EDF’s painful experience of building two of the same reactors in Finland and France is any guide. Both those European Pressurised Reactors are years behind schedule and three times over budget; there is even a possibility that the French one, Flamanville 3, will be dismantled. To compensate EDF in case of spiralling construction costs, the government has pledged to pay it up to £92.5 per megawatt hour for 35 years once it starts producing—almost triple current wholesale prices. That, Mr Taylor writes, poses the politically sensitive problem of rewarding the firm with as much as £1 billion a year, funded by higher electricity bills, when all of its risks have been overcome. British taxpayers are also on the hook if things go wrong; the government has guaranteed billions of pounds worth of loans on the project. Even more awkwardly, it puts a pillar of British energy security in the hands of firms mostly or wholly owned by foreign governments. EDF, backed by the French state, is a financial mess, with high debts and negative cashflow that this month forced it to cut its 2015 dividend. The strains could become more severe once it starts spending billions of pounds a year on Hinkley Point. The go-ahead also depends on a Chinese state-owned firm taking a one-third stake, amid uncertainty about the health of China’s economy. For all its problems, Hinkley Point is not yet doomed. Politics may trump economics; Britain has committed to stringent climate goals, and France would discourage EDF from abandoning Hinkley Point because it would end the dream of a nuclear-export industry. If EDF does pull out, Dieter Helm of Oxford University says the British government has a fallback option: it could float “nuclear bonds” at low interest rates to pay for the project. That, he says, would be cheaper than the 10% annual return that the French would charge.“Education should not be about wealth,” boomed Tony Blair in 1996. Two decades later, it still is. Private schools teach 7% of Britain’s pupils, but account for half the country’s senior civil servants, cabinet ministers and leading journalists. Seven in ten generals and judges went to independent schools, according to the Sutton Trust, a charity. In some jobs the proportion has even increased. A decade ago, half Britain’s senior doctors were privately educated; today the figure is 61%. The share has risen in the law, too. Even pop stars are more likely than average to have a posh education. And what of the fat cats leading FTSE firms and the plutocrats in Parliament? They, it turns out, are among the least privileged of the lot: only one in three went private.
