IT WAS ONE of the most important trips of his young presidency. Last October Jokowi and a bevy of advisers and businesspeople went to Washington, DC, to meet Barack Obama. They were due to go on to Silicon Valley to show off Indonesia’s burgeoning startups. But as his team flew west, Jokowi flew east, summoned home by a crisis: Kalimantan and Sumatra were blanketed by the haze of hundreds of thousands of fires. Such fires rage every year, but in 2015 a dry spell caused by the El Niño weather pattern made them especially severe. Smoke settled over Singapore for months and even reached Cambodia, Vietnam and the Philippines. At least 2m hectares of forest were burned. Dozens of people were killed and hundreds of thousands sickened. For much of last October greenhouse gases released by those fires exceeded the emissions of the entire American economy. The losses over five months of fires amounted to around 2% of the country’s GDP. Last year was worse than usual, but only in degree, not in kind. Between 2001 and 2014 the country lost 18.5m hectares of tree cover—an area more than twice the size of Ireland. In 2014 Indonesia overtook Brazil to become the world’s biggest deforester. One of the reasons for those forest fires is economic. The country produces well over half the world’s palm oil, a commodity used in cooking and cosmetics, as a food additive and as a biofuel. It accounts for around 4.5% of Indonesia’s GDP, and demand is still rising. To meet it, Indonesian farmers set fires to clear forest and make way for new plantations. Often these forests grow on peatlands, which store carbon from decayed organic matter; in tropical regions these hold up to ten times as much carbon as surface soil. Draining peatlands releases all of that carbon. The peat also becomes a fuel, so it is not just felled trees that are burning but the ground itself. But politics also plays a part. The government’s response to last autumn’s haze was no better than it had been under Jokowi’s predecessors. The president declared a moratorium on peatland-development licences and called for peat forests to be restored, even as his agriculture minister pointed out that burned peatland can be used for corn and soyabean planting. Neither set of comments made any discernible difference on the ground in Sumatra and Kalimantan. To cap it all, Jusuf Kalla, the vice-president, came up with a creative response to Singapore’s complaints about the air pollution: “For 11 months our neighbours enjoyed nice air from Indonesia and they never thanked us.” Fortunately for Indonesia (and the planet) the rainy season put an end to the mayhem in late October. Why it won’t stop Yet the reasons for the fires have not gone away. Slash-and-burn land preparation is cheap. Indonesia’s land-use laws are complex and have been inconsistently interpreted and applied. There is no agreed map showing all plantations and (often competing) claims of ownership. Responsibility for developing and approving plans for forest use is spread among at least three ministries, along with the national parliament, as well as provincial governors and district heads, local parliaments and forestry officials. These groups rarely co-ordinate their plans, and their interests often clash. The president and national ministers may understand the benefits of conservation, but local officials have little interest in curbing their revenues for a nebulous goal such as “sustainability”. Directives from the top often go unheeded at the bottom, thanks to corruption and lack of political will. Back in 2010 Norway pledged $1 billion in conditional aid to Mr Yudhoyono to help Indonesia stop deforestation, but the conditions were not met and not much has been paid out. Civil-society groups have had some success. At least 188 Indonesian palm-oil companies have made some sort of sustainability pledge, including five large multinational firms that in 2014 signed the Indonesian Palm Oil Pledge (IPOP), which commits them to avoiding deforestation and planting oil palms on peatland. Together those five firms account for 80% of Indonesia’s palm-oil exports. All the same, deforestation continues. Perversely, it may even have increased temporarily, as companies cleared as much land as they could before the agreement took effect. Besides, opaque supply chains allow companies to buy palm oil from suppliers not bound by IPOP. Glenn Hurowitz at the Centre for International Policy says that when big palm-oil companies are shown evidence of deforesting, they respond. But that kind of monitoring is done only on an ad-hoc basis. It is no substitute for clearer land-use laws, better local governance and more enforcement on the ground. And for those things to materialise, Jokowi will need to give a strong lead and make sure others follow.Hurry, time is short NINETEEN YEARS AGO the Asian financial crisis left Indonesia in dire straits. Between July 1997 and January 1998 the rupiah lost 80% of its value against the dollar. Shares plunged, banks were nationalised, inflation and unemployment soared. It seemed like a disaster, but in retrospect many Indonesians see it as a blessing. In the wake of the crisis, Indonesia introduced a host of overdue reforms. Today there is no crisis, but the country is being held back by a set of interrelated problems that prevent it from doing as well as it might, above all low commodity prices, slow global trade and limp demand from China. Fortunately, Indonesia is in a better position than many other commodity exporters to weather the storm. The World Bank expects its growth to be above 5% both this year and next. Rising wages in China are offering Indonesia the chance to pick up some labour-intensive manufacturing for export. But Indonesia’s neighbours also want that business, so Indonesia will have to compete on policy and merit. To prosper in this new environment, it must act faster and more boldly to seize the opportunities on offer. Jokowi, to his credit, understands this: “Now is the era of competition,” he says. “Good quality, on-time delivery and competitive prices are all important.” Asked which country’s development models he most admires, he mentions Singapore, the UAE and Vietnam. But Indonesia is a different sort of place: huge, diverse and increasingly unwieldy. Residents of Jakarta send out more tweets than those of any other city on earth, yet around one-fifth of the population does not even have access to electricity. In her book “Indonesia Etc”, Elizabeth Pisani writes: “Indonesia’s diversity is not just geographic and cultural; different groups are essentially living at different points in human history, all at the same time.” Travelling from Jakarta to the Maluku islands can seem like going back in time. Indonesians have enthusiastically embraced democracy; in each five-year cycle they vote in a dizzying array of separate presidential, parliamentary and local elections. When Suharto resigned, Indonesia had 26 provinces and around 300 regencies and cities; it now has 34 and 514, respectively, and each regency or city has its own parliament or city council. Jokowi’s supporters point to the admirable progress he has made in his short time in office: ending fuel subsidies, making it easier and quicker for private buyers to acquire land, opening sectors previously closed to foreign investors and, perhaps most important, setting an example of graft-free leadership for others to follow. Infrastructure spending has recently accelerated and the outlook for growth is positive. But not everyone is convinced. Mr Yudhoyono, the doubters say, also showed great promise at the beginning of his decade in office, but it ended in disappointment. They point to the gap between targets and results so far in infrastructure, tax collection and growth rates. “Indonesia is the country of the future,” says one disillusioned foreign businessman, “and it always will be.” That is too cynical. Still, the crucial question is not so much what Jokowi wants to do but what he can deliver. Two main scenarios are emerging. Way to go In the first, infrastructure investment continues to accelerate. By 2019 Indonesia has highways spanning Java and Sumatra and ports dotted across the east. Messrs Lembong and Bambang press on with deregulation and Jokowi holds out against protectionist measures from parliament, keeps control of his more recalcitrant ministries and maintains his onslaught against corruption. Manufacturing once again becomes the biggest contributor to Indonesia’s GDP. He returns Indonesia to 7% growth, and appreciative voters re-elect him in 2019, endorsing economic liberalism for the first time in the country’s history. In a second scenario, things on all these fronts go much less well. Jokowi is unable to push through his reforms and by 2019 growth is below 5%. He loses the election to a candidate favoured by the old guard and Indonesia is back to business as usual—except that nobody even calls it the country of the future any more. In real life the outcome will no doubt fall somewhere in the middle. Jokowi has made a career of defying expectations, and he is playing a long game. But raising growth to 7% through export-led manufacturing will be a challenge. Geography puts Indonesia at a logistical disadvantage, and other South-East Asian countries such as Vietnam and Thailand do better on deregulation and infrastructure. By the time of the next election, Indonesia’s demographic dividend will have a scant decade to run. Jokowi has much to do, and little time to get it done.“OVERSUPPLY is a global problem and a global problem requires collaborative efforts by all countries.” Those defiant words were uttered by Gao Hucheng, China’s minister of commerce, at a press conference held on February 23rd in Beijing. Mr Gao was responding to the worldwide backlash against the rising tide of Chinese industrial exports, by suggesting that everyone is to blame. Oversupply is indeed a global problem, but not quite in the way Mr Gao implies. China’s huge exports of industrial goods are flooding markets everywhere, contributing to deflationary pressures and threatening producers worldwide. If this oversupply were broadly the result of capacity gluts in many countries, then Mr Gao would be right that China should not be singled out. But this is not the case. China’s surplus capacity in steelmaking, for example, is bigger than the entire steel production of Japan, America and Germany combined. Rhodium Group, a consulting firm, calculates that global steel production rose by 57% in the decade to 2014, with Chinese mills making up 91% of this increase. In industry after industry, from paper to ships to glass, the picture is the same: China now has far too much supply in the face of shrinking internal demand. Yet still the expansion continues: China’s aluminium-smelting capacity is set to rise by another tenth this year. According to Ying Wang of Fitch, a credit-rating agency, around two billion tonnes of gross new capacity in coal mining will open in China in the next two years. A detailed report released this week by the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China reveals that industrial overcapacity has surged since 2008 (see charts). China’s central bank recently surveyed 696 industrial firms in Jiangsu, a coastal province full of factories, and found that capacity utilisation had “decreased remarkably”. Louis Kuijs of Oxford Economics, a research outfit, calculates that the “output gap”—between production and capacity—for Chinese industry as a whole was zero in 2007; by 2015, it was 13.1% for industry overall, and much higher for heavy industry. Scarier than ghosts Much has been made of China’s property bubble in recent years, with shrill exposés of “ghost cities”. There has been excessive investment in property in places, but many of the supposedly empty cities do eventually fill up. China’s grotesque overinvestment in industrial goods is a far bigger problem. Analysis by Janet Hao of the Conference Board, a research group, shows that investment growth in the manufacture of mining equipment and other industrial kit far outpaced that in property from 2000 to 2014. This binge has left many state-owned firms vulnerable to slowdown, turning them into profitless zombies. Chinese industrial firms last year posted their first annual decline in aggregate profits since 2000. Deutsche Bank estimates that a third of the companies that are taking on more debt to cover existing loan repayments are in industries with overcapacity. Returns on assets of state firms, which dominate heavy industry, are a third those seen at private firms, and half those of foreign-owned firms in China. The roots of this mess lie in China’s response to the financial crisis in 2008. Officials shovelled money indiscriminately at state firms in infrastructure and heavy industry. The resulting overcapacity creates even bigger headaches for China than for the rest of the world. The overhang is helping to push producer prices remorselessly downward: January saw their 47th consecutive month of declines. Falling output prices add to the pressure on debt-laden state firms. The good news is that the Chinese have publicly recognised there is a problem. The ruling State Council recently declared dealing with overcapacity to be a national priority. On February 25th the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, which oversees big firms owned by the central government, and several other official bodies said they would soon push ahead with various trial reforms of state enterprises. The bad news is that three of the tacks they are trying only make things worse. One option is for China’s zombies to export their overcapacity. But even if the Chinese keep their promises not to devalue the yuan further, the flood of cheap goods onto foreign markets has already exacerbated trade frictions. The American government has imposed countervailing duties and tariffs on a variety of Chinese imports. India is alarmed at its rising trade gap with China (see article). Protesters against Chinese imports clogged the streets of Brussels in February. There is also pressure for the European Union to deny China the status of “market economy”, which its government says it is entitled to after 15 years as a World Trade Organisation member, and which would make it harder to pursue claims of Chinese dumping. Another approach is to keep stimulating domestic demand with credit. In January the government’s broadest measure of credit grew at its fastest rate in nearly a year: Chinese banks extended $385 billion of new loans, a record. But borrowing more as profits dive will only worsen the eventual reckoning for zombie firms.  A third policy is to encourage consolidation among state firms. Some mergers have happened—in areas such as shipping and rail equipment. But there is little evidence of capacity being taken out as a result. Chinese leaders are dancing around the obvious solutions—stopping the flow of cheap credit and subsidised water and energy to state firms; making them pay proper dividends rather than using any spare cash to expand further; and, above all, closing down unviable firms. That outcome is opposed by provincial officials, who control most of the country’s 150,000 or so publicly owned firms. Local governments are funded in part by company taxes, so party officials are reluctant to shut down local firms no matter how inefficient or unprofitable. They are also afraid of the risk of social unrest arising from mass sackings. China’s 33 province-level administrations are at least as fractious as the European Union’s 28 member states, jokes Jörg Wuttke, head of the EU Chamber: “On this issue, increasingly Beijing feels like it’s Brussels.” So Mr Gao’s claim that the problem is not entirely his government’s fault may be true in a sense. But in the 1990s China’s leaders did manage bold state-enterprise reforms involving bankruptcies and capacity cuts, that overcame such vested interests. To meet today’s concerns, the central government could provide more generous funding to local governments to offset the loss of tax revenues arising from bankruptcies, and also strengthen unemployment benefits for affected workers.  If China’s current leaders have the courage to implement such policies, there may even be a silver lining. Stephen Shih of Bain, another consulting firm, argues that much quiet modernisation “has been masked in many industries by overcapacity”. For example, little of the fertiliser industry’s capacity used advanced technologies in 2011; most of the new capacity added since then has been the modern sort that is 40% cheaper to operate. Baosteel Group, a giant state-owned firm, has been forced by Shanghai’s local authorities to shut down dirty old mills in the gleaming city. So its bosses have built a gargantuan new complex in Guangdong province with nearly 9m tonnes of capacity. This highly efficient facility has cutting-edge green technologies that greatly reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, recycle waste gas from blast furnaces and reuse almost all wastewater. “When the older capacity in China is shut down, we’ll have a much more modern industrial sector,” Mr Shih says. “The question is, how long will this take?”SHIPS leaving Nhava Sheva port, across the harbour from Mumbai, tend to ride higher on the water than when they arrive. India’s trading statistics explain why: steel and other industrial goods from China weigh down the ships as they come in, to be replaced on the way out by fluffy cotton bales, pills and—given India’s perennial trade deficit in goods—empty containers. India’s economy grew by 7.5% last year, cruising past China’s 6.9% growth. Yet the deficit in goods trade with China continues to widen (see chart), to over 2% of GDP last year. For Indian policymakers this is an irksome reminder of the weakness of the country’s manufacturers. Halving the trade shortfall with China would be enough to eliminate India’s overall current-account deficit, and thus the need for external financing. The government’s ideas for shrinking the shortfall have been sadly predictable. The minimum import prices it imposed earlier this month on various grades of Chinese steel, which it claims are being “dumped” below cost, come on top of other anti-dumping levies and taxes on steel and myriad other products, from raw silk to melamine dinner sets. No country has used such measures as energetically as India over the past 20 years, according to the World Trade Organisation. The commerce minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, has called for a devaluation of the rupee to curb imports and boost exports. Yet the rupee has been falling against the yuan for years, with little effect on trade. And a weakening currency could revive inflation, which falling oil prices and sound monetary policy have helped tame. The government looks longingly at manufacturing’s 32% share of China’s GDP, roughly double the Indian figure. It sees factories as the ideal way to soak up the million-odd young workers who join the labour force every month. So it is showering sops on various industries. It is handing out subsidised loans to small-scale and labour-intensive industries such as ceramics and bicycle parts. Lightly-taxed “special economic zones”, many of which are set up to benefit a single company, are in line for further handouts. A “Make in India” jamboree in Mumbai earlier this month sought to present an image of openness to foreign investment, eliciting promises of multi-billion-dollar plants from firms keen to cosy up to policymakers. But India is trying to emulate China’s export-led manufacturing growth in a global economy that is now drowning in China’s industrial surpluses. It hopes to fill the vacuum left by its larger neighbour as Chinese wages rise, to double those of Indians, and its economy rebalances from exports to consumption. Yet so far it has struggled to seize that opportunity. Indian firms grumble, with some justification, about their products being shut out of the Chinese market. Agricultural products, of which India is a net exporter, are largely excluded from China through various phytosanitary rules. Indian pharmaceutical firms complain that China’s growing aid to other developing countries often includes the provision of medicines—Chinese-made ones, of course—which means that the recipient countries buy fewer Indian-made drugs than they used to. Why countries are so keen to agree new trade deals India runs a global surplus in services, mainly by selling them to rich countries. But they are a small component of Indo-Chinese trade. China gets the best of tourist exchanges between the two countries: 181,000 Chinese tourists came to India in 2014, against 730,000 Indians who visited China. All this tortures Indians, for whom China is the biggest source of imports and third-biggest export market, but barely troubles China, for whom India is a second-tier trade partner. Indian policymakers are reflexively sceptical, for example, of China’s plan to build a road linking the countries, worrying it will only widen the trade imbalance. If China’s consumers won’t buy Indian goods, perhaps its businesses could build factories in India instead? Some big projects have recently been announced, notably a $10 billion industrial park to be developed by Dalian Wanda, a Chinese property group; and a $5 billion plant proposed by Foxconn, a Taiwanese electronics outfit which mainly manufactures in China. Foxconn said last July that it might employ up to 1m Indians in 10-12 plants by 2020, despite suffering labour strife when it closed an existing factory last year. However, foreign investors’ projects often fall quietly by the wayside when bureaucratic obstacles prove insurmountable. Foxconn is already said to be rolling back its ambitions. After years in the doldrums, India is enjoying its moment as the world’s fastest-growing large economy. That in itself will be enough to pique the interest of multinationals: Apple, for example, thinks a sales push in India can help make up for sluggish Chinese demand. Even so, it will be a while before its devices (whose assembly it outsources to Foxconn) are made in India. Instead, they will further weigh down the ships entering its ports.“DEADPOOL”, which so far has taken more than $500m in cinemas worldwide, is an atypical blockbuster, a foul-mouthed anti-hero film with a mature “R” audience rating. But in one important respect it is typical of many of Hollywood’s most successful movies: it does not rely on a world-famous star to sell it. In contrast, two recent “star vehicle” films struggled to attract audiences despite heavy promotion and high-profile openings on Christmas Day in America. “Joy”, with Jennifer Lawrence, and “Concussion”, with Will Smith, both failed to earn back their production budgets at the domestic box office and also fared poorly overseas. What happened? Ms Lawrence is by the reckoning of some the biggest star in Hollywood’s firmament; Mr Smith held that unofficial title for years. Have film stars lost some of their lustre? Overall, the cinema business’s health seems as rude as ever. Revenue from the American box office grew by 6.3% in 2015, to a record high of $11 billion. Thanks to droves of new filmgoers in China, where the market grew by 49% last year, global revenues increased by 4% to $38 billion. The industry has held up well against increased competition from streaming services that give people plenty of options to watch films at home. The stars with the biggest global profiles, such as Tom Cruise and Leonardo DiCaprio, are instantly recognisable in lucrative overseas markets. But much of the industry’s recent success, at home and abroad, comes from the rise of the big special-effects event film: franchises like “Fast and Furious”, “Avengers”, “The Hunger Games”, “Jurassic Park”, James Bond and “Star Wars” led a group of 14 films with more than $500m each in worldwide box-office takings last year, up from just five such films in 2006. Such productions are more likely to make stars than to be made by them. “You really don’t want to have a movie star” in certain big franchises, says a senior studio executive: the films will be hits either way, so why pay more? Jennifer Lawrence was not “Jennifer Lawrence, biggest female movie star in the world” until she made the first “Hunger Games” film.  An analysis by The Economist of two decades of box-office results in America and Canada does not refute Ms Lawrence’s status as one of the biggest box-office draws (see article). But it is hard statistically to disentangle her singular appeal from the massive success of the franchise films she has been in. By the same token, she should perhaps not be blamed for the poor performance of “Joy”—“without Jennifer Lawrence in it, it would have been a flop, a total flop,” says the executive. Hollywood executives still want to believe in stars’ power to get bums on seats, so they will bet again on a headliner even after a few flops. There is some risk-aversion in this: if they make a flop with a big name in it, they are less likely to have to defend their decision to green-light the film. This conservatism tends to favour the white male actors that have already attained superstar status over the selection of new and diverse talent (as does the fact that the decision-makers are predominantly white males too). The controversy over the lack of any black actor (among other omissions) in the nominees for this year’s Oscars ceremony, on February 28th, is in part the fruit of that mindset. Academic studies in recent decades have generally failed to find any conclusive evidence to support studio bosses’ faith in stars’ pulling power. Our own analysis suggests only that a few of them do add a bit to box-office receipts. Number-crunchers at Epagogix, a company in London, use an algorithm to project box-office takings of films based on their story elements—including the use of special effects, a surprise ending or a cool location. And they reckon that as long as the stars look good and can act, they make scant difference, with at best a very few exceptions. It helps to have a damsel in distress, but it does not really matter which damsel. Among the few stars who do, by common consent among studio bosses, producers and agents, seem to be guarantors of success are the biggest comedy actors—names such as Kevin Hart and Melissa McCarthy. This is in part because they signal to the audience precisely what kind of entertainment is on offer, and are good at delivering. Our analysis backs this, with a bunch of leading comedy actors strongly outperforming industry averages. But the trajectories of star careers leave a lot of room for guesswork. Bruce Willis was paid $5m to make “Die Hard” in 1988; some in Hollywood were aghast, but the movie was a huge hit. Then Mr Willis made more flops than hits (excepting the “Die Hard” sequels) before hitting it big again with “The Sixth Sense”. But this time, was it the star or the story? INTERACTIVE: Track the star power of Hollywood films Prominent among the stars who keep getting hired despite repeated flops is Nicole Kidman, though an algorithm might have predicted that the films she has chosen would fare poorly anyway. “Secret in Their Eyes”, with Ms Kidman and Julia Roberts, once an even bigger star, was the latest example. The film grossed just $20m at American cinemas, the same amount as its modest production budget. STX Entertainment, the studio which released the film, believes that star vehicles can work if the actors’ paydays are lower than the astronomical sums of years past. Expensive star showcases, where the featured actor could earn salaries of $20m or more and participate in gross receipts, are now rare. In part that is because fans can get their fill of their favourite actors in so many other, cheaper ways than going to the cinema—through social media, on-demand cable and Netflix. Yet there is one arena where stars are as relevant as ever: the international market. Foreign cinemas like to exhibit films with known names in the lead roles. Some old-school stars are still big draws—the likes of Mr Cruise or even, apparently, Arnold Schwarzenegger. The latter’s 2015 film, “Terminator: Genisys”, a flop in America with $90m in takings on a $155m production budget, was a blockbuster overseas, earning $351m, including $113m in China. Even if big names like these have lost some of their lustre at home, abroad they can be “sort of like supernovas”, the studio executive says. “They have flamed out a long time ago but the light shines on past their death.”IN 1983 William Goldman, a screenwriter, coined the famous saying that in Hollywood, “Nobody knows anything” when it comes to predicting which films will succeed at the box office. To find out how true that remains, we have analysed the performance of more than 2,000 films with a budget of more than $10m, released in America and Canada since 1995, to see which factors help make a movie a hit. Crunching information from The Numbers, a website that collects data on film releases, and Rotten Tomatoes, an aggregator of critics’ and punters’ reviews, we found that the strongest predictor of absolute box-office receipts is a film’s budget. Even if it got no boost from its cast, from favourable reviews or other factors, a movie would generate an average of 80 cents at American and Canadian cinemas for every dollar a studio promises to spend on it. A film’s budget is announced while it is in production, to create a buzz and signal its quality—though in practice its true cost may vary from the announced figure. The more a studio commits to producing a film, the more it is likely to spend on advertising it. The budget also helps determine how widely a film is shown. Films with a budget of $10m-40m open, on average, in 1,600 of the 6,000-odd cinemas in America and Canada; those with budgets of over $100m open in 3,500. Sequels and franchise films are another way for studios to limit their risks. Nearly one in five of the films Hollywood pumps out nowadays is a sequel, up from one in 12 a couple of decades ago. All other things being equal, sequels earn $35m more than non-sequels at the box office. Franchise films increasingly depend on superhero characters. Hollywood made just eight superhero films between 1996 and 2000, but 19 in the past five years. A $200m-budget superhero film will earn $58m more at the box-office than a non-superhero film of the same budget. Superhero films (“Deadpool” excepted) tend to be child-friendly, for good reason: films that receive an “R” (restricted) certificate typically earn $16m less in cinemas. How a star’s previous films did helps a bit in predicting their next one’s success. Each $1 earned by a leading actor’s previous, non-sequel films in the past five years adds 2 cents to their current one’s takings. The very brightest stars, such as Jennifer Lawrence and Leonardo Di Caprio, whose films have earned more than $500m at the box office in recent years, would add around $10m to ticket sales for a film. Do critics play a role in the success of films? Not as much as they would like to think. Between 1996 and 2006 an extra ten percentage points on the aggregate critics’ score on Rotten Tomatoes was associated with just $4m in extra box-office takings. Now it is worth just $1m. The wisdom of crowds matters more these days: the same increase in positive audience reviews on Rotten Tomatoes is associated with an $11.5m increase in box-office revenues. INTERACTIVE: Track the star power of Hollywood films Taken together, these factors explain about 60% of the variation in box-office revenues. Adding an estimate of marketing costs increases our model’s accuracy by another 20 percentage points. That leaves about one-fifth down to factors not explained by the model. “John Carter”, a $275m science-fiction extravaganza that was one of the biggest turkeys in Hollywood history, should have earned $235m according to our model. It made just $73m when it was released in 2012. Clearly, no one yet knows everything. However, our analysis suggests a formula that maximises the chances of packing them in. First, create a child-friendly superhero film with plenty of action and scope for turning it into a franchise. Set your budget at an impressive but not reckless $85m. Convince a major studio to distribute it on wide release in the summer (when releases earn an average of $15m more than at other times). Lastly, cast two lead actors with a solid but unspectacular box-office history, who are thus not too expensive. With reasonable reviews from critics and the audience alike, your film would make about $125m at the American box office. But do it for the money, not the plaudits: such a film would have just a one-in-500 chance of carrying off an Oscar for Best Picture.THE Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) was launched in 2003 as a would-be global standard for managing natural resources, promoting openness in transactions between governments and companies to curb the corruption that was rampant in some places. It has since grown to include 51 countries. But its “multi-stakeholder” model—which gives equal board representation to its three constituencies: governments, companies and civil society—ensures regular bust-ups. As the EITI itself has put it, the process is “by definition loud, difficult and argumentative”. The atmosphere was particularly poisonous this week, as the clans gathered in Lima for the EITI’s Global Conference. Most of the NGOs boycotted a meeting on board nominations. They had been spreading “serious and untrue allegations”, wrote Clare Short, the EITI’s outgoing chairman, in a circular to members. Some muttered that the whole enterprise faced a “governance crisis”. NGOs were livid that someone they considered to be a rogue candidate for a civil-society board seat—backed by a pugnacious former British politician, Eric Joyce—had been allowed on the ballot. By not moving to strike him from the list, they huffed, the secretariat had broken the rules, written or otherwise, thereby undermining the civil-society contingent’s right to select its own candidates. The secretariat denies this charge of interfering by not intervening. It is “always a punch-ball” when tensions rise, says an official. It circulated a legal opinion to counter its critics; the NGOs issued one of their own. Recriminations continued to fly as The Economist went to press (though the offending candidate’s name was eventually withdrawn). The civil-society brigade has its critics, too. Some think its latest fit of pique is less a principled stand than an attempt by a clique of powerful NGOs, led by Publish What You Pay, to maintain a tight grip on who speaks for the sandal-wearers. The campaigners “often seem happier yelling than seeking compromise”, says a board member who represents companies. The NGOs are not alone in raising concerns over the running of the EITI, however. In December several country and company representatives signed a letter questioning the secretariat’s impartiality and the “very flawed” process for electing the chairman—which, awkwardly for a transparency initiative, they viewed as lacking transparency. (A committee later rejected these complaints.) This infighting is an unfortunate distraction from some genuine achievements. Thanks to the EITI, governments in Africa and other corruption-plagued places now disclose a lot more about their dealings in oil, gas and mining. No one doubts that its members, however querulous, have delivered more together than they could have done apart. But the ruffling of feathers makes it harder to move forward. The task of smoothing them will now fall to the incoming chairman, Fredrik Reinfeldt. As a former Swedish prime minister and president of the European Council, he might just have the required diplomatic skills. He certainly has his work cut out.WOLFSBURG has no cathedral, but two glass towers loom over the city. Inside them, robots whisk new Volkswagens into storage racks, an entertaining ceremony akin to a votive offering. The towers also dominate the Autostadt, a sprawling, car-themed entertainment park and VW marketing wheeze, more popular than any other tourist site in Lower Saxony, a big German state. Since 2000, 33m car pilgrims have paid homage there; last year brought a record 2.42m visitors. (Even more devotees flock to BMW World, a rival in Munich). Those who tire of gawping at vehicles can refuel with VW–made sausages or ice cream. Many drive home in a new VW. Last year 168,000 cars, 28% of all the firm delivered in Germany, drove through the doors of the Autostadt’s showroom. “People in Germany love cars,” says a VW employee. But public trust in VW is being tested by a scandal involving software to cheat emissions tests, installed on 11m cars sold worldwide. Though most other carmakers are reporting buoyant sales, VW’s were down by 9% year on year in January in Germany, and have fallen in other countries. Its shares are down by two-fifths since the scandal broke in September. Its tin-eared bosses have bungled their explanations and apologies. The threat to VW goes beyond possible big fines in America—the firm has set aside more than $7 billion for those. Having to come clean about its cars’ true emissions will make it harder to meet ever-stricter curbs being imposed in many countries (though pliant European officials recently eased theirs). VW looks like a reluctant innovator, especially in electric vehicles, of which Germany’s government wants to see 5m on the country’s roads by 2030. Wolfsburg’s citizens are not pleased. One describes a recent trip to Japan where his hosts jeered at his home as “the city of liars”. It certainly lacks charm. Founded in 1938 by the Nazis and their industrial friends as “City of the KdF Car” (a reference to the Nazis’ leisure club), its purpose was to house labour, including wartime slaves, for the factory built to produce what became the VW Beetle. “It’s really one of the worst, most artificial, ugliest cities,” says a newish resident, pointing to the grim architecture on Porschestrasse, the main drag. But Wolfsburg, renamed by the British after the second world war, is at least prosperous and debt-free, thanks to VW. The firm does not directly provide housing or public services, unlike in some company towns in other countries, but it is pervasive. Its cars crowd the roads—only here could driving a Volvo be deemed rebellious. Estate agents spurn calls not from VW staff. A theatre, galleries, sports teams and small businesses all depend, ultimately, on VW as sponsor, customer, taxpayer or dominant employer. There are intimate ties between local politicians, managers and union leaders, as in much of Germany. The last big scandal at VW reflected that: a former personnel chief was convicted in 2007 over a bribery scheme, involving sex parties and prostitutes for leaders of works councils. VW eventually shrugged that off, and may be hoping to do the same again. The mayor, Klaus Mohrs, whose office sports a large painting with VW symbols, says politicians enjoy “close co-operation” with car bosses, but rejects any talk of crony capitalism: “35 years ago” he might have thought relations too close, he says, “but we lead a good life this way.” VW employs 60,000 in a town whose working-age population is around 77,000. Firms pay a “municipal-trade tax”, or Gewerbesteuer, at typical rates of 14-18% of profits. That tax, the lion’s share of which is paid by VW, provided 59% of Wolfsburg’s revenue in 2014. The Economist’s analysis of the dependency of some German towns on their principal employers shows that Wolfsburg is extreme, but not unique (see table). Such reliance on a single employer would once have been familiar outside Germany, too. “Company Towns”, a 2012 book by Marcelo Borges, notes how America had 2m people living in them in the 1930s. George Pullman, pioneer of the luxury rail car, founded a planned community near Chicago, and named it after himself, to house his workers. William Hesketh Lever, the founder of what is now Unilever, created Port Sunlight in the north-west of England, to “socialise and Christianise” workers in his soap factory. Such places are still to be found in developing countries: for example, Jamshedpur in India was named for Jamsetji Tata, the founder of Tata Steel, which still dominates the town and provides many public services. In the West, however, many such places have diversified or died. It is in western Germany in particular that towns dominated by a single firm, Arbeitersiedlungen, continue to bloom. Henri de Castries, the boss of Axa, a French insurer, lauds how “family-owned global firms keep their roots in small towns” in Germany, spreading wealth more evenly than in his centralised home country. Bill McDermott, the American who runs SAP, a giant software firm, says “I deeply respect all things that Walldorf is,” referring to its home town among the asparagus fields of the upper Rhine valley. Walldorf, like Wolfsburg, relies on a firm that has vastly outgrown its nest. For firms, that usually spells a lower rate of municipal-trade tax, but also means they may struggle to lure talented staff to work in semi-rural obscurity. Bertelsmann, a publisher with 112,000 global staff, is based (with about a tenth of its workers) in Gütersloh. BASF, a chemicals giant, has 35,000 in similarly modest Ludwigshafen. Such towns also run the risk of their corporate champions stumbling. Residents of Metzingen, a town of 22,000, will have shivered this week when a warning of weak sales by Hugo Boss, the fashion firm that dominates it, sent the company’s shares plunging. Back in Wolfsburg, Mr Mohrs has so far cut this year’s investment budget for the city by one-third, to €120m ($132m). An official at VfL Wolfsburg, a high-flying football club, says locals are anxious—70% of fans in his stadium work in VW’s plant. The club has put off building a youth academy to save a few million euros. Cultural events funded by VW have been scratched. Kevin Nobs, a local journalist, says small businesses expect a tough year, fretting that VW staff will not get their usual bonuses. A sausage-making count to the rescue Residents recall worse times. In the cold war, Wolfsburg, on the frontier with East Germany, felt like “the end of the world”, says a businessman. Carmaking slumped in the 1990s, sending the local unemployment rate to 18%. The city and VW responded with Wolfsburg AG, a joint venture to encourage startups. Its boss, Julius von Ingelheim, says 600 local firms resulted, notably in health care and IT. “Today the region is much stronger than one company,” he claims. He also lauds Count von der Schulenburg, the former lord of Wolfsburg’s castle, who runs a boarding-house, a music festival and a sausage business. In reality, VW crowds out much else. High wages for designers, researchers and financial experts at its headquarters make it hard for others to attract staff, or for anyone else to afford housing. Olaf Lies, economy minister for Lower Saxony, which owns one-fifth of VW, says the entire state is bound to the firm. He worries about the 120,000 VW employees in the state and as many more workers in supply firms. VW also employs 10,000 in Emden, a town of around 33,000 working-age residents. But ask Wolfsburgers to imagine a future without VW and you get only glowers. Historians there say no one dares criticise VW, and recall hosting an exhibition in 2014 that urged visitors to “learn from Detroit”, suggesting that the city’s reliance on VW was a “ticking time-bomb”. Locals shunned it.THE brokers who traded shares in the Tontine coffee house in 18th-century New York often resorted to stronger drink, leaving them “a little addled”, according to one contemporary account. The technology involved in share-trading has changed a bit since then, and at least some of the participants have sobered up. But more than 200 years later, investors in American equities still wonder whether they are really receiving decent service. On the face of things, they have little to complain about. The cost of trading has declined sharply over the years (see chart). Explicit commissions, which were once levied in percentage points (0.25% in 1792), have largely disappeared. This is thanks mainly to competition. Whereas the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) dominated the trading of shares listed on it for most of the 20th century, there are now lots of places where they can be bought and sold. The impetus for the fragmentation was “Regulation NMS”, adopted in 2005 by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Wall Street’s main regulator. This required share-trading orders to be funnelled to the exchange offering the best price. The intention was to boost competition to NYSE and NASDAQ, which had a near-duopoly in share-trading at the time. It succeeded in that: both now have less than a fifth of the market. (In response, firms running exchanges have branched into other markets—see next article.) American shares are traded on a dozen exchanges; at least six other exchanges cater to investors in derivatives linked to shares. Shares also change hands on another 40 or so “alternative trading systems”, as well as a number of “single-dealer platforms”. Finally, many trades are now “internalised” by big banks and asset-managers, meaning that they pair up buyers and sellers within their sprawling empires rather than use an outside trading venue. Yet investors worry that, in many cases, competition has brought down the visible price of trading by adding hidden costs. Two anxieties stand out. One is the worry that the current set-up of the markets allows high-speed traders to anticipate big orders and “front-run” them, moving prices in an unfavourable direction before an order can be executed. The other is the question of how robust the system is, with regulators still unable fully to explain events like the “flash crash” of 2010, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged by 9% in minutes before rebounding. Start with fears of front-running. Many institutional investors complain that ultra-fast traders spot big orders entering the market, and race ahead of them to adjust their prices accordingly. Attempts to hide from the speedsters can go awry. In January Credit Suisse and Barclays, two big banks, agreed to pay $154m in fines for misleading clients about the workings of their “dark pools”, where offers to sell and bids to buy are not published. In theory, that protects investors from front-running; in practice, several of the firms running such venues had concealed the central role that high-frequency traders played on them. (Credit Suisse didn’t admit or deny wrongdoing in the settlement.) There is another, less-often-told side to the story. Speed is necessary to knit together a dispersed set of exchanges, so that investors are immediately routed towards the best price available and so that their orders are the first to get filled. And plenty of high-frequency traders are market-makers; it is their job to adjust prices in response to new information. Nonetheless, the idea that markets are rigged is widespread, not least thanks to the publication of “Flash Boys”, a book by Michael Lewis on the evils of high-speed trading. One proferred solution is to level the field by slowing things down deliberately. IEX, whose founder is the hero of Mr Lewis’s book, is a trading platform that has applied to the SEC to become an exchange. It uses miles of coiled cable to create a “speed bump” that delays trades to the advantage of institutional investors. The SEC has received more than 400 letters in support of its application, but there is a vigorous debate about whether IEX’s system complies with the requirements of Regulation NMS. Some think that the better solution would be to get rid of Rule 611, which in effect requires orders to be sent to the exchange showing the best price, even though such quotes can sometimes be unobtainable in practice. The SEC will vote on IEX’s application by March 21st. Front-running is not the only concern about America’s market structure. The other is the risk of sudden spasms like the flash crash. Glitches are common. In 2012 two public offerings, for Facebook and BATS (“Better Alternative Trading System”, a firm that runs exchanges and other trading venues, ironically enough), suffered disruption. Later that year faulty software toppled Knight Capital Group, a big trading firm, by vomiting orders to exchanges without tracking those that were filled. In 2013 the primary electronic market and the back-up system both failed at NASDAQ thanks to a software bug, and so on. Andrew Lo, a professor of finance at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), argues that investigations into such events tend to focus on the venue most affected. How they reverberate through the broader system is very little studied or understood. Sometimes, the existence of other venues may help: in July the NYSE briefly went offline and traders barely noticed as other exchanges filled the gap. On other occasions, they may amplify volatility. In August lurches in the future and equities markets caused the value of exchange-traded funds to deviate from the value of the underlying shares they owned. Mr Lo proposes a simple reform: the creation of a commission that can subpoena witnesses and evidence to look into the causes of crashes, just as the National Transportation Safety Board investigates air disasters. The commission would look as widely as it liked at what went wrong and then publish its findings. The SEC acknowledges that the rules governing share-trading need amending. Mary Jo White, the chair of the SEC, has mused, for example, about monitoring the controls firms use to prevent their algorithms running amok. Another idea is to provide the SEC with the power to curtail otherwise legal trading when the market is convulsing. The risk is that in addressing market complexity, the regulators only add to it. A single SEC proposal, on a facet of a facet of the overall system, is now up for public comment. It runs to 581 pages.
