EVEN as the business of trading splinters across ever more platforms, the firms that run exchanges continue to consolidate. Last year NASDAQ agreed to buy Chi-X Canada, Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) purchased Interactive Data and Deutsche Börse snapped up 360T. The past decade of dealmaking in the industry has given rise to five powerhouses: the London Stock Exchange Group (LSE), Deutsche Börse, CME Group, ICE and HKEX. This week it emerged that, not for the first time, LSE and Deutsche Börse are talking about a merger. Organisations like the LSE once made all their money by charging fees to those who traded or listed shares. But as regulators allowed rival trading platforms to encroach on the established exchanges’ turf, those fees came down, pushing them into other lines of business. LSE and others bought up derivatives exchanges, data providers, index compilers and clearing houses. The intention was to serve customers throughout the process of buying a security, from research to clearing and settlement. Only a tenth of LSE’s and Deutsche Börse’s revenues now come from the trading of equities. This strategy has worked well. LSE’s shares have outperformed the FTSE 100 by more than 200% over the past five years. The groups have developed slightly different models, though. The German exchange adopted a “vertical silo”, in which customers for one of its products must also use others. Trading on the group’s Eurex derivatives exchange meant using its clearing house, for example. Running a vertical silo made expanding into other areas attractive, as new customers could be steered towards the rest of the group’s offerings. LSE, in contrast, offered open access to its exchanges and its clearing house. The EU is now obliging exchanges to open up their silos and let clients mix and match execution and clearing. That leaves Deutsche Börse more exposed. What is more, LSE’s strengths in shares and indices complement Deutsche Börse’s in derivatives. Putting Eurex Clearing and LCH.Clearnet under the same roof would also allow customers of both to clear trades with less collateral. Previous attempts to combine London’s bourse and Frankfurt’s failed in 2000 and 2005. The European Commission, which in 2012 blocked a tie-up between Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext, could kick up a fuss. Should it happen, Brexit would also complicate matters. But the incentives for exchange groups to join up are not going away.LIKE politicians, financial regulators know that late on a Friday is a good time to slip out bad news. The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), part of America’s Treasury, chose February 19th to announce it had rescinded a devastating finding against a European bank suspected of facilitating money-laundering. The withdrawal, less than a year after the designation, looks like a climbdown. In March 2015 FinCEN branded Banca Privada d’Andorra (BPA) as a “primary money-laundering concern”, saying its top managers had moved cash for criminal groups. This so-called “311” measure (after the relevant section of the Patriot Act of 2001) is usually crippling for the bank concerned, because in effect it cuts it off from the American financial system and any banks that participate in it. BPA was no exception: the government of Andorra, a mountainous financial haven nestled between France and Spain, ended up taking over the bank despite objections from its majority shareholders, the Cierco family; its Madrid-based wealth-management arm was liquidated. The Ciercos, insisting there was no legal basis for FinCEN’s move, sued in the American courts. FinCEN’s explanation for its reversal was that Andorra had taken steps to protect BPA from money-laundering risks, and the bank therefore no longer poses a threat. The Ciercos are having none of this. They argue that it was instead a “blatant effort to avoid judicial scrutiny” of the 311 measure. They point to the timing: the court was to hear a motion to dismiss the case next month. That would have required much more detailed evidence to be aired in support of the 311 action. The Americans wanted to avoid this because their case was flimsy, critics say. The Ciercos have argued from the start that it was based on cases of suspected money-laundering which the bank itself had reported to Andorran regulators and had brought in KPMG, an accounting firm, to investigate. If BPA was already cleaning up its act, why go after it at all? Some suspect the bank was a pawn in a tussle between governments: miffed that Andorra was slow to adopt American-style anti-money-laundering rules, including limits on cash transactions, America decided to show who was boss by selecting a bank to pick on. There is some evidence to support this sacrificial-lamb theory. In unscripted comments last year, for instance, an American diplomat suggested that America chose to “use the hammer” on BPA as a way of resolving wider concerns about Andorra. (FinCEN referred questions from The Economist to the Department of Justice, which declined to comment on the ground that lawsuits are under way.) The Treasury has been challenged in another 311-designation case. FBME Bank of Tanzania sued it after being accused of servicing all manner of bad guys. Last autumn an American court issued an injunction blocking the government’s action until the bank received more information about why it was deemed a threat to the financial system. The case continues. Meanwhile, FBME’s operations have been severely disrupted: it has sought an injunction to stop the authorities closing an important subsidiary in Cyprus. These cases highlight two problems with FinCEN’s money-laundering cudgel. The first is double-standards. It tends to go after only small banks in strategically unimportant countries; its use of 311 has been likened to using a sledgehammer to crack nuts. The second is its lack of openness. It faces no requirement to make detailed evidence public, or even available to a court, at the time of action. By the time any challenge is heard, it may be too late for the bank in question. BPA is not dead, but it is seriously wounded. Much of the value may have already vanished from a bank that was worth €600m ($680m) before the debacle—though there are substantial assets left thanks to a freezing order. The Ciercos want the Andorran authorities to halt the disposal of its assets and enter into “remedial negotiations”. They have hailed FinCEN’s about-face as a “momentous victory”. But will it be a hollow one?VICTORY this week in the Nevada caucuses, on top of recent triumphs in New Hampshire and South Carolina, make Donald Trump the clear favourite to be the Republican nominee in America’s presidential election. Users of Predictit, a gambling website, collectively rate his chances at about 70%. Although many people think that Mr Trump cannot triumph in November, it is worth remembering that Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, is hampered by several nagging scandals that could conceivably deepen. So investors need to start thinking about what the economy might look like under a President Trump. This is far from easy, because the candidate gives a good impression of making up policy as he goes along. How seriously is one to take his policy on Chinese trade (declaring the country a currency manipulator and eliminating its “illegal” export subsidies)? Is the plan for a border wall contingent on his improbable promise of getting the Mexicans to pay for it? And it is not clear whether Mr Trump’s policies would be approved by Congress. A Republican House and Senate would normally follow the lead of their party’s standard-bearer. But Mr Trump has departed a long way from party orthodoxy in some respects, such as declaring the Iraq war a “terrible mistake”. On taxes, at least, Mr Trump is not so different from other Republicans, arguing for sweeping cuts. He wants a higher standard income-tax deduction, along with lower bands of 10%, 20% and 25%. Dividends and capital gains would be taxed at 20% at most. The alternative minimum, estate and gift taxes would all be abolished. The corporate-tax rate would be cut from 35% to 15%. The cost of these cuts would be partly offset by limits on certain deductions, and by taxing companies’ global profits, whether repatriated or not. Part of Mr Trump’s “man of the people” appeal is his apparent divergence from Republicans on some tax breaks for the rich. One example is his promise to end the tax break on “carried interest”, which allows private-equity fund managers to cut their bills substantially. But the Tax Policy Centre (TPC), a think-tank that has analysed Mr Trump’s proposals, points out that although his plan does indeed reclassify carried interest, it would still cause the effective tax rate on it to fall from 23.8% to 15%. The billionaire need not worry about losing the private-equity vote. How will all this be paid for? Lower taxes could stimulate economic growth, although the size of the improvement is debatable and it could be offset by higher debt-servicing costs. The TPC estimates the tax cuts would reduce revenues by $9.5 trillion over ten years. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (CRFB), a fiscal watchdog, puts the total cost at $12 trillion-15 trillion. Debt could rise as high as 140% of GDP by 2026. Perhaps Mr Trump is a secret admirer of Paul Krugman, a liberal economist, and plans a big Keynesian stimulus? Not so: he has called for a balanced budget. That would mean huge spending cuts, but he has not outlined many. He wants to beef up the armed forces, and to spend more on veterans and immigration controls. He has also promised to protect Social Security (the national pension scheme). Mr Trump says he will save $300 billion from Medicare (the government health-care scheme for the elderly) by buying drugs more cheaply. Alas, total Medicare spending on drugs is likely to average $111 billion annually over the next decade. Aggregate American spending on drugs (public and private) is around $300 billion a year, says the CRFB. Perhaps Mr Trump thinks he can persuade the pharmaceutical companies to give their product away: the “art of the deal” in action. As the chart shows, the more departments that are protected, the bigger the cuts needed elsewhere. Funding his tax cuts would require spending reductions of 61-78% in the unprotected areas; balancing the budget would be impossible, according to the CRFB, as there is not enough spending left to cut. For those counting on economic growth to eliminate the deficit, the annual increase in GDP required would be more than 10%. All politicians promise too much, of course, but Mr Trump’s plans differ in the sheer scale of their implausibility. If investors also factor in the candidate’s unpredictability, the wildness of his foreign-policy rhetoric and a potentially fractious relationship with Congress, it all adds up to considerable uncertainty, something that markets traditionally dislike. If Mr Trump does become the Republican nominee, prepare for a volatile autumn. Economist.com/blogs/buttonwoodHair today… AS LONG as they stay on the right side of political battles, officials who reach the exalted heights of Chinese government can generally count on job security. Firing them in the middle of their term for poor performance is almost unheard of. The removal last week of Xiao Gang, China’s securities regulator (pictured), more than two years before the end of his term, was thus remarkable. It was bad enough that a stockmarket bubble had swollen and burst on Mr Xiao’s watch. He became chief of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) in early 2013; the stockmarket rally began in mid-2014 and turned into a mania before collapsing in mid-2015, wiping out some $5 trillion in wealth. Worse, his fingerprints were all over the market’s excesses, when it soared and when it fell. On the way up, he was an energetic cheerleader. In the months before the crash, when prices were already unsustainably high, Mr Xiao described the rally as a “reform bull”—that is, a fair response to the government’s economic-reform plans, however vague and incremental they actually were. He also missed the dangers in the market, arguing that leveraged buying of shares was under control, when in fact it had reached unprecedented levels. On the way down, he was the guiding force behind the adoption of a circuit-breaker mechanism intended to slow losses. This ended up exacerbating panic-selling and had to be scrapped. For months, rumours spread that senior leaders had lost faith in Mr Xiao. Investors took to referring to him as Xiao Rectum, which sounds very similar to his actual name. Reuters reported on January 18th that he had offered to resign. Yet the final decision to remove him from the CSRC is still a risky one for Li Keqiang, the premier. Until now, the bumbling Mr Xiao stood as a buffer between the stockmarket and Mr Li. In the event of more market mayhem, blame will now filter upstairs. …gone tomorrow Mr Xiao’s successor is Liu Shiyu, who most recently was chairman of Agricultural Bank of China, a big state-owned bank, and previously was a deputy governor of the central bank. He is doubtless hoping that the worst is past: the CSI-300 index of blue-chip shares has shed more than 40% of its value since last June’s peak. Yet even after the sell-off, small-cap shares still trade at nearly 90 times last year’s earnings, which suggests that the correction may have further to run (a multiple of 40 or so would be more reasonable). Daily dispatches: China's market mess What’s more, Mr Liu has the unenviable task of changing the way that initial public offerings (IPOs) are conducted. For years the authorities have mulled shifting from a system in which these are individually authorised to one in which eligible firms simply register their intention to list. Under the former, regulators control which companies get to list, when and roughly at what price. In the latter, these decisions are given over to the market (in effect, to underwriters, firms and investors). The authorisation system is prone to corruption because it gives regulators undue power. But in a volatile market with scant legal protection for investors, the fear is that registration will be abused by unscrupulous firms and so could be even more damaging. Mr Xiao handled this dilemma by dragging his feet. Mr Liu will be under pressure to move more boldly.CHILDREN are sometimes reassured that new siblings arrive via friendly storks. The reality is messier. Money creation is much the same. The “stork” in this case is the central bank; many think it transfers money to private banks, which act as intermediaries, pushing the money around the economy. In reality, most money is created by private banks. They generate deposits every time they make a loan, a process central banks can influence but not control. That alarms some, who worry that banks use this power heedlessly, thereby stoking disruptive booms and busts. Campaigners in many rich countries want to strip private banks of the power to create money. In Switzerland members of the “Vollgeld Initiative” presented the government with enough signatures in December to trigger a national referendum on the subject. Bank deposits, they point out, make up some 87% of the readily available money in Switzerland, vastly exceeding notes and coins. Since money creation is the main fuel of both inflation and growth, they argue, it should not be in private hands, let alone entrusted to institutions that are prone to binge and purge. Under the existing system deposits sit on private banks’ balance-sheets. Under the proposed alternative (a variation on “narrow banking”), accounts would be transformed into something much closer to the safe-deposit boxes nestled in Swiss vaults. Customers would pay the banks a charge for storing their cash. Any loans banks make would have to be funded by shareholders or by borrowing of their own, not by deposits. The central bank, meanwhile, would survey the economy and judge how much cash was required to maintain stable inflation. Rather than tweaking interest rates to influence private banks’ lending, it would simply hand out (or siphon away) the necessary cash itself, to the government, the public, or as loans to private banks. The system would be safer for depositors, since banks could not lend out and lose their money. That would allow governments to withdraw the implicit protection banks currently enjoy as the guardian of voters’ deposits. Even big banks could be allowed to fail, since the losses would not reverberate through the system so much. That possibility would nudge lenders into behaving more prudently. The Swiss government responds officially to every issue to be put to a referendum. On February 24th it released its verdict on the Vollgeld Initiative (the actual vote will not take place until next year at the earliest). It is not a fan. As the central bank issued more money, the government points out, its liabilities (cash) would rise without any increase in its assets. This, the government fears, would undermine confidence in the value of money. Those hoping for a simpler, more streamlined system would probably be disappointed. There would need to be heavy-handed rules to make sure that banks did not create “money-like” instruments. The government also worries that the change would hobble Swiss banks, including multinational giants such as UBS and Credit Suisse, which would face mammoth restructuring costs. Finance, a huge part of the Swiss economy, would be turned inside-out, with unpredictable but probably expensive consequences. The government also points out that the initiative only guards against one particular form of financial instability. Even once the new system is in place, a bank could still become insolvent or suffer a liquidity squeeze, with potentially disastrous results for those that had backed it and the economy as a whole. Even though it did not accept retail deposits, Lehman Brothers still collapsed, and nearly brought down the global financial system as it did so. Given the limited benefits, the costs the reform would involve look prohibitive, opponents argue. Besides, “there are less radical means to achieve financial stability,” according to Serge Gaillard, director of Switzerland’s Federal Finance Administration. Rules on lending, reserves and capital have all been tightened since the crisis. Now that these reforms have been implemented, the government says, such a fundamental overhaul of the system is unnecessary, if not downright dangerous. Safe-deposit boxes may be popular in Switzerland, but the public will probably side with the government, disappointing radical economists hoping for a trailblazer to prove that the model can work. The Swiss authorities believe they have recommended the safer option. Campaigners will think them narrow-minded.BANKS love to talk up their tech credentials, but few go as far as BBVA, Spain’s second-biggest. In a surprise move last year, it promoted its head of digital banking, Carlos Torres, to second-in-command despite his lack of experience in retail banking. Digital transformation, the bank said, was its top strategic priority. To that end, it has spent around $200m over the past three years investing in fintech startups such as Atom, a British digital bank, and Simple, an American one. It has also invested in a data-crunching firm, a Bitcoin-trading outfit and a digital-design company, among others. The shopping spree is not over yet. In mid-February BBVA injected an extra $150m into its $100m venture-capital arm and transferred it to a new subsidiary called Propel Venture Partners. This outfit, based in San Francisco and London, will operate independently of the rest of the bank, in an attempt to appeal to startups wary of working with a dinosaur. BBVA is also trying to turn its existing operations into something resembling a tech firm. Some 600 employees at its headquarters near Madrid now work in small “scrums” incorporating people from IT, marketing, design and other divisions. They take on small projects with short deadlines, gathering daily in front of whiteboards dotted with fluorescent Post-It notes to chart their progress. The aim is to improve apps constantly, based on feedback from customers, including the direct telephone conversations with a personal account manager enabled by the app. BBVA calls it “the revolution of small things” and points to higher customer-satisfaction ratings as evidence of its success. Investors are not quite as satisfied. BBVA’s emphasis on technology has not yet translated into any big benefit to the business, says Rohith Chandra, an analyst at Barclays, a British bank. Two years after the purchase of Simple, for example, it remains independently managed and in the red. Its most appealing features, such as clever budgeting software for customers, have not yet been adopted by other units. Moreover, most big banks are investing heavily in technology and offering more services via fancy apps as custom at branches dwindles. BBVA’s digital offerings do not seem dramatically different from those of Santander or Caixabank, say, its biggest Spanish rivals. Caixabank recently launched ImaginBank, accessible only through mobile apps and social networks. Many big banks, including Barclays, Citigroup, HSBC, Santander and UBS, have invested in fintech startups. BBVA’s investments are so disparate that they seem driven chiefly by FOMO, as millennials might say, or fear of missing out. Teppo Paavola, head of BBVA’s New Digital Business unit and a former executive at PayPal, makes no apologies for that. “Being paranoid is the way to go,” he says. BBVA can afford a digital flutter or two: it earned €2.6 billion ($2.9 billion) last year. Many of its 66m customers are in emerging markets, where few people have ingrained banking habits; that might allow more rapid technological change. Just under 30% of consumer loans at BBVA’s Mexican unit are issued digitally, up from 2% a year ago. If mobile banking can be made appealing enough that it allows BBVA to attract customers in such countries without building lots of expensive branches, then it could make a difference to the bottom line, Mr Chandra speculates. For now, however, bricks and mortar are still an integral part of BBVA’s business model. It has no plans to close a big chunk of its 3,800 branches in Spain anytime soon. Transforming the bank is a gradual process which will take a very long time, the bank’s chairman recently said. That, at least, is not the sort of talk you would hear at a tech firm.Economic stimulus and fiscal godsend LEAP years are a plus for finance ministers: the extra day bolsters annual output by a sliver and so flatters their record. Arun Jaitley, India’s finance minister, should be especially grateful for any boost to GDP on “leap day”, when he unveils his third budget. Although the Indian economy continues to outpace both richer and poorer rivals, the government’s fiscal options are narrowing. Given jittery markets and total public debt of around 65% of GDP, a high figure for an emerging market, the question isn’t whether the government should cut its budget deficit but by how much. It is projected to be 3.9% in the fiscal year that ends on March 31st. The government has pledged to reduce the shortfall to 3.5% in the coming year and 3% the following one. But these targets are already less ambitious than ones Mr Jaitley had set previously, and ministers seem to be preparing the ground to push them back further—to bond markets’ consternation. As always, politicians can craft a compelling case for another “one-off” delay in budget-trimming. Civil servants are expecting a mammoth pay bump as a result of a once-a-decade wage negotiation; there is also a boost to military pensions that will cost around 1.1 trillion rupees ($16 billion), or 0.8% of GDP. Fresh funds will have to be found to recapitalise 29 state-owned banks, most of which have books infested with dud loans and so are making heavy losses. State governments, which add a further 2.3% of GDP to the central government’s deficit, are being leant on to bail out bankrupt power-distribution companies. There is an economic case for deferring cuts, too, given febrile global conditions. Private investment is at a nadir, due to firms’ heavy debt and weak earnings. Two disappointing rainy seasons in a row have depressed incomes in rural regions, where most Indians live. And though India’s growth, at 7.5% last year, looks buoyant by global standards, it is below the 9-10% the government aspires to. (Many, including some government officials, in any case question the accuracy of the data.) There is some debate among economists about whether further public spending is warranted in such circumstances. Unfortunately for Mr Jaitley, one of the most vocal critics is Raghuram Rajan, the central-bank governor. He has compared India’s economy to Brazil’s, which is similarly indebted and shrinking fast—a humiliating rebuke to the government. Mr Rajan has argued that there are few investments the government can make that are likely to deliver high enough returns to compensate for adding to India’s debt pile. More public spending risks crowding out the private sort, he thinks. The implicit threat from Mr Rajan is that he will not reduce interest rates from their current 6.75% if the deficit does not shrink. After all, India has already received a hearty stimulus, albeit not one of Mr Jaitley’s doing. No other country has benefited quite so much from the tumbling price of commodities, particularly oil, of which it is a huge net importer. When Narendra Modi came to power in May 2014, with crude at nearly $110 a barrel, whatever tax the government levied on petrol and other oil products was largely spent on fuel subsidies for the poor. The subsidy bill has since atrophied, while the government has pocketed much of the benefit of falling prices by raising the tax on petrol. It has received unexpected revenue of 1.5% of GDP, even as consumers’ spending power has risen. For a country whose tax receipts total around 11% of GDP, that is a sizeable boon. Economists point out that the oil price, currently hovering near $30, cannot tumble another $80 next year. Worse, it might go up, which could prompt a reversal of the tax increases. If so, a $10 increase in the oil price would cost the government 0.35% of GDP, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank, more or less doubling the cuts needed to meet its current fiscal targets. Modest rises in other taxes have been mooted, and may be necessary if Mr Jaitley sees public investment or rural handouts as a political necessity. But there is another obvious way of raising money: selling down the government’s stakes in hundreds of Indian companies. Targets for privatisation have been missed in nine of the past ten years (see chart). Although many of the government’s holdings have little strategic value—it owns stakes in cigarette-makers, engineering firms and hotels, for instance—it has resisted a sell-off. The reticence should end, argues Sajjid Chinoy of JPMorgan Chase, a bank, who advises government to think of divestments not as asset sales but as asset swaps, trading stakes in companies for the money to build new roads and railways. A selling spree would allow Mr Jaitley to stick to his 3.5% target. Yet if anything, he is expected to trim projected revenue from privatisation. The disappointment of bond markets will be blunted by a rule that obliges banks to keep 21.5% of their assets in government bonds. But the price of profligacy is mounting: of the 13.7 trillion rupees the government expects in revenue in the coming year, over a third of it, or 5.1 trillion rupees, will go on interest payments.LONDON may be Europe’s commercial capital, but not all Britons are thrilled about that. In a poll conducted in 2014, two-thirds of non-Londoners reckoned that London had a positive impact on the British economy as a whole, but fewer than a third thought London’s strength was good for their city. London lures skilled workers and productive companies away from other parts of Britain. It also lures workers and firms from across Europe—something that makes many Britons, both in London and beyond, bristle. Indeed, London’s mop-topped mayor, Boris Johnson, this week joined the campaign to persuade Britons to withdraw from the European Union. London dominates Britain, accounting for 23% of its population and about a third of its economic output. The city grew to enormous size in the 19th and early-20th century, when it served as the political and economic hub of a global empire. The post-war decline in its population, a result both of the loss of empire and of policies intended to curb its growth, ended in the 1980s, when the globalisation of finance rejuvenated the city’s main industry. Greater London is the fifth-largest metropolitan economy in the world, according to the Brookings Institution, a think-tank. It is the EU’s largest city, by both population and output. Yet London should arguably be bigger than it is. It is Europe’s most important financial centre, and one of its biggest hubs for information industries and professional services—the European analogue to New York city. But London accounts for just 4.5% of the EU’s output, after adjusting for variation in the cost of living, and just 2.9% of its population, whereas New York accounts for 8.1% of America’s GDP and 6.3% of its population (see chart). Were European integration ever to yield something like a United States of Europe (and Britain ever to be part of such an enterprise), London would probably swell in size and importance. Why should that be the case? Economists have touted the benefits of cities since 1826, when a German one named Johann Heinrich von Thünen tried to explain why farmers gather in villages rather than living by their fields. Paul Krugman, in a paper published in 1991, homed in on the role of “increasing returns to scale” in driving the growth of cities. Because it is expensive to move people and goods, customers want to be where producers are and vice versa. As cities grow, increasing returns kick in: the more people who live in a particular place, the more attractive that place becomes to others. Mr Krugman focused on clustering in manufacturing. Two trading regions with a slight imbalance in population would naturally evolve into a developed core and an underpopulated periphery, he argued. In the paper, which the Nobel committee cited when awarding him the prize for economics, Mr Krugman pointed as an example to Europe, where industrial activity is concentrated in the north-west. Manufacturing no longer drives urbanisation in the rich world. In 2009 Edward Glaeser and Joshua Gottlieb of Harvard University surveyed recent research in order to distil the nature and causes of the “wealth of cities”. Although manufacturing firms have grown less likely to concentrate together in dense areas, thanks to the falling cost and hassle of shipping, firms in knowledge-based industries like technology and finance have become more prone to clustering. In cities with lots of skilled workers, productivity tends to rise with population density. The authors reckon that it is now the advantage of associating with other clever people, and the intellectual stimulation and exchange that results, that gives the biggest cities their magnetism. City sticker Congestion slows cities’ breakneck growth: housing and transport infrastructure seldom keep pace with demand. As a result, rather than a single metropolitan goliath, economies tend to develop a series of cities distributed by size according to “Zipf’s law” (named after George Zipf, an American linguist). The largest city tends to be twice the size of the second-largest, three times the size of the third-largest, and so on. American cities roughly follow this pattern. In the less-integrated EU, however, there is instead a jumble of big cities and a dearth of medium-sized ones. Deeper integration would push Europe toward a more American distribution. London would probably be the main beneficiary, given its particular strengths. Europe’s financial markets remain highly fragmented. Its stockmarkets are about half the size of America’s, despite the similar size of the two economies; European corporate-bond markets are about a third of the size. Few Italian firms, for instance, turn to their country’s relatively small equity or bond markets for funding. Instead, they simply borrow from Italian banks, which tend to have their headquarters in Milan. The EU is currently trying to rectify that by making it easier to borrow, lend and invest across its internal borders, in the hope of reducing funding costs for European firms. If such efforts bear fruit and Britain remains a part of the union, firms based in London would help more foreign companies issue shares or bonds there, at the expense of other European financial centres. Easing the cross-border provision of services, another thing on the EU’s long-term agenda, would likewise prove a boon for London. That prospect would naturally discomfit continentals. Just as New York rose head and shoulders above Philadelphia and Boston as the American economy grew and integrated, Paris, Frankfurt and Milan could all expect to cede ground to London in a close-knit EU. But London’s boosters might also blanch at the growth deeper integration might bring. It would mean more building, for starters. Greater London added 23,000 new housing units in the year to September, less than a third of the new units approved in New York last year. Were London to follow the example of New York, its GDP and population could eventually eclipse that of the rest of Britain, lengthening the political and cultural shadows cast across the rest of the country. Mr Johnson is angling for a promotion to prime minister; ironically, a vote to remain could make his current job one of the most desirable in Europe.Correction: In a recent article on the restructuring of big banks (“Chop, chop”, January 30th), we said Barclays planned to “shut up shop” in Asia. In fact, it is only closing its share-trading business there. Sorry.“WE FEEL we must speak up in the face of what we see as an overreach by the US government.” With those words Tim Cook, head of Apple, the world’s biggest information-technology (IT) company, explained on February 16th why he felt his firm should refuse to comply with an FBI request to break into an iPhone used by Syed Farook, a dead terrorist. Farook and his wife Tashfeen Malik, who were sympathisers with Islamic State, shot and killed 14 people in California in December, before both were themselves killed by police. The FBI’s request, Mr Cook said, was “chilling”. Ever since 2013, when Edward Snowden’s leaks pushed privacy and data security into the public eye, America’s IT firms have been locked in battle with their own government. The issue at stake is as old as mass communication: how much power should the authorities have to subvert the means citizens and companies use to keep their private business private? For Mr Cook to choose the Farook case as the line he will not cross seems, on the face of things, baffling. The phone is government property (Farook was a public employee). The FBI wants help unlocking it because it may contain information on the motives or contacts of a dead terrorist. What could be more reasonable? But for Apple, and those security advocates who think the firm is right to defy the government, it is not reasonable at all. Far from being a one-off, they suspect the FBI’s case has been chosen carefully, in order to set a legal precedent that would let policemen and spies break into computers much more easily—and would do so in a way that undermines everyone’s security. Cryptoporticus The files on Farook’s phone, as on all iPhones, are encrypted. Unless the correct code is entered to unlock the phone, they are meaningless gibberish. By itself such a code provides little security. It is, by default, a mere four digits long, which makes it easy to memorise but means there are only 10,000 possible combinations. This makes it simple to try every combination until by chance the right one is hit, a process called “brute-forcing”. Other features, though, are designed to make brute-forcing harder. After six wrong guesses a user has to wait a minute before trying a seventh. That delay rises rapidly to an hour. On average, therefore, brute-forcing a four-digit iPhone passcode will take 5,000 hours—nearly seven months. Yet even that might be a surmountable obstacle, were it not for the fact that iPhones can also be set to wipe themselves clean after ten failed attempts to log in. Crucially, both restrictions—the time between attempts, and the wipe after ten failed tries—can, unlike the encryption itself, be circumvented. That is because they are enforced by the phone’s operating system, iOS, and operating systems can be changed. Apple does so regularly, issuing updates that add features and fix bugs. The FBI is, in essence, asking for just such an update, bespoke to the phone in question, that would remove the extra security features so that they can brute-force it quickly. In theory the bureau could write such an update itself. But it could not use it without Apple’s help because, precisely to stop such attacks, iPhones will accept an update only if they can be convinced, via a special, cryptographically signed certificate, that it comes from Apple. Only Apple possesses the long, randomly generated number used as the key to that process. The FBI has insisted its request is a one-off, and that once the software has done its job Apple can delete it. But many security experts are sceptical: they do not believe that looking inside Farook’s phone is the bureau’s only motive. “They almost certainly won’t find anything of interest on the phone,” opines Nicholas Weaver, a computer-security researcher at the University of California, Berkeley. He points out that Farook and his wife took the trouble to destroy two other phones and a laptop, while leaving the iPhone—which belonged to Farook’s employer—intact. (On the other hand, Farook did disable the phone’s online backup feature, data from which the FBI would have access to—a few weeks before his rampage.) Dr Weaver and people like him think the FBI has pushed the case specifically because it is hard, from a public-relations point of view, for Apple to be seen to be refusing to co-operate. They worry that if Apple agrees to build such a system once, it will find similar requests impossible to refuse in future—an argument that was bolstered when it emerged that the Justice Department was demanding Apple’s help in at least nine similar cases (in seven of those, the firm is resisting). Some fret that the FBI might even require the firm to start sending subverted code to specific suspects over the air, using the technology it employs to distribute legitimate updates. Viewed narrowly, that might be no bad thing. The FBI has argued many times that encryption can thwart legitimate investigations, leaving vital clues undiscovered. But security researchers point out that what works for the good guys works for the bad guys, too. If a subverted operating system managed to escape into the “wild” even once, then the security of every iPhone would be put at risk. The trade-off, says Kenneth White, a director of the Open Crypto Audit Project, an American charity, is not security versus privacy, but security for everyone versus the police’s ability to investigate specific crimes. And the risk of a leak would rise with every extra person who had access to the nobbled code: defence lawyers demanding to see it; court-appointed experts given the job of checking it works as intended; and so on. A second argument against collaboration points out that Apple has governments besides America’s that it must answer to. Deliberately compromising its security for the Americans, says Mr White, will encourage other countries to make similar, perhaps even broader, demands for access. Having conceded the point once, Apple will find it hard to resist in future. In countries less concerned with civil liberties and the rule of law, that could have serious consequences. Key decisions All these arguments are set to be rehearsed when Apple and the FBI meet in court, on March 22nd. But however the decision goes, it is unlikely to be the last word. Most observers expect appeals to carry on all the way to the Supreme Court. In the meantime IT firms, Apple included, are taking steps to lock themselves out of their own customers’ devices, deliberately making it harder to fulfil official requests for access. New versions of the iPhone feature something called the Secure Enclave. This is a separate computer within the phone, whose job is to police access to the rest of the device. Cracking it would require an extra piece of customised software aimed at neutering the Enclave itself. That is doable, for Apple has retained the ability to alter the Enclave so that it can issue updates and fix bugs. But things need not stay this way. The firm has pondered removing its ability to modify the Enclave, which would frustrate official requests for access. Even then, a determined policeman has options. It is possible, with expensive equipment and a good deal of skill, to recover cryptographic keys from hardware by poking around physically in the transistors and wiring of the chip itself. Decapping, as this process is known (the first step is to remove the chip’s protective plastic cap) is the stuff of intelligence agencies and a few dedicated laboratories, and carries a risk of destroying the chip for no gain. But, if access were thought crucial, and there were no other options, it is possible to do it. Even so, ensuring that phones themselves can be unlocked will not solve all of the authorities’ problems. There are plenty of encrypted messaging apps available for smartphones, many written outside the United States and thus beyond the reach of its government. The most advanced feature a technique called forward secrecy, which uses disposable, one-time encryption keys to ensure that old messages stay scrambled even if those looking manage to get hold of the conversers’ permanent keys. (One such app, called Telegram, which was developed by Pavel Durov, a nomadic Russian, announced on February 24th that it had reached 100m users.) All this may sound like an arms race. It is. Silicon Valley has roots in the counterculture of the 1960s, and a potent streak of civil libertarianism. There is a sense there that Mr Snowden’s revelations proved the American government cannot be trusted not to abuse its powers of surveillance. And there are commercial factors, too. Apple has made privacy and security important selling points for its products. Cybersecurity types, meanwhile, feel aggrieved that policemen and politicians do not seem to grasp what they view as a fundamental point: weakening security for the police’s benefit inevitably weakens it for everyone. “They keep asking for a ‘Manhattan Project’ to figure this out,” says Mr White. “But that’s like asking for a Manhattan Project to figure out how to divide by zero.” (Attempting to dividing by zero is, by definition, a mathematical folly.) It will be left to the courts to decide the right approach in this particular case. But the fight between Apple and the FBI raises very big questions. To answer them will ultimately require the intervention of elected politicians.
