AMPLE evidence shows that exercising regularly reduces the risk of cancer. Similarly, those who have survived the disease are less likely to see it return if they engage in lots of physical activity after treatment. All this suggests that such activity triggers a reaction in the body which somehow thwarts cancer cells, but the details of the process have remained murky. Now, a team led by Pernille Hojman at Copenhagen University Hospital, in Denmark, has reported in Cell Metabolism that the key to the mystery is adrenalin. Dr Hojman began her work by verifying that exercise truly does have beneficial anti-tumour effects. She and her colleagues gave some of the mice in their laboratory activity wheels, which the animals could run around inside as much as they liked. Other mice, meanwhile, were given no opportunity to exercise beyond moving about inside their cages. The researchers then induced mice of both sorts to develop one of three types of cancer. Some, they injected with a substance called diethylnitrosamine, which causes liver cancer. Others, they injected below the skin with melanoma cells, which then set up shop where they had been injected. Others still had their tails inoculated with melanoma cells. In mice, previous experience has shown, this leads to melanomas forming in the lungs. The results were instructive. While all mice injected under the skin with melanoma cells developed that cancer, the tumours in animals which had had access to a running wheel were 61% smaller after six weeks than were those in mice that had been unable to exercise. A similar reduction in size (58%) pertained to lung tumours. And, of the mice injected with diethylnitrosamine, only 31% of those with wheels in their enclosures developed tumours at all—in contrast to a 75% tumour-development rate in mice lacking access to a wheel. To try to understand why exercise does this, Dr Hojman and her team put under a microscope some of the tumours they had induced. They found that those from well-exercised mice contained more immune cells than equivalent tumours from inactive animals. Specifically, the former had double the number of cytotoxic T-cells, which kill off body cells that are damaged, malfunctioning or infected with viruses. They also had five times more natural killer cells, a type that sounds the alarm and attracts other immune cells. In light of these discoveries Dr Hojman repeated the experiment, this time on mice that had been engineered to lack cytotoxic T-cells. Again, she found that mice with access to wheels had smaller tumours. This suggested that the natural killer cells, not the T-cells, were the responsible agents. A third experiment confirmed this. She sabotaged natural killer cells by giving mice an antibody that eliminated these cells while leaving the rest of the immune system intact. With the natural killer cells gone, the tumours of all the mice, regardless of whether or not they could run in a wheel, grew to the same size. Dr Hojman knew from past work that epinephrine, a hormone also commonly known as adrenalin, has the potential to mobilise natural killer cells. She knew, too, that this hormone’s levels in the blood rise during periods of physical exertion. That led her to wonder if it is epinephrine which is behind the cancer-thwarting effects of exercise. To find out, she ran a fourth experiment, in which mice induced to have cancer were injected either with epinephrine or with saline. The hormone performed well, reducing the growth of tumours by 61% in mice that had no access to a wheel. However, this was not as impressive as the reduction of 74% which the team saw in control mice that got regular exercise. There was, they concluded, something else involved. And they found it in the form of interleukin-6. Levels of this molecule also spike during exercise—and it, too, helps immune cells home in on tumours. When Dr Hojman and her colleagues exposed sedentary mice both to epinephrine and to interleukin-6, the rodents’ immune systems attacked the tumours in their bodies as effectively as if those animals had engaged in regular wheel-runs. Dr Hojman’s findings, then, suggest that epinephrine and interleukin-6 could be used as anti-tumour drugs. She is not proposing that they should be a substitute for exercise in those who are merely lazy—not least because exercise brings benefits beyond curbing oncogenesis. But people who are too old or too ill to be active might thus gain exercise’s anticancer benefits without the need to get sweaty.TRICHIASIS, the last stage of an infection called trachoma, rarely hits the headlines. That is because it does not kill. It does, however, blind. More than 2m people suffer, half of whom have lost their vision. The condition, caused by certain strains of Chlamydia trachomatis, a bacterium, makes the eyelid turn inward. That causes the sufferer’s eyelashes to scratch his cornea when he blinks. People blink 15-20 times a minute, so the pain is relentless, and eventually the scarring caused by the scratching results in sightlessness. Trachoma is preventable (by regular face washing and general cleanliness) and treatable (by an antibiotic called Zithromax and by surgery to correct deformed eyelids). But, until recently, where such efforts should be concentrated was not clear. This changed with the publication earlier this month, by the Global Trachoma Mapping Project, of an atlas of risk (see above). The survey which created this atlas, led by Sightsavers, a British charity, examined 2.6m people over three years to see whether they had the disease. That sample was drawn from a population of 224m in 29 countries reckoned at risk. The project’s methodology was designed to be simple and reliable. Out went pens and paper. In came smartphones. Data could thus not be lost to the rain, and their quality could be checked continuously. Nor was there any doubt about where they were collected from, since the phones were tracked by the Global Positioning System. The atlas’s publication brings encouraging news. Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda had much lower levels of trachoma than expected. Laos and Cambodia, unsurveyed since the 1960s, turned out to be virtually free of it. And, for those places that are infected, the full force of antibiotic-distribution and face-washing education programmes can now be brought to bear. The World Health Organisation aspires to eliminate trachoma as a public-health risk by 2020, leaving only sporadic cases that local doctors can clear up. That sounds ambitious. But knowing where to concentrate fire certainly helps.GUILT-FREE intercourse may, as Philip Larkin wrote, have begun in 1963, but sexual reproduction has been around a good deal longer than that. Single-celled organisms began exchanging and mixing up genetic information in ways modern biologists recognise as rudimentary forms of sex about two billion years ago. Yet the question of why sex exists at all remains troublesome. A creature which reproduces asexually passes on all of its genes to each of its progeny. One that mates with another, by contrast, passes on only half of them. On the face of things that is a huge selective disadvantage. There must therefore, evolutionary biologists believe, be equally huge compensating benefits. Two ideas exist about what these might be. One is that the constantly changing genetic variety sex creates stops parasites and pathogens evolving stable techniques for exploiting a host species. This is the “Red Queen” hypothesis, an allusion to a character in “Through the Looking-Glass” who had to run as fast as she could to stay in the same place. The other idea is that the continual mixing of genes from generation to generation separates good and bad mutations, permitting the bad ones to be purged by natural selection without taking the good ones along for the ride. This process was described by Joel Peck, one of its progenitors, as plucking rubies from rubbish. “Plucking rubies” and the “Red Queen” are not mutually exclusive. Both could be true. But, while the queen has experimental evidence to back her up, rubies have had little such validation. Until now. For Michael Desai of Harvard University believes he has demonstrated such plucking experimentally in brewer’s yeast. This is a well-understood experimental organism and one ideal for Dr Desai’s purpose because it can reproduce both sexually and asexually. Studying the switch between the two modes, he hoped, might illuminate the purging process. And, as he and his team write in Nature, it has. Despite having two sexes, known as mating-types a and alpha, yeast’s default mode of reproduction is asexual, so Dr Desai’s first task was to work out a way to turn his yeast cells on to sex, as it were. He did this by adding to their DNA genes for resistance to two antibiotics, hygromycin and G418, and arranging for this resistance to be turned on only when the gene for mating was also active. Adding the antibiotics to the yeast’s growth medium meant only sexually active yeast cells could survive. This done, he and his team set up 24 lines of this modified strain (12 of mating-type a and 12 of alpha) and let them grow for six months, a period that corresponds to about 1,000 yeast generations. Six lines of each mating type were forced to undergo sexual reproduction every 90 generations, by mixing the sexes together and adding the antibiotics. Others were left to carry on cloning themselves. At these 90-generation break points the researchers also sampled each line to look for any genetic mutations that had arisen in the intervening period. Such mutations are the stuff of evolution, and Dr Desai hoped they might tell the story of why, in an evolutionary sense, sex works. They did. The researchers found, as predicted, that when a beneficial mutation appeared in a few of the asexually reproducing cells, it would spread only if its positive effects outweighed the negative effects of any deleterious mutations that appeared in the same cells. Even if a good mutation prospered, it did so slowly, as any bad mutations associated with it came along for the ride when the genome it was in passed from one generation to the next. In the sexual yeast population, however, good and bad mutations often went their separate ways when the parent cell’s genome was chopped up and mixed around during reproduction. This permitted different combinations of good and bad mutations to pass to the genomes of different offspring of the same parent cells. That made it easier, in an evolutionary sorting of wheat from chaff, for the good mutations to spread, even if they first appeared in bad company. So, as evolutionary theory predicts, over the course of the experiment genomes containing deleterious mutations disappeared and positive mutations accumulated in the genomes of cells that remained. The crucial test, though, came at the end of the experiment, when Dr Desai compared the asexual to the sexual strains. In every case, the descendants of sexually reproducing yeast cells bested their asexual rivals in the competition for food and resources. His experiments thus confirm that the ruby hypothesis works—at least, in a laboratory. That puts it on an equal footing with the Red Queen. What goes on in the wild, though, has yet to be determined.Sing up, dear THE lovey-dovey monogamy which the untutored eye may perceive in pairs of songbirds, raising their young together in nests constructed by joint endeavour, has long been exposed by zoologists as a fantasy. Even by the adulterous standards of the ornithological world, though, the red-backed fairy-wren, an Australian bird, is a champion. According to a study just published in Biology Letters by Daniel Baldassarre of Cornell University and his colleagues, almost half of fairy-wren nestlings are not fathered by the male that is helping to feed them, and 60% of nests contain at least one such chick. For male fairy-wrens, then, trying to guarantee paternity is a continual struggle, and Dr Baldassarre and his team wondered which strategies worked best. Broadly, a male fairy-wren has two options. He can try to discourage interlopers by beating them up, or he can woo his mate to encourage her not to stray. He does this by duetting with her. That both keeps her attention and may suggest to other males that she is, indeed, loyal. To see which was the better approach Dr Baldassarre and his team ran some experiments in Queensland. They challenged male fairy-wrens with dummy interlopers who were given voice by recorded songs. They then compared the males’ typical responses to these artificial encounters with the paternities of actual nestlings subsequently raised, as estimated by comparing the youngsters’ DNA with that of their purported fathers. In practice, all challenged males responded both by attacking the stuffed rival and by duetting with their mates. They did so, however, with varying levels of enthusiasm for each approach. Altogether, in the course of several slightly different experiments, the researchers looked at the adults and offspring in 51 territories. Their results were intriguing. A male’s level of aggression towards the dummy made no perceptible difference to his chance, subsequently measured, of being a cuckold. His level of duetting, by contrast, made a big one. The best duetters had almost no offspring born of adultery inflicted on them. Aggression, presumably, brings other advantages, otherwise it is hard to see why it happens. Probably, it serves to protect a territory (and thus its food resources) from predatory neighbours. In the matter of sexual fidelity, though, it seems to be useless. For female fairy-wrens, it is rather a mellifluous mate that is the key to domestic harmony and a loyal partnership.Heavenly bodies FOR centuries the received wisdom was that the Renaissance started in Italy. Ever since Giorgio Vasari, one of the first art historians, wrote in 1550 of a new naturalness in painting—as opposed to medieval mannerism—the idea of the Renaissance has been linked with frescoes in Florence or the sinuous forms painted on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. Now, an important show of work by Hieronymus Bosch, one of the finest Dutch painters, in his home town of ’s-Hertogenbosch, challenges that view. It shows how an artist usually associated with the medieval was using a naturalist style at least 50 years before Vasari. The exhibition, which marks the 500th anniversary of Bosch’s death, has been over a decade in the making, and is the culmination of six years of work by the Bosch Research and Conservation Project, in which experts analysed the paintings of Bosch in piercing detail. It is a remarkable achievement. Of the 24 paintings known to be by Bosch, 17 are on display, while 19 of his drawings are also shown, making it the largest exhibition of his work to date. Managing to get all of these paintings together, often from large and possessive museums in Madrid, New York and Venice, is a coup for a small, regional gallery which owns no Bosch pictures of its own. Bosch’s work has inspired many different interpretations: from the idea that he belonged to a sexual sect to the notion that his paintings, often full of fantastical creatures, could have been created only while on psychedelic drugs. This show is blissfully free of heavy-handed interpretation. Instead it presents his work alongside documents (bibles, books of hours and missals) which help put his paintings in context. But the commentary is minimal. The work is allowed to speak for itself. The result is outstanding. Bosch came from a long line of artists. His grandfather was a painter, as was his father and three of his uncles. Painting was their way of understanding the world. Bosch’s work is deeply religious: with a few exceptions, his pictures depict moments from the Bible and the lives of the saints, or scenes of heaven, hell and the bits between. Many were commissioned by a local church, St John’s, where in 1487-88 he became a “sworn brother” of the Brotherhood of Our Lady, a religious fraternity. The energy of his devotion can be felt in the scathing social commentary of “The Haywain”, where crowds of people, including nuns, grasp at a haystack which is being led to hell by creatures that are half-fish and half-man. Or it can be glimpsed in “The Ascent of the Blessed”, where angels guide people from purgatory up to heaven—their arms outstretched—and jubilantly push these souls upwards (see picture). But this exhibition also shows how his work is rooted in the everyday. His drawings, with all their vitality and observed detail, have a special sharpness. His religious works, too, are grounded in reality. In “The Last Judgment” the instruments of torture are crafted out of funnels, barrels, jugs and bells. In “Ecce Homo”, which depicts the moment Christ is condemned to death, in the background a man and a woman peer over a bridge, oblivious to what is going on near them. This mix of the extraordinary and the mundane appears even more original when comparing Bosch’s work with that by members of his workshop. This exhibition often invites such comparisons. Bosch’s luminous “The Adoration of the Magi”, on loan from the Metropolitan Museum in New York, hangs next to a work of the same name by one of his followers. Bosch’s painting is full of life and details: daisies sprouting out of the base of a wall and two men warming their hands over a fire in the background. By contrast, although his follower’s work is a later painting it seems stiffly medieval. No such details of life exist in it, while its perspective is skewed. So too with one of the workshop editions of “Ecce Homo”: Bosch presents a Christ who is bowed and lacerated with whippings and dripping with blood, whereas his follower presents Christ standing upright, seemingly unhurt. Earthly delights Not all of Bosch’s works are on display. “The Garden of Earthly Delights”, perhaps his best-known painting, still hangs in the Prado in Madrid. Two other works from the Prado were withdrawn at the last minute, after the Bosch Research and Conservation Project found they were likely to be by one of his followers instead. This is a shame. But the experience of seeing so many of Bosch’s paintings and drawings together, and in the town where they were first created, mostly makes up for these losses. There are images that run throughout the work: owls, long associated with evil, appear often. What is remarkable is how modern Bosch’s work feels. He was “on the brink of the new time,” says Charles de Mooij, the director of the Het Noordbrabants Museum. This feels too modest. Bosch’s scenes of hell and damnation may not have the same spiritual impact on a largely secular society. But there is a sense of urgency to his paintings that demands attention, and which feels distinctly new. His figures, whether saints or mischievous sinners, are depicted with a naturalness which makes them stand apart from those of other painters of his time. This exhibition suggests that half a millennium ago, in a small town once considered an artistic backwater, the Renaissance began with Bosch.Setting the liberal agenda David Astor. By Jeremy Lewis. Jonathan Cape; 416 pages; £25. DAVID ASTOR, who edited the Observer from 1948 until 1975 (and whose family owned it), belonged to a time when newspapers were Britain’s principal source of information. For well over 20 years, Astor’s Observer was the voice of Britain’s liberal consensus. It campaigned persistently and successfully against the death penalty, theatre censorship and racial discrimination; in favour of the decolonisation of Africa and of tolerance towards homosexuality. The laws that were passed subsequently freed people to make social and moral decisions for themselves. Jeremy Lewis, in a lively, gossipy and affectionate biography, asserts that Astor was “one of the outstanding editors of the last century”, and it is hard to disagree. Although Astor never learned to type, he was a good copy editor and headline writer. He hired writers he admired, even if they had not dutifully served the usual three-year journalistic apprenticeship in the provinces.  Anthony Sampson, one of his most distinguished editorial acquisitions, thought that the paper was more like a family charity, or an eccentric college, than a commercial newspaper. One significant difference between Astor and most Fleet Street editors was his inherited wealth. He was brought up at Cliveden, a great house on the Thames: “a shallow, vapid, cotton-wool life”, he once said, dominated by his obtrusive and overbearing American mother Nancy, Britain’s first female member of parliament. It is no surprise that he sought consolation in Freudian psychoanalysis, in which he never lost his faith. His father, Waldorf, (whose own father had bought the paper from Lord Northcliffe in 1911) suggested it might provide David with a suitable occupation. The young man not long out of Eton and Oxford found the idea wearisome, but the outbreak of the second world war piqued his interest. While still on the staff of Lord Mountbatten’s Combined Operations, he persuaded a reluctant Observer editor to run a weekly series that contemplated life after the war. In 1945 he became its foreign editor, nurturing temperamental central European intellectuals such as Arthur Koestler and Isaac Deutscher. David Astor’s reputation was made by his violent opposition to the Suez invasion in 1956. The Observer damned it as gangsterism. Although advertising suffered, circulation did not. His paper fought the cold war, was routinely Atlanticist and favoured a federal Europe. But it was the campaigns that defined it. The other crucial ingredient was writing that burnished a golden age of Sunday journalism. Kenneth Tynan’s theatre reviews, the reportorial brilliance of Patrick O’Donovan and Michael Davie, Jane Bown’s photographs, Hugh McIlvanney’s match reports and Terry Kilmartin’s literary pages set standards few journalists could match. The problem was money. Waldorf Astor had set up a charitable trust to protect the paper from disagreeable predators, with statutes that prevented it from making a profit or borrowing money. The only legitimate source of new capital was the family, and David Astor himself ploughed at least £1.25m (in late 1960s money) into the paper and leant on his siblings for more.  The money was needed to compete with the Sunday Times, but not even the Astors had enough. Besides, Astor was not naturally competitive. When the Sunday Times published a magazine, he declined to follow suit, until his commercial department forced him to. Shortage of capital meant the Observer could not rival the size and range of the Sunday Times, and, as an editor, he had little sympathy with the investigative journalism that became the powerful speciality of its rival. He was wrong; by the 1970s, the battle for supremacy on Sundays was over. When Astor retired in 1975, Sir Harold Evans, the celebrated editor of the Sunday Times, declared that he no longer thought of the Observer as a rival. The Sunday Times published some memorable journalism; none more so than its determination to win compensation for the victims of thalidomide. But the Observer’s campaigns for social liberalism have profoundly affected the way Britain lives and thinks. So who was the more influential editor? It was David Astor, surely.Being a Beast. By Charles Foster. Profile; 218 pages; £14.99. To be published in America by Metropolitan in June, $28. STRIDING around describing plants and animals, often in flowery prose from behind a desk or a camera lens, seems rather old-fashioned. In “Being a Beast” Charles Foster takes a more modern approach, getting down to the animal’s level to see what it is really like to be a badger, an otter, a fox, a red deer and a swift.  It is an extreme proposition. Mr Foster, a writer and barrister who qualified as a vet and has a PhD in medical law and ethics from Cambridge, doesn’t just investigate the taxonomical differences with humans; he attempts to overcome them. This means eating rubbish from bin bags as an urban fox would do, living in a sett as a badger, cowering naked on a moor as a red deer and launching himself fully clothed into a river pretending to be an otter.  Mr Foster is a nature writer, but not one you would recognise. There is plenty of shit and blood and dirt and very little description of the beauty of the animals. Because who needs to read that? Readers know that a badger is handsome. What they do not know is what worms taste like. Since you ask, it’s like wine apparently: once you get past the slime, each worm has its own individual terroir.   Mr Foster shapeshifts with the book. In the badger chapter he is sensuous yet ruthless. As an otter he has ADHD. As a fox he is a canine kind of street smart. And as a swift? Suddenly transcendent. The book contains some very funny moments, usually involving other humans who are confused as to why a man is sleeping under a shed, eating spiders or growling at a dog.  But to dismiss Mr Foster as an eccentric would be a mistake. In each chapter the reader learns a lot about the animals involved. What does it feel like to sleep by a road, hunt voles or be hunted by hounds? The author hones senses long neglected. As a badger he maps the dark wood by smells alone, as an otter he sees the river through a thousand tiny bubbles, and as a fox he slinks into a new city of London defined by dark corners and rubbish dumps.  The idea that people should stop managing the landscape and let the wild back into their tired lives has gained so much in popularity it now goes by the buzzword “rewilding” in conservation circles. Mr Foster is the real thing, going truly feral and in the process discovering a whole new world. It is not a midlife crisis so much as a lifelong passion.  Yet no matter how hard he tries, poor Charles Foster is such a very human homo sapiens. He cannot escape being a middle-aged man. It is like watching a geek with the cool kids at a party, trying to assume the character of a cunning fox or a confident badger. He has moments, like when he discovers the joy of chasing a cat or earthworms emerging after the rain. But in the end, he is too clumsy, too bipedal—and altogether too intellectual.  A streak of eastern mysticism runs through Mr Foster’s book. In the end he listens to its call and lets rip. This is the moment when he becomes a swift, allowing his writing and his thoughts to fly and “slash the veil”, as he calls it. He believes that the closest he can get to being a swift is to understand the finer details of the planet he shares with the bird: “The velvet flow of a caterpillar’s legs and the grunt of a crocus as it noses out of the earth.” Finally, the author accepts that he is human, which is all about being curious and pushing boundaries. This idea is not new. Attempting to connect to animals and even become them has been tested over generations, not least as shamans and through stories, such as “Homeward Bound”. What is new is the modern world that humans have created full of cars and houses and computers, where “sensitivity is impossible”. It would be all too easy to mock the author’s commitment to recognising his atavistic abilities and releasing his inner animal. But curiosity prevails. “Being a Beast” wastes no time telling you how to identify nature or become a better person. It encourages you to get down on your hands and knees and start sniffing. Ray of sunshine One Breath: Free-diving, Death and the Quest to Shatter Human Limits. By Adam Skolnick. Crown Archetype; 336 pages; $26. Corsair; £20. THE death of Nick Mevoli, an American freediver, on November 17th 2013, while competing at Dean’s Blue Hole—a 202-metre-deep funnel of darkness in the Bahamas—is a litany of “if onlys”. If only the 32-year-old from Brooklyn, tired and in pain, had not attempted a dive that day. If only, sensing trouble, he had turned back to the surface sooner. If only his team’s resuscitation efforts had succeeded. “One Breath”, Adam Skolnick’s dissection of an extreme sport and post-mortem of a dive gone wrong, becomes a morality play of hubris, imprudence and obsession. Free-diving, descending as deep as possible on a single breath, is a niche interest that is more dangerous than any sport other than base-jumping (leaping from a bridge or cliff wearing a wingsuit). Perils include punctured eardrums, embolisms, blackouts and “lung squeezes”. Diving at extreme depths brutalises the lungs, which at a depth of 30 metres compress to a quarter of their normal size. At worst, capillaries and pulmonary vessels rupture and a diver drowns in his own blood. It took Mevoli, who began his first formal course in free-diving in 2011, slightly more than a year to rocket from being a novice competitor to a record-holder, and that was part of the problem. “The biggest problem with freedivers now is they hurry. They go too deep too fast,” said Natalia Molchanova, possibly the world’s greatest freediver, who drowned last August off the coast of Spain. She was giving a private lesson when she made a dive for pleasure. Not being clipped to a line, she was swept away and never found. Even the best of the best are not immune. Mevoli grew up in a broken home with a neglectful, self-absorbed father who gave his son a life-insurance policy for his 18th birthday and made himself the beneficiary. Before his parents’ divorce, Mevoli would plunge into the backyard pool of his boyhood home in Florida, surface to check if the angry voices had subsided, and, if not, submerge again. In free-diving he found solace and self-worth. “Each dive”, Mr Skolnick writes, became “a referendum on his own value.” Mevoli-the-friend was caring and large-spirited. Mevoli-the-competitor was reckless—“cowboyish” a friend said—prone to tantrums, sulks and self-excoriation. “I really liked Nick,” a fellow diver observed. “But I didn’t like him as a competitor. He was exorcising demons from his past and using free-diving to do that.” It is a haunting tale. To the list of “if onlys” one should perhaps add one more: If only Nick Mevoli hadn’t measured his self-worth in metres. “Numbers infected my head like a virus,” he wrote in a blog post shortly before he died. “The need to achieve became an obsession.” And “obsessions”, he noted, “can kill.” At 20 metres, the body loses its buoyancy. Pressure builds, the lungs shrink, gravity exerts its pull. The diver goes into free fall, carried ever deeper away from light and into blackness. One imagines Nick Mevoli, young and beautiful—an undersea Icarus falling from the sun, away from friends, family and life.My Name Is Lucy Barton. By Elizabeth Strout. Random House; 193 pages; $26. Viking; £12.99. “DON’T ever worry about story,” a novelist assures her writing students in “My Name Is Lucy Barton”, Elizabeth Strout’s new novel. “You have only one.” Every writer may indeed be telling the same story over and over, with slight variations. So it is for Ms Strout, who turns every book (including her Pulitzer-prize-winning “Olive Kitteridge”) into a kind of love story. These are not romances, mind you, but yarns about the primal, unwieldy love of family—those unchosen mothers and hapless brothers—and the bonds that can sometimes feel like manacles. Ms Strout’s latest book unfurls in retrospect. Lucy Barton, a writer in New York, is recalling a time in the 1980s when a mysterious illness forced her to stay in hospital for nearly nine weeks, away from her husband and young daughters. Her solitude left her aching with loneliness, eager for visits from her doctor (who “wore his sadness with such loveliness”) and nurses, who were too busy to linger. So it is with relief that she wakes up one day to discover her mother at the foot of her bed. “Hi, Wizzle,” her mother says shyly. It has been years since they last saw each other, after a falling out over Lucy’s husband. But suddenly the recognition of her mother using her pet name makes Lucy “feel warm and liquid-filled, as though all my tension had been a solid thing and now was not.” This sweet but odd visit by her mother dredges up more complicated memories of Lucy’s impoverished and isolated childhood in rural Illinois, with a father who was never quite right after what he saw in the second world war. Lucy managed to escape this deprivation, first through books and then through a scholarship to university, where she met her husband. After her parents ignore her wedding and then barely acknowledge her daughters, her contact with them is reduced to awkward phone calls on holidays. Not even the thrum of the city can displace the ache of loneliness left by her youth. Yet these grievances quietly evaporate in the hospital. For Lucy, the sound of her mother’s voice nattering on with town gossip while she dozes in and out leaves her with an overwhelming feeling of comfort. “I thought: All I want is this.” Of course Lucy is alert to what makes her mother so frustrating, too. How is it that her mother never seems to ask her a single question? Or even pay her a compliment? But the older Lucy narrating this slim and compassionate book is too wise to fan the flames of these disappointments. She knows her mother loved her, albeit imperfectly—(“Because we all love imperfectly.”) And there are times in a grown woman’s life when there are few things more reassuring than a flawed mother’s love.SOMETIMES it really is the little things that count. France faces high unemployment, a divided political establishment and surging xenophobia. But the issue that has the French particularly outraged is an argument about language. Two decades ago the French Academy, a group of 40 greybeards charged with keeping the language pure, decided to reform French spelling. The government took its time with implementing the academy’s decisions. But, starting in the autumn, new school textbooks will at last comply. What has French social media in an uproar? The academy wants to simplify or regularise certain tricky spellings—allowing nénufar for nénuphar (water lily), and ditching a silent “i” in oignon, making it ognon (onion). But one change has symbolised all the others: maîtresse will become maitresse, and many other words will similarly lose the tricky little hat-shaped accent-mark that gives the online protest its name: #JeSuisCirconflexe. It should take something serious to make the French repurpose the hashtag used after the massacre in January 2015 of staff at Charlie Hebdo at the hands of jihadist murderers. But the French who have joined the protest might retort that for them, language is serious indeed: a typical criticism on Twitter read “simplification, glorification of mediocrity, sinking to the lowest common denominator”. The French take linguistic prowess as a proxy for intellectual agility of all kinds. For many “prowess” is a mastery of the complexity (some of it quite pointless) of the written language. The academy was founded in 1635. Official French spelling, which largely reflected its Latin roots, has changed little. But like every other language, the spoken argot has gone on changing. This has left French with many silent letters. The tricky circumflex, which on many words does not change a vowel’s pronunciation, still had to be there. Top French students prize themselves on taking down dictée in much the same way their American counterparts compete in spelling bees. But plenty of ordinary people hate spelling, just as in English. Much of the analysis outside France on the circumflex case has made two related observations. Pointlessly difficult spelling isn’t actually pointless: it shows who has had a fine education. Those howling about mediocrity, under this theory, are really afraid for their expensively acquired status. The second theory is that it is France itself—always closely identified with its language—that is on the decline, and that the need to simplify the spelling just shows that the country isn’t as vigorous as it used to be. Both these analyses are working too hard to put France’s peculiarities on the psychoanalyst’s couch. In fact, a glance across the Rhine shows that the circumflex dead-enders are in good company—with their German neighbours. In the 1990s a government-sponsored commission proposed a few sensible reforms, including simplifying a few spellings, much as France is now doing, and removing the distinctive German “sharp S” (ß) from many words with a short vowel sound. The result was an almighty pushback. Intellectuals such as Günter Grass, a Nobel-prize-winning novelist who, before his death last April, had been a kind of steward of Germany’s post-war moral self, rejected the reform ostentatiously. Springer, a huge publishing house, and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, one of Germany’s main national broadsheets, said they would refuse to observe the reforms. One of the 16 federal states went as far as to hold a referendum against the spelling changes—which passed. (The reforms were slightly modified, and the holdouts gave in in the end.) All this took place in a Germany that was much more at ease with itself than France is today. People just have an irrational attachment to spelling. What they associate with hard but successful work as a child—learning to spell—is more precious than the pointy-headed reformers ever realise. The best analogy outside spelling might be the demoting of Pluto from its status as a planet. Many of those who had hardly bothered to think about the icy rock-ball at the far edge of the solar system suddenly found a childhood memory tarnished, mnemonic devices now featuring a superfluous P at the end. Humans, it seems, are natural conservatives: even if Pluto really isn’t a planet, even if the circumflex really is useless most of the time, it is not about the thing itself. Human beings don’t like going back and rewriting old memories.
