SHE was a plain, chubby, chain-smoking southern girl, living in a cold-water flat in New York and working as an airline-reservation clerk. He was a paunchy, balding, chain-smoking teacher of semiotics, the study of signs, codes and meanings in language, at various Italian universities. Both enjoyed producing small articles and pastiches, she for the college magazine, he for avant-garde publications, and it was only challenges from friends that induced either to embark on a novel. His first, “The Name of the Rose”, published in 1980, sold 10m copies worldwide. Her first, “To Kill a Mockingbird” (1960), sold more than 40m, and was proclaimed by some to be the best American novel of the 20th century. Umberto Eco rode literary stardom like a plump surfer on a giant laughing wave. Harper Lee was drowned by it. “Mockingbird”, set in fictional Maycomb, Alabama, was a story of racial injustice seen through the clear but innocent eye of a small tomboy, Scout, whose father, Atticus Finch, was given the hopeless task of defending a black man accused of raping a white woman. On the eve of the civil-rights era the novel pricked America’s conscience, and reporters raced to photograph Miss Lee in her home town of Monroeville, Alabama, on the porch and in the courthouse, nervously smiling. The book was assumed to be her life in thin disguise. But in a rare interview in 1961 she said it was all fiction, nothing to do with her “dull” real childhood, and (unspoken but implied) would they please now go away. Mr Eco would have queried that wished-for divide between fact and fiction. It wasn’t as clear-cut as that. The urge to tell stories, weave myths and simply lie lay deep in the possibilities of human language. But if facts could become fables, fables could lead to facts, just as wild medieval tales of lost kingdoms had inspired Europe’s exploration of America. Besides, any novel pretended to be true, and a good “open” text would spur the reader to judge and interpret that truth for himself. “Mockingbird” and “The Name of the Rose” were both essentially whodunnits, and “Who done it?” Mr Eco said, was the fundamental question of all philosophy. His own journey through the labyrinth described an investigation by William of Baskerville and his sidekick, the novice Adso, into a series of gruesome murders in an unnamed abbey in the year 1327. He began with a pleasing idea, that a monk might be poisoned by reading a book, and took it from there, lovingly channelling the Middle Ages and pouring forth everything he knew. Again, though this was fiction, pages covered the theological, philosophical and scientific debates of the time, well-dosed (for those who knew) with his own semiotics in medieval dress. Both he and Miss Lee dealt in sealed-off worlds: Maycomb isolated in cotton fields and quiet red dust; the abbey perched on precipices behind high walls. In suchworlds rumours festered and conspiracy theories proliferated, fed by the feverish interpretation of signs. Both featured places (in the abbey, the library; in Maycomb, the tumbledown Boo Radley house) peopled by shadows and littered with symbols. In the abbey, painted phrases from the Apocalypse beckoned towards horror. In Maycomb, Indian-head pennies left in a tree seemed to do the same. Despite her protests, Miss Lee’s minute evocation of Maycomb—the talcum scent of white women in the humid afternoons, the smell of Hoyt’s Cologne in the blacks’ church—was evidently drawn from childhood. And she had honed her skills of observation afterwards when Truman Capote, a childhood friend, took her along in 1959 to help with the exhaustive forensic interviews in Holcomb, Kansas that became “In Cold Blood”. Mr Eco, who worked from notebooks, index cards, obscure codices and hand-drawn maps, was seldom autobiographical, save for musing on the seductive symbols and myths of fascism with which he had grown up; and save for reflecting that his omnivorous curiosity, his love of lists and lunatic science (“Ptolemy, not Galileo”) and his analysis of every conceivable cultural artefact, from Thomas Mann to Mickey Mouse, from Snoopy to Avicenna, from TV quiz shows to the “Poetics” of Aristotle, had been fed in boyhood by reading Jules Verne. Opening the text Sudden fame encouraged him all the more. He travelled the globe, wrote columns for left-wing newspapers and produced six more novels: one, “Foucault’s Pendulum” (1988), about an all-encompassing conspiracy theory; another, “Baudolino” (2000), about webs of lies. All sold well. In his several residences he amassed a collection of 50,000 books; but he still spent five days a week merrily teaching semiotics in Bologna, partly at the university and partly, till late, in the tavernas of the town. Harper Lee vanished. The second novel would not come, and she retreated to Monroeville. In 2015 the discarded part of “Mockingbird” was published as “Go Set a Watchman”, to tepid reviews. She too, in confused old age, was indifferent to it. But in Bologna one professor might have noted that “Watchman”, in which the noble Atticus suddenly expressed racist opinions, had opened up “Mockingbird” to new and startling interpretations: which surely should encourage the millions who loved it to read it all over again.Super Tuesday in America saw a dozen state primary elections in the presidential nominating process. Hillary Clinton reinforced her position as the front-runner in the Democratic race, winning Texas, Georgia, Virginia and Massachusetts. Bernie Sanders took Colorado, Minnesota and two other states, but he remains far behind Mrs Clinton in the delegate count. Donald Trump lengthened his lead in the Republican contest by winning most states on offer. Ted Cruz won his home state of Texas and Marco Rubio chalked up his first win, in Minnesota. But it looks increasingly unlikely that the party establishment will be able to trip Mr Trump. See here, here and here.  David Duke, a former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, backed Mr Trump for president. Never normally lost for words, Mr Trump stopped short of denouncing Mr Duke in a TV interview, prompting another volley of criticisms from Republicans and Democrats. Mr Trump deflected these by saying he hadn’t understood the question. See article.  Clarence Thomas, a Supreme Court justice, broke his decade-long silence on the bench (thought to be a record) and asked questions in a case on gun rights. The audience gasped. Many theories have been proffered for his failure to speak, but the death last month of the loquacious Antonin Scalia, a close ally, may have left Justice Thomas thinking that the time has come for him to stick up for strict constructionism. More than a slap on the wrist The UN Security Council adopted tougher-than-expected sanctions on North Korea following its nuclear test and rocket launch earlier this year. They include mandatory inspections of all shipments to the country, a ban on sales of aviation fuel and a halt to exports from the North of iron and coal. But China will need to be the chief enforcer of the sanctions if they are to work. See article.  Chinese internet companies shut down the microblogs of Ren Zhiqiang, a property tycoon. He had used an account with 38m followers to criticise President Xi Jinping’s efforts to tighten Communist Party control over the media. China’s internet regulator accused Mr Ren of publishing “illegal” messages. A court in the coastal Chinese province of Zhejiang sentenced a Christian pastor, Bao Guohua, to 14 years in prison for corruption and inciting people to disturb social order. His wife was jailed for 12 years. Mr Bao’s refusal to remove a cross from his church’s roof had angered the authorities. A Christian lawyer who had supported churches that erect illegal crosses was shown on local TV apparently confessing to having colluded with foreigners to stir up trouble. Help is on the way The European Union announced that it will provide €700m ($760m) in aid to accommodate migrants in countries overwhelmed by the refugee crisis. Most of the money is expected to go to Greece. Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, scolded Austria and other countries for clamping down on refugee arrivals, and vowed not to abandon Greece. The leader of Spain’s Socialist Party, Pedro Sánchez, failed in his first attempt to form a minority government with the upstart centrist Ciudadanos party. Both the centre-right Popular Party and the far-left Podemos party voted against the proposed coalition in parliament. If Mr Sánchez fails again in a second vote planned for March 4th, the caretaker government will probably call new elections. Ireland’s governing coalition of the Fine Gael and Labour parties suffered a stinging electoral defeat, dropping from a combined 113 seats to 57. The opposition Fianna Fáil party, which came second with 44 seats, vowed not to join a coalition with Fine Gael, leaving no clear direction for forming a new government. See article.  The EU and America revealed details of their proposed deal for companies to share digital information, which replaces the Safe Harbour agreement that was thrown out by Europe’s courts. Officials said the deal contains measures to protect stricter European privacy guarantees. Better than nothing Argentina reached an agreement in principle to pay four of the largest creditors whose refusal to accept earlier debt-restructuring offers precipitated a default by the country in 2014. Argentina is to pay Elliott Management, a hedge fund, and three other holdouts $4.7 billion, 25% less than they are claiming. If the deal goes through, Argentina will be able to resume borrowing on international credit markets. See article.  Police in Colombia arrested Santiago Uribe, the brother of Álvaro Uribe, a former president, for allegedly leading a paramilitary group suspected of murdering criminals and anti-government guerrillas in the 1990s. Santiago Uribe denies the charges; his supporters say his arrest is motivated by politics. Álvaro Uribe, who is now a senator, opposes the government’s plan to end the conflict with the FARC rebels. The Jamaica Labour Party won the country’s election, defeating the governing People’s National Party. Andrew Holness, Jamaica’s new prime minister, campaigned against the PNP government’s austerity programme and promised to exempt from income tax 72% of the Jamaicans who pay it. Fingers crossed A ceasefire in Syria went into effect on February 27th. Despite numerous small violations, it appeared to be holding, allowing a smoother delivery of aid. See article.  In Iran moderates did well in elections to the parliament, inflicting defeats on hardliners despite their attempts to stop the moderates from standing. The parliament has only limited powers, but reformists were nonetheless cheered. See here and here.  Jihadists from al-Shabab killed at least 30 people when they detonated two bombs in the Somali town of Baidoa. Concerns increased that civil war may break out in Burundi after protests and violence over a decision by Pierre Nkurunziza to run for a third term as president. In the latest escalation of troubles, the government ordered all foreign nationals to give their details to the police. Robert Mugabe, the president of Zimbabwe and the world’s oldest head of state, celebrated his 92nd birthday with a lavish party and a 92kg cake. Zimbabwe, which is suffering its worst drought in decades, is near economic collapse and unable to pay civil servants.Volkswagen acknowledged that its former boss, Martin Winterkorn, had been handed a memo in May 2014 that mentioned inconsistencies in emissions from its diesel cars. That was more than a year before the German carmaker admitted to cheating on emissions tests in the United States, though VW says it is not known whether Mr Winterkorn read the memo, as it was included in a batch of “extensive weekend mail”. See article.  Aubrey McClendon, one of the pioneers of America’s shale-gas revolution, died after his car hit a concrete wall in Oklahoma City. A day earlier he had been charged by the Department of Justice with conspiring to fix the price of oil and gas leases between 2007 and 2012, when he was CEO of Chesapeake Energy. He had denied the allegations, insisting he was being “singled out” as the only person in the energy industry to face criminal charges for bidding jointly on leaseholds in the 110 years of the Sherman Act. Every little step The People’s Bank of China cut its reserve requirement ratio—the amount, relative to deposits, that banks must keep with the central bank—by half a percentage point. It is the fifth reduction in just over a year. By freeing money for lending, the PBoC hopes to stimulate the slowing economy. Manufacturing activity in China fell in February to its lowest level in years. The euro zone slipped back into deflation for the first time since September. Consumer prices fell by an annual 0.2% in February; economists had expected the figure to be flat. The European Central Bank will meet on March 10th to weigh more stimulus in order to tackle persistently low inflation. Sweden’s economy grew by a respectable 1.3% in the fourth quarter of last year compared with the previous three months, and by 4.1% for all of 2015. Consumer spending, investment and exports all rose faster than expected. Sweden has a negative interest rate of -0.5%; a robust economy makes it unlikely that the central bank will cut it further. A potential bidding war for the London Stock Exchange loomed when ICE, which owns the New York Stock Exchange, said it was considering making an offer. The LSE is already in advanced talks with Deutsche Börse about a merger. One of the LSE’s most attractive assets is its profitable clearing-house business in swaps, bonds and other financial instruments. Out of Africa After a century of doing business on the continent, Barclays said it would leave Africa and focus on its core banking activities in Britain and America. The bank is selling assets in part to boost its capital. It also cut its dividend by half to help shore up its balance-sheet. See article.  Apple and the FBI took their tussle over accessing the iPhone of a terrorist to Congress. The hearing produced more heat than light, with Apple defending its decision not to help the agency unlock the device on privacy grounds, and the FBI asking “Are we comfortable with technical design decisions that result in barriers to obtaining evidence of a crime?” Facebook confronted two legal challenges. Police in Brazil arrested an executive at Facebook because it failed to comply with a court order to turn over messages sent by suspected drug-traffickers through WhatsApp, which is owned by the tech giant. Facebook says it can’t comply as it can’t retain or intercept user messages on the messaging service. In Germany antitrust regulators started an inquiry into whether it abuses its dominance in social networks to collect personal data. Amazon made its first proper foray into Britain’s supermarket industry when it teamed up with Morrisons to deliver its produce. Britain, with its densely populated towns, has a vibrant online- shopping market; 27% of Britons buy groceries online at least once a month. Another week, another woeful annual earnings release from a mining company, as Glencore reported a net loss for 2015 of $5 billion. Its debt pile remained high, at $26 billion at the end of the year. But Ivan Glasenberg, Glencore’s chief executive, said that the company had “learnt lessons” from the past and was on track to reduce its debt to $15 billion by 2017. The parent trap Disney introduced variable pricing for tickets to its American theme parks. The new system has three pricing bands, with the peak ticket costing about a fifth more than previously. New “value days” will be priced about 5% lower than the old flat rate. Parents with school-age children will feel the market is again working against them, but the changes are similar to those already implemented by other theme parks.More KAL's cartoonsHILLARY CLINTON will be the Democratic nominee; the man most likely to face her in November on the Republican ticket is Donald Trump. Those are the battle lines after the primaries on Super Tuesday. In many ways this is profoundly gloomy. Mr Trump has said ever more repellent things about immigrants, women and Muslims and declined to condemn white supremacists. But he changes his sales pitch as easily as his socks: in a speech after winning seven out of 11 states, he stopped snarling and tried to sound presidential. It would be unwise to underestimate his ability to feign gravitas and transform himself into an apparent centrist. The only obstacle between Mr Trump and the Oval Office would be Mrs Clinton. She is a formidable and in some ways admirable candidate, but flawed. She is unloved by bits of her party’s base and subject to an investigation into whether she mishandled classified information. Small wonder that so many who contemplate American politics today sink into despair. But with a large dose of optimism and continued faith in the good sense of American voters, it is just possible to see November’s election in a more positive light. The vote for the presidency could yet yield the reshaping of the two main parties and a political realignment that leads to a less stagnant and gridlocked government. Be nice now This optimistic scenario depends on converting today’s antagonism into a force for change. The primaries have made clear that a large share of American voters are angry: angry with their own side’s representatives, angry with their opponents and angry with the world. So far, that anger has been channelled into divisiveness. On the right, Mr Trump has exploited the discontent by insulting his way to the front of the pack, stirring up racial resentment as he goes, delighting crowds with a list of proposals that run from the unethical to the unworkable. On parts of the left, the rage is more polite but, particularly where it is aimed at Wall Street, no less deeply felt. In recent elections partisan fissures have been reinforced by the brutal maths of voter turnout. Polling shows that a majority of Republicans and Democrats believe that the other lot are so depraved as to pose a threat to the nation itself. Because it is hard to persuade people who think like this to switch sides, electoral strategists argue that chasing swing voters is pointless. The easiest extra votes come from the 40% of the electorate who typically stay at home in a presidential poll. Each side therefore concentrates on stirring up people who support it but might not vote. That raises the anger to a new pitch. If this desperate logic is repeated in a Clinton v Trump race, the contest could have consequences both ugly and far-reaching, particularly for the Republicans. After winning a race fuelled by anger and led by Mr Trump, the party would almost certainly ditch its attachment to free trade and a muscular foreign policy and retreat into isolationism, xenophobia and economic populism. If it survived that shift (a big if), it would by the middle of the century be a white-nationalist party in a country that will be majority non-white. More likely, it would fracture, parts of the Republican coalition spinning off to find a new home elsewhere (see article). For Mrs Clinton, going down the angry route might not split the party, but would almost certainly result in defeat. Democrats tend to fare poorly when their anguish overflows and begins to sound like contempt for America. It is hard to imagine Mrs Clinton credibly playing the political insurgent. She has decades of experience when the angriest voters want a novice. Nobody can out-hate Mr Trump. So it is encouraging that Mrs Clinton celebrated her victories on Super Tuesday by calling for more “love and kindness” in politics. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar The opportunity for a better outcome lies in the asymmetry of the risks. Mrs Clinton has the opportunity to put together a coalition of anti-Trump voters broader than the one that carried Barack Obama to victory in 2008 and 2012. Despair over Mr Trump has reached such an intensity among some Republicans that the usual rules about there being no swing voters may no longer apply. If Mrs Clinton were to combine a high turnout on her own side with a sizeable number of Republican abstentions and spoilt ballots and some voters who are prepared to switch from red to blue, then Democrats could not just win the presidency with a landslide, but also wrest back control of the Senate. To form this coalition for stopping the blond Berlusconi, Mrs Clinton would have to woo moderate, business-minded Republicans, and such folk would in turn have to put the national interest ahead of their tribe’s victory in November. Republicans like to talk about the importance of character (see Lexington); Mr Trump offers a chance to show that means something. Mr Trump often insults other Republicans; they owe him no loyalty. Some prominent Republicans have already begun to attack him, including Mitt Romney, the party’s nominee in 2012. More will have to make that move. Don’t throw it away After the election a broad coalition could melt away as fast as it had formed. Democrats could use their advantage to force through what they can without the support of their opponents while they have the chance. They would then be punished in subsequent elections and the federal government would return to its familiar divided self: unable to pass budgets, trim spending on entitlements or find money to repair roads. Or a President Hillary Clinton might argue for the virtues of democratic compromise, and not claim that she can magically give her core voters everything they want all of the time. If she were able to pursue a different kind of politics, one that seeks to deal with some Republican concerns as well as Democratic ones, she might just hold the new consensus together for longer, reshaping the parties, making the country more governable and burying Mr Trump’s offer of an America turned against itself. This is the distant promise that 2016 holds. As the battle lines are drawn, try to bear it in mind.EVERY second three more Indians experience the internet for the first time. By 2030 more than 1 billion of them will be online. In June last year one in four mobiles used in India was a smartphone, up from one in five just six months earlier. Add in two more facts—India boasts the world’s fastest-growing large economy, and the planet’s biggest population of millennials—and you can see why the likes of Facebook, Uber and Google are falling over themselves to establish footholds there. No battle for the online future of India is more intense than the one now being waged in e-commerce (see article). Sales are still tiny, at $16 billion last year, but the country is the world’s fastest-growing e-commerce market and is prized by America’s and China’s internet titans. India has become the biggest test of Amazon’s international ambitions. Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder, wants it to be his second-largest market, after America, and has backed his plans with billions of dollars of investment. His opponents are platforms like Flipkart and Snapdeal, founded by locals and funded by some of the biggest names in tech, among them Alibaba, China’s e-commerce champion. As these companies jostle for market share, they are spending feverishly on logistics and discounts to lure consumers online. Capital may dry up for some; in February a Morgan Stanley mutual fund sharply lowered the valuation of its stake in Flipkart. But whoever wins or loses in this frenzied contest, the importance of e-commerce stretches beyond individual firms and into the wider economy. In the West e-commerce companies piggybacked on an existing infrastructure of shops, banks and logistics firms. In India the game being played by the e-commerce pioneers is leapfrog. It could become a model for emerging markets around the world. Pay as you grow Indian e-commerce has such potential because it can bring three changes more profound than convenience and keen prices. The first is faster financial development. China already provides one example. Alipay, an arm of Alibaba, overcomes mistrust between buyers and sellers by holding on to customers’ money until they have safely received their goods. Now run by an affiliate called Ant Financial, Alipay has more than 400m accounts that let consumers buy products, pay bills and transfer money. The torrent of information that Alibaba gathered on merchants and consumers was the basis for a lending business. Something similar is under way in India. Paytm, which provides digital wallets and is itself backed by Ant Financial, has 120m accounts, nearly six times the number of credit cards in India. E-commerce companies are also helping small businesses obtain loans that they would otherwise have struggled to raise. Amazon India rolled out such a programme for its sellers last month. In January Snapdeal announced a partnership to streamline loans from the State Bank of India. Second, e-commerce firms could help overcome India’s ropy infrastructure and vast geography. Where roads are clogged and infrastructure is decrepit, the rival firms are melding warehouses and local outposts into idiosyncratic distribution networks. About half of Flipkart’s and Snapdeal’s customers are outside India’s biggest cities. Some are still farther afield: Amazon claims to be helping more than 6,000 Indian businesses sell abroad. China again shows what can be done. Alibaba is connecting remote rural areas to the online economy; there are now 780 “Taobao villages”, rural communities in which at least 10% of households are shopping or selling over the internet. The third big impact of e-commerce in India is on retailing itself. Shopping malls and chain stores account for only about one-tenth of total retail sales. Already, the combined sales of India’s top three e-commerce sites, Flipkart, Snapdeal and Amazon, surpass those of the ten largest offline retailers. Two-thirds of Indians are below the age of 35. For these young people, armed with smartphones, shopping is likely to be very different from what it was for their parents. Malls and chains will not disappear, but they may never be as prevalent as they are in the West. That in turn will stimulate the rise of other digital firms. India’s tech scene is thriving. Tiger Global, a Flipkart investor, also backs an Indian online classified business and a messenger app that helps users avoid data costs. SoftBank, which backs Snapdeal, funds a mobile-advertising platform. In 2014 only America, Britain and Israel saw more new tech startups. Platform boost Simply to assume that e-commerce will conjure up growth—particularly of the labour-intensive sort that India needs—would be a mistake. The market in China had a very different starting-point, for instance. When the likes of Alibaba got going, it helped that China was already home to many manufacturers looking for new ways to sell excess inventory. India’s manufacturing base is much smaller, especially for electronics, e-commerce’s best-selling category. India is also poorer. A smaller share of its population is online—32% last year, compared with 52% in China. Indians speak more than 20 languages, which complicates marketing. The budget unveiled by Narendra Modi’s government this week includes plans to upgrade 50,000km (30,000 miles) of roads, but India is not about to possess a gleaming motorway network to rival China’s. Mr Modi’s continued failure to install a harmonised goods and services tax blunts the benefits of e-commerce. Yet in its heft, governance and manufacturing clout, China is also an outlier. India is a better template for the e-commerce battle in other emerging markets. Its logistical woes provide a test of firms’ ingenuity. If they find a way to deliver goods profitably there, they may succeed elsewhere. If they falter, their stumbles will provide lessons. That is all the more likely because India’s e-commerce is so international. Naspers, a Flipkart investor, backs ventures in Nigeria, South Africa and Egypt, among other places. E-commerce in India is a local battle for customers, but it is also a battle for the future.THE conservatives did everything they could to prevent it, abusing the power of the state to disqualify thousands of candidates they judged too prominent, too moderate or both. But the election on February 26th of Iran’s parliament, the Majlis, was a slap in the face to them nonetheless. Though complete results are not yet in, moderates and centrists look likely to control the new chamber (see article). The hardliners, who won handily in 2012, before Western nuclear sanctions began to bite, were pushed back. They call themselves “principlists” because of their stern promotion of premodern values. Iranian voters, it seems, reject their principles. The election is good news for Iran’s reform-minded president, Hassan Rohani. It demonstrates just how solidly the nation’s voters support the deal he negotiated with world powers to roll back the country’s nuclear-enrichment programme in return for relief from sanctions. The principlists in the old parliament had tried, but failed, to block it. The poll will also make it easier for Mr Rohani to continue with his economic reforms, which involve opening Iran to more foreign investment and freeing the private sector to compete against inefficient state firms that serve largely to enrich religious and military bigwigs. And it is surely a good omen for his chances of re-election as president next year. Still, one should not overstate the significance of the vote. The new parliament is a weaker, less reliable ally than Mr Rohani might have hoped. Due to all the disqualifications, the new moderate list is less impressive and less reformist than it could have been. The parliament itself, though not irrelevant, is not a very powerful body. Its decisions have to be vetted by the Council of Guardians—the reactionary grandees who disqualified so many moderates. And over the whole political edifice—parliament, president and all—stands the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who wields vast powers, especially over foreign and security policy. Even if he wanted to, Mr Rohani could not act as an Iranian Mikhail Gorbachev. Mr Khamenei insists that the nuclear deal has no implications for any other forms of co-operation with the West; and he has set his face against any relaxation of the country’s strict Islamic legal code. Besides, it is not at all clear that Mr Rohani, a member of the old revolutionary elite, is setting out to be anything more than an economic reformer. Still stirring up trouble Iranians have lived through this before. The election in 1997 of President Muhammad Khatami, who genuinely sought political reform, was followed by the election of a supportive Majlis. But the mullahs’ stifling grip loosened not at all. So do not expect Iran’s dismal record on human rights to improve. (In one village last year, every adult male was reportedly executed on drugs charges.) Nor should the West count on a more pliant partner in the Middle East. At the moment, Iran is standing tall in the region. Its support for Bashar al-Assad’s homicidal regime in Syria has been reinforced by Russian bombers. It is the dominant force in Iraq, its mostly Shia neighbour. And it is giving its old Sunni rival, Saudi Arabia, a bloody nose in Yemen. Having asked them to dismantle Iran’s nuclear programme, Mr Khamenei will need to placate Iran’s hardliners in other ways. Funding for the Revolutionary Guards, including its Quds Force, which operates in several countries, is likely to go up, not down. Iran’s support for Hizbullah, its battle-hardened proxy in Syria and on Israel’s borders, will probably grow. Free from sanctions, Iran is likely to remain prickly, no matter how moderate its parliament appears.ONE of South-East Asia’s richest and hitherto most stable countries, Malaysia ought to be a beacon. Its constitution is liberal, and its brand of Islam generally tolerant. Its diverse, English-speaking population, combining ethnic Malays, Chinese and Indians, gives it zest and vim. Yet under the prime minister, Najib Razak, the country is regressing at alarming speed. Its politics stinks (see article), its economy is in trouble, and there are worrying signs that the government is not above stirring up ethnic and religious divisions. For the past year allegations of corruption have swirled around Mr Najib. They centre around hundreds of millions of dollars that made their way into his bank accounts before the most recent general election, in 2013 (see article). Investigators are looking into whether the money is linked to a troubled state investment firm, 1MDB, whose advisory board Mr Najib chairs. He denies wrongdoing. His attorney-general has ruled that the money was a legal donation from an unnamed Saudi royal, and that much of it has been returned. For Malaysians, the precise nature of what happened is not the main point. Mr Najib presented himself as a liberal out to remake the sleazy system of money politics by which the ruling United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) has held power since independence. He was to open up a crony economy. And he was to do away with repressive colonial-era laws, such as that for sedition. Now Mr Najib’s credibility is in tatters. Facing inquiries around 1MDB, he has engineered the retirement of a pesky police chief, replaced an attorney-general and promoted members of an inquisitive parliamentary committee into the cabinet, where they can do less harm. Far from loosening colonial laws, the government is wielding the sedition law with new zeal. It is blocking news websites and hounding opponents (the opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, is in prison on charges of sodomy). Even yellow T-shirts have been outlawed since citizens protesting against corruption took to wearing them. The more Mr Najib cracks down, the more he alienates those who were once inclined to support him. Foreign investors and others should be worried. The government is floundering in its responses to a sharp slowdown in the economy and to a falling currency. Cheap oil has hurt Malaysia, but its wretched politics will hold it back more in the long run. The government is now using dog-whistle politics to appeal to its ethnic-Malay, Muslim base, and is refusing to distance itself sufficiently from Islamists seeking the introduction of harsh sharia punishments. Pro-government bigots in the street have told ethnic-Chinese Malaysians to “go back to China”. This is dangerous. Malaysia has seen race riots before, and could see them again. Nearby Singapore, with its different mix of the same ethnic groups, should also be alarmed. 1 Massive Development Balls-up Malaysia’s problems run deep. UMNO is out of ideas and seems incapable of rejuvenating itself. The fractured, rudderless opposition does not have the winning combination to overcome UMNO’s gerrymandering and harassment. And the next election is anyway still two years away. Restoring confidence will be tricky. But for as long as Malaysia is governed in the style of Mr Najib, ordinary Malaysians will suffer and their country will be deprived of the standing that it surely deserves in the world.
