IMAGINE being asked to take part in an activity that gives you somewhere between a 1-in-5 and 1-in-20 chance of a serious head injury over a four-month period. That could lead to weeks of impaired mental performance and headaches, and, especially if the blows are repeated, the danger of longer-term mental-health problems. Now imagine that your child is the one taking that risk. Such are the dangers associated with playing American football. The risks of concussion are higher still in rugby, one of the world’s fastest-growing sports. These concerns have already prompted some changes. Rugby has introduced “head-injury assessment” rules, enabling players who have suspected concussions to be substituted temporarily so that they can be checked by medical staff. All 50 of America’s states have adopted “return to play” laws that require medical clearance before younger athletes who have sustained a concussion can take to the field again. Such measures are welcome, but they sidestep the real issue: is it safe to play a game whose rules require people to slam into each other? As understanding grows of what happens in the brain when collisions take place (see article), the answer seems certain to be “no”. Adults are able to consent to taking risks of this sort, even if they are not yet fully understood. That does not relieve sports authorities of their duty of care to players—one reason why American-football coaches at Ivy League universities have just agreed to get rid of “full contact” training sessions during the playing season. But liberal principles argue against the most drastic interventions. Boxing; barbarically dangerous though it is, should not be banned, nor should other sports. Children are a different case, not simply because they cannot give informed consent but also because their brains are more susceptible to long-term damage. Researchers at the University of Illinois found that children who had sustained a single sports-related concussion still had impaired brain function two years later. Some measures to protect children from harm are already in place. Some states in America have introduced rules for American football to restrict full-contact sessions in high schools: incidents of concussion have fallen as a result. Although the risks of brain injury in association football are lower, US Soccer, the governing body for the sport in America, has banned headers for children aged ten and under, and restricted them for 11- to 13-year-olds. More should be done. No child should be obliged to play full-contact American football, rugby or ice hockey in schools. And for those who do take to the field or rink, schools should do more to reduce the risks—from recording and monitoring injuries systematically and requiring that children train with players their own size rather than their age, to insisting on non-contact forms of play. Rugby has most to do, particularly given plans to raise the number of child players. This week doctors and academics rightly called for a ban on tackling in rugby games played in British and Irish schools. Not tackling it head-on None of this is popular. Critics contend that all sports are dangerous. They argue for the benefits of exercise and say that the nanny state is out of control. But other sports do not involve deliberate impact and are just as energetic. And ensuring the safety of children hardly counts as excessive intervention. Critics raise another, cultural, objection: that the spirit of games like rugby and American football is in danger of being lost. There is something to that. But an activity that rests on exposing children to long-term neurological damage needs a better defence.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] High ho silver lining I was disappointed by “The right way to do drugs” (February 13th). It didn’t go far enough in calling for cannabis to be legalised. There is no lethal dose of cannabis, though there are lethal doses of the government-approved alternatives to cannabis. Getting users off deadly alcohol, say, and towards cannabis will save lives. Marijuana should be as cheap and as accessible as possible. Taxing and restricting it will not fix the problem. There is a functional black market and it is not going to end just because the government “sort of” legalised pot. DAN KING In my experience a cost calculation drives the preference among occasional users for higher THC content in cannabis. Only one or two tokes are required to give occasional users the desired high, so a little weed goes a lot further. It follows that, to the extent there is price sensitivity, higher prices and taxes would have the perverse effect of pushing your 80% of occasional users towards inhaling more smoke. The calculus for the 20% who are heavy users is different. There is an intensity factor. Even though heavy users may be high for longer, they are not nearly as high as the occasional user. They do indeed prefer higher THC content, just to achieve any effect at all. So in their case higher prices and taxes would encourage the continuation of a black market. PETER CONROY Japanese television “Anchors away” (February 20th) submitted that “it is no coincidence” that the three anchors who left their TV programmes in Japan “are robust critics of the government”, implying the government had intervened in their leaving. However, Yoshihide Suga, the chief cabinet secretary, clearly stated at a press conference on February 9th that “freedom of the press and editorial rights must be guaranteed.” The government of Japan has been and will remain fully committed to freedom of expression and freedom of the press. The descriptions in your article have no ground. YASUHISA KAWAMURA Small but mighty Lexington noted that if no presidential candidate gets 270 electoral-college votes, the contest is decided by the House of Representatives, which will be Republican-held (February 20th). However, in such a circumstance each state gets only one vote in the House, regardless of how many representatives are elected from that state. Presumably, Texas would vote Republican and California would vote Democrat. But numerous smaller states would have an equal weight with the more populous ones. RYAN SCHAAP Mix it up It is true: diversity undermines trust (Schumpeter, February 13th). But this may be its greatest gift. When ethnically different others are present, people tend to remain cautious, scrutinise information and reach better decisions. Our research, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, showed that ethnically diverse markets are significantly less likely to bubble compared with homogenous ones. The results held for North America and South-East Asia, notwithstanding the differences in culture, history and ethnic composition. In homogenous markets, we reason, trust in other people’s reasonableness can cause erroneous beliefs to spread more readily. Diversity makes you better precisely because it makes you less trusting. PROFESSOR SHEEN LEVINE Divide and choose? I read Bagehot’s fascinating article on the divergent views of the European Union from people in Cambridge and Peterborough (February 20th). This divergence has little to do with nativism or nationalism or even class. It is a pertinent fact that because of its role as a centre for agriculture, food processing, packaging and logistics, Peterborough has borne a heavy burden in respect of unskilled immigration from the EU: more than 30,000 new migrants from 2004 to 2011. This puts huge pressure on public services, and has arguably kept wages low and entrenched welfare dependency among many indigenous and low-skilled workers. Business, and the Treasury, have reaped the economic benefit of this large-scale migration, but local taxpayers have footed the bill and seen the pressures consequent in this unprecedented demographic change. Local people can’t have helped noticing, and are canny enough to understand the role of the EU Free Movement Directive. People in Peterborough have seen the cost of unrestricted immigration and, as a result, are more conscious than most of the benefits or otherwise of Britain’s membership of the EU. Is it any wonder that they are more sceptical? STEWART JACKSON I am not sure about Bagehot’s “educational-cultural divide” over Europe. The Brexit referendum has not come about because of an outcry across the land by ordinary folk or because public opinion has been consistently against EU membership, or because people are calling for an immediate exit. We are having a referendum because of a battle within the educational and political elite. It is symptomatic of the division within the Tory Party, not within the country, yet at least. However, with “in” campaigners like Jeremy Corbyn ranting something along the lines of “Workers of the EU, unite!”, the divisions could get very real, very soon. LUKE CARR Double entendres Johnson, ruminating on the secret meaning of “feisty” (February 13th) would have done well to have provided a whiff, as it were, of etymology. In Mark Forsyth’s marvellous book, “The Etymologicon”, and largely corroborated by the Oxford English Dictionary, feisty, in the sense of “spirited”, is derived from “fist” or “feist”, meaning a small dog. This in turn comes from the phrase “a fisting hound”, where “to fist” means to fart. VENKAT ANANTHARAM Catching the wave As a resident of next-door Devon I read your article about Cornwall’s post-industrial economy with great interest (“Winter sun”, February 20th). In addition to the demographic, political and infrastructural factors which you identify, advances in affordable wetsuit technology have also played an important role in tourism. As a result, anyone can spend as much time in the sea as they want the whole year round. The effect has been revolutionary, as local surfers know only too well. ANTHONY KINGIT IS a quiet morning on the outskirts of Mumbai, the air still mild. Dusty streets are dappled with sunlight, a stray dog rummages through some rubbish, the shutters are lifted on a few tiny shops. A man pushes a cart bearing a pyramid of oranges. And a delivery boy named Anil is already racing along his route on a motor bike borrowed from his uncle, his delivery backpack as large as he is. He has been up for hours, planning his route and carefully filling his bag with the packages to be dropped off first stacked near the top. Anil enters a block of flats, squeezes his backpack into a narrow lift and delivers a shirt to a 21-year-old taxi driver. In a neighbouring tower he hands a smartphone case to a 16-year-old who uses several apps to do the shopping for his family. A short ride away, a 78-year-old grandmother is a particularly pleased customer—with help from her grandson, she has bought some clay pickling jars that she couldn’t find elsewhere and some high-quality saris at a knock-down price. For Anil, it is gruelling work. But he is betting that e-commerce in India has nowhere to go but up, and he wants to ride up with it. In the next 15 years India will see more people come online than any other country. Last year e-commerce sales were about $16 billion; by 2020, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank, the online retail market could be more than seven times larger. Such sales are expected to grow faster in India than in any other market. This has attracted a flood of investment in e-commerce firms, the impact of which may go far beyond just displacing offline retail. India’s small businesses have limited access to loans; most of its consumers do not have credit cards, or for that matter credit. The e-commerce companies are investing in logistics, helping merchants borrow and giving consumers new tools to pay for goods. Amit Agarwal, who runs Amazon.in, holds out the hope that “We could actually be a catalyst to transform India: how India buys, how India sells, and even transform lives.” The jewel in the crown Amazon wants to make India its second-biggest market, after America. For the time being, though, with just 12% of the market, it lags behind the home-grown successes, Flipkart (45%) and Snapdeal (26%). All three, as well as some smaller competitors, are spending at a blistering rate. As global markets dip and Silicon Valley unicorns stumble, the international funding that makes this possible may dry up. Doubts about the sustainability of the companies’ present plans were underlined when, on February 26th, one of Morgan Stanley’s mutual funds marked down the value of its stake in Flipkart by 27%. If the prospect of changing India a billion deliveries at a time is a beguiling one, it is not for the faint-hearted. India’s visionaries keep their spirits up by remembering the example of China. Chinese e-commerce grew by nearly 600% between 2010 and 2014, making the country the biggest e-commerce market in the world today. It managed this largely through the growth of indigenous companies: mighty Amazon merely nips at the heels of home-grown giants Alibaba and JD.com; eBay has all but left the stage. And in the process China’s top e-commerce firms came to offer an astonishing range of services. Alibaba, founded by Jack Ma in 1999 and now valued at $184 billion, provides the best illustration. To calm anxieties about buying online Alibaba created Alipay, which holds a shopper’s payment in escrow until he receives his order. The tool has evolved into a financial-services company, Ant Financial, which last year serviced more than 400m Alipay accounts and made over 2m loans to small businesses and entrepreneurs. To provide Chinese consumers with access to foreign goods the firm’s services include not just online listings but marketing, shipping and help with customs. Alibaba is now building service centres in remote areas where shoppers can order, pick up and sell goods, as well as pay their bills. It is a further step in its attempts not merely to benefit from the growth in Chinese consumption, but to shape and accelerate it. The degree to which it has succeeded suggests that the earlier an e-commerce company arrives in a country’s development, the wider its role might be. India is in many ways a tougher market for e-commerce than China. Its population is poorer and its infrastructure worse. But its prospects look remarkable. Income per person, which in 2014 was $1,570, could be twice that by 2025. Two-thirds of Indians are younger than 35, and their phones give a huge number of them access to the internet. In December 2014 smartphones accounted for one in five Indian mobiles, according to Goldman Sachs. Just six months later, they accounted for one in four (see chart 1). Morgan Stanley expects internet penetration to rise from 32% in 2015 to 59% in 2020. By 2030, India is projected to be a one-billion-person digital market. The prospect of a second market growing to a near-Chinese size attracts those who made a packet the first time round. Bob van Dijk, the chief executive of Naspers, a South African firm that backed JD.com and Tencent, China’s largest social-media company, says he looks for countries with big populations, rising smartphone use and few retail chains. India, where malls, supermarkets and branded chains, or what analysts call “organised retail”, account for just 10% or so of the total market, fits the bill perfectly. The middlemen Naspers owns a 17% stake in Flipkart; other JD.com investors, including Tiger Global Management, in New York, and DST Global, a Russian fund, have also backed the company. Japan’s SoftBank, a big investor in Alibaba, has backed Snapdeal since 2013, and Alibaba itself followed suit last August. Meanwhile Alibaba’s Ant Financial owns a 20% stake in India’s Paytm, which began as a mobile-wallet company and now competes with Snapdeal and Flipkart as an online marketplace. The three firms have a combined valuation of almost $25 billion. In contrast to those investors trying to recapitulate their Chinese success, Amazon is seeking to make up for its failure. Reduced last year to the ignominy of having to open a shop on Alibaba’s Tmall site, Jeff Bezos is determined that this time, with more experience and in a more open market, things will be different. When Flipkart was founded, in 2007, Amazon was obviously its model. The company began as a bookseller; the two engineers who started it, Sachin Bansal and Binny Bansal (not related), had worked for Amazon. Mr Bezos, though, is of the opinion that if anyone if going to be the Amazon of India, it should be Amazon. In 2014, shortly after Flipkart announced a $1 billion round of funding, Mr Bezos donned Indian clothes in Bangalore, hopped aboard a rainbow-coloured truck and handed Mr Agarwal a $2 billion cheque. A firm which earned over $100 billion in 2015 and has shareholders content to see more or less nothing by way of profits can afford such largesse. Neither Flipkart, Amazon, nor any of the other big competitors are following the retail strategy that led to Amazon’s success in the West. Indian regulations bar foreign-backed e-commerce firms from owning inventory, and so acting as a straightforward retailer is not an option. As a result India’s top e-commerce companies look much more like Alibaba. Flipkart has become a marketplace where sellers offer everything from mobile phones to washing machines to handbags. Snapdeal, Amazon and Paytm run marketplaces too. The firms compete feverishly on price, offering discounts that chomp away their own margins. In the long term, they must differentiate themselves by honing services for sellers and shoppers alike, and offering a better, broader range of products to more Indians than would have them otherwise. The first step to that goal is to boost the number of sellers on the company’s platform—it is the sellers, after all, who pay commissions and shipping fees. So companies offer a range of services to lure businesses to their sites. Flipkart’s programmes range from teaching sellers how to manage peak sales during diwali to advising fashion brands on trends and production. In February Amazon announced a travelling studio-on-wheels, offering training, photography and other services to help shop-owners come online. But the most important help they offer is in easing access to credit. Small businesses, given their scarce financial statements and limited credit history, have long had trouble obtaining loans from India’s banks. They often rely on expensive loans from neighbours or family. The e-commerce companies have strong incentives to make them better offers—and because they have access to online-sales data they are in a privileged position from which to help lenders judge credit risk. Take Sumit Agarwal (no relation to Amazon’s Mr Agarwal), a young entrepreneur who started an online shoe business in 2011. In his warehouse in New Delhi workers pack and scan shipments among towers of shoeboxes. The early days were uncertain; his family’s reaction when the firm started, he says, was “What the hell is this guy doing?” Now it is easier for such entrepreneurs to find the capital with which to grow. When Mr Agarwal logs into his seller’s account on Amazon.in his screen offers a column of short-term loans, their rates calculated using data from his transactions. Other e-commerce firms have similar schemes. In January Snapdeal announced that the State Bank of India would approve loans of up to $37,000 instantly if it liked the look of the data that Snapdeal provided on the borrower. Once a site has sellers, the second challenge is to help consumers buy their wares. Anil carries a clunky credit-card reader with him on his rounds, but most people pay cash. The e-commerce sites want to change that. Paytm lets customers add money to a digital wallet that can then be used to shop online, top up a mobile phone, lend money to a friend, pay a bill or use a service such as an Uber taxi. It has 120m digital-wallet accounts, nearly six times India’s number of credit cards. Snapdeal bought its own mobile payments company in April. Amazon purchased an online-payments service in February. A fine balance If a consumer does buy a product, the next task is delivering it. Delivery itself is nothing new. Indians have long been able to have a delivery boy from the local kirana—the cornershops that dominate Indian retail—bring them a stick of butter. But being able to deliver on a larger scale is a challenge. The country’s mail service, India Post, is ill-equipped to wait while a shopper tries on a kurta and ponders returning it. So newcomers are building networks. But India’s traffic is hellish and its addresses vague. A startup named Delhivery has hired more than 15,000 staff, from developers to executives poached from Facebook and posh consultancies. Its headquarters in Gurgaon are so packed that engineers spill onto an outdoor porch, tapping their keyboards furiously. Delhivery, which works with a number of e-commerce firms, is using machine learning to subdivide India’s postcodes, the better to map idiosyncratic descriptions. “We’ll know the house with the yellow door next to the temple,” says Sandeep Barasia, the managing director. The company moves goods to 700 or so small distribution centres overnight to avoid congested main roads during business hours. Thousands of delivery boys then dash to and from the distribution centres throughout the day, bearing more than 20 kilos on their bikes. E-commerce companies are devising their own solutions, too. Some investments, such as warehouses, are straightforward. Others are less so. Flipkart last year began using Mumbai’s famous network of dabbawallas, or lunch-delivery men, to drop off packages when they picked up customers’ lunch tins. Amazon has a pilot programme that lets customers order groceries online and have them delivered from the nearest kirana. Together, e-commerce firms say, these experiments could create a new truly national marketplace. Neelkanth Mishra of Credit Suisse, a bank, points out that road construction, electrification and mobile phones have stoked big increases in rural wages, and thus demand for goods (see chart 2). Flipkart says that about half its sales come from outside India’s big cities. Snapdeal claims more than 60%. It recently launched seven regional-language versions of its website. As they build out their markets the firms trumpet their assistance to small businesses. “Some of the big sellers on Amazon only had a shop in a corner of Bangalore; they were happy selling to five kilometres around each shop,” declares Amazon’s Mr Agarwal. “Now they are shipping orders to Kashmir and eastern India.” Amazon is helping more than 6,000 Indian businesses export, as well. Snapdeal’s Kunal Bahl is equally expansive: “Our ambition is to be a great social, economic and geographic equaliser for the small businesses of India as they scale up.” All these bold plans are clouded by two obstinate facts. First, spending on discounts, marketing campaigns and new hires means none of the companies has yet made money. Visit any firm’s lobby and you will meet herds of job applicants. Delivery boys like Anil are in hot demand—a top performer in his branch, he earns about 14,000 rupees ($200) each month. Amazon is, predictably, outspending its competitors. Last year its sales were two-thirds the size of its losses. Mr Agarwal is not bothered by a lack of profit. “The priority is growth,” he explains. Ankit Nagori, Flipkart’s chief business officer, says that the most important metrics for his company are not margins but the number of new customers, how often they shop, how much they buy and the speed of delivery. “If you solve for these four things,” he contends, “then the top line and bottom line will fall in place.” A billion deliveries more The second problem is regulatory. Forbidding foreign-backed firms from owning inventory has costs. Companies have limited control over the quality of products on their sites, points out Morgan Stanley’s Parag Gupta, and they can do little to streamline the country’s fragmented supply chain. Flipkart has become a tangle of interlinked entities, including a holding company in Singapore, in an attempt to obey India’s rules while maximising profits. India’s government may nonetheless come under protectionist pressure. Traditional retailers allege that the online marketplaces flout rules against foreign direct investment. Facebook’s recently scuttled plan to offer Indians free internet services, including its own, sparked a furore over the risks of “digital colonialism”. Offline retailers are watching all this intently. Kiranas are relatively protected, thanks to meagre tax bills and limited carrying costs (they store little). Big shops and malls are another story (see chart 3). “What is remarkable for me is that in a very short time, e-commerce has become half of what the organised market is,” says Abheek Singhi of the Boston Consulting Group. “Two years down the line, three years down the line, the e-commerce market could be larger.” Big foreign retailers—such as Ikea, a Swedish furniture company, which after years of kerfuffle may finally be opening an Indian store—cannot sell directly online. Matters are simpler for Indian retailers, but their course remains cloudy. Reliance Industries, a conglomerate with over 1m square metres of shop floor, is planning its own e-commerce venture. Future Group, which pioneered hypermarkets in the country, is outfitting small shop-owners and entrepreneurs with digital catalogues so that consumers can order Future Group products in places where there will never be a store. However the firm has scaled back some of its more ambitious plans for e-commerce. “The more sales you do, the more money you lose,” muses Kishore Biyani, Future Group’s founder. “You need to have continuous funding and someone to back you.” For the time being, the big companies in the sector are having those needs met. “You have at least three, potentially four large players with deep enough pockets,” says Mr Singhi. “It’s going to play out at a very high cost.” Companies like Alibaba and Amazon see that cost as worth paying in part because, just as they applied what they learned in China to India, so they will use their Indian experience in the next markets they move into. Alibaba, not content to back Paytm and Snapdeal, is also courting Indian businesses directly. In December it said it would help Indian firms with financing and logistics so they might use Alibaba’s platforms to export to China and beyond. Eventually, Mr Ma likes to say, any consumer should be able to buy from any seller, anywhere in the world. The more of those purchases go through one of his firms, the better. And everywhere these giants go, home-grown entrepreneurs will be hoping that their local acumen will give them an edge and looking for overseas investors to back them. Many of them will fail: India does not yet offer an example of how to make a profit, and it may be a long time before it does. But as long as some of these efforts survive, they will serve to speed progress, and innovation, in developing markets. As Amazon’s Mr Agarwal says, “If millions of small, medium enterprises out there, manufacturers and retailers, can...sell their product anywhere in the world—that’s transformational.”The unifier TWO of the most loathed politicians in America won big on March 1st in the electoral smorgasbord that is Super Tuesday. Hillary Clinton won seven of the eleven states holding Democratic primaries or caucuses, including Massachusetts, Virginia and a clutch of other Southern states, such as Arkansas, Georgia and Tennessee. Donald Trump also won seven of eleven, carving a trail from Vermont to Arkansas that has caused yet more apoplexy among the Republican top brass. Though it is not yet certain that Mrs Clinton and Mr Trump will fight it out for the presidency in November, it is probable. The symmetry between the despised front-runners is alarming. Mrs Clinton is mistrusted by 60% of Americans, a legacy of years of scandals and Republican slander. It is possible, though unlikely, that the Democratic front-runner could yet be indicted by the FBI over her allegedly slapdash handling of classified information while secretary of state. Mr Trump, more extremely, is disliked by 60% of Americans, especially non-whites, a contempt he has earned by pandering to white Americans’ ugliest prejudices. When announcing his candidacy last year, he described Mexican immigrants as rapists. In the run-up to Super Tuesday, American media were dominated by a furore over his initial refusal to condemn the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), whose former Grand Wizard, David Duke, supports him. A Trump rally in Virginia on February 29th was mobbed by a line of hand-holding black activists, who were herded out by Secret-Service officers and a jeering white crowd. One of the officers manhandled a photographer for Time magazine. With Mrs Clinton and Mr Trump as the nominees, America, which is as repulsed by political mudslinging as it is ghoulishly drawn to it, can expect an extraordinarily ill-tempered and divisive election in November. Mrs Clinton’s dominance on Super Tuesday, despite four victories for her rival, Bernie Sanders, in his own state of Vermont, in Oklahoma, Colorado and Minnesota, was based on her crushing lead among non-whites. This had been expected. Mrs Clinton trounced Mr Sanders in South Carolina on February 27th by winning over 85% of the black voters who make up over half the state’s Democratic electorate. That was a bigger share than Barack Obama had won in 2008, when campaigning to become America’s first black president. It indicated that Mrs Clinton’s vaunted “Southern firewall” against Mr Sanders was intact. It is the berm that has stopped the Bern. Across the Super Tuesday states, Mrs Clinton won 83% of blacks and 67% of Hispanics. She also did better than previously with white women, winning 57% of their votes. “I’m very emotional because today I’m going to vote for a woman, which I find empowering,” said one, Laney Parrot, a teacher entering a polling station in Fredericksburg, Virginia. Mr Sanders’s victories, though impressive for a candidate who launched his campaign last year in front of a few friends, were in smaller states and mostly by smaller margins. They were also exclusively in states where blacks, who deliver around a quarter of the Democratic vote, represent less than 10% of the population. That is a guarantee of failure, as Mr Sanders tacitly acknowledged in a speech delivered on friendly Vermont soil. Effecting a political revolution had always been his main aim, the septuagenarian senator said; winning the nomination was a lesser concern. Absent an unlikely collapse, Mrs Clinton has the Democratic nomination in the bag. She leads Mr Sanders by around 200 delegates, excluding her massive lead among super-delegates, the Democratic officers whose votes will count at the party’s convention in July. Given that the Democratic delegates are shared out in proportion to the votes won in primaries and caucuses, this leaves Mr Sanders’s needing an improbable run of thumping majorities to catch up. Mr Trump’s wins were based on a now-familiar double whammy: a crowded Republican field, in which his more conventional rivals took bites out of each other’s vote, combined with his knack of tapping the anti-establishment rage evident across the Republican coalition. This looks likely to produce one of the most disliked and unpropitious candidacies in American political history. At polling stations in northern and western Virginia, conservative country, your correspondent was told by many that they had voted “for the lesser evil”, “not for you know who,” that they “knew who they hadn’t voted for.” Yet about one in three said they had voted for Mr Trump: “Because politicians are liars”, and he isn’t one; “because he’s a businessman,” and that’s what the country needs to get straightened out; “because he’s funding his own campaign”, and his rivals are on the take. “Because there’s no political mumbo jumbo with him and he’s going to stop everybody, Syria, Iraq, you name it, treating us like a doormat,” said Eileen, a teacher, working herself into a fury on a sunny afternoon in Culpeper County, one of the prettiest, most law-abiding, luckiest places on Earth. She also reckoned Mr Trump was the best man to beat the Democrats, of whom she said she’d never met one she liked; though her daughter, Melissa, standing smiling besides her, had just voted for Mr Sanders. Mr Trump won Virginia, an important swing state in general elections, with 35% of the vote. Exit polls suggested a staggering 54% of Republican voters in the state were unhappy with the prospect of having him as their nominee—a pattern repeated in every state he won. Altogether he won about 40% of the available 595 delegates, who were also divvied up on a proportional basis. This gives him 319 delegates in all, which represents a less decisive lead than Mrs Clinton’s, but a strong one. It is above the level Nate Silver, a revered pundit, had predicted Mr Trump would need to be on track to win an outright majority of Republican delegates ahead of the party’s convention. His main rivals, the senators Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, are well below their comparable benchmarks, with 226 and 110 delegates. Yet both did just well enough on Super Tuesday to justify staying in the contest—which should ensure that both Mr Trump’s big advantages endure through a run of delegate-rich primaries, including in Florida, Illinois and Ohio on March 15th, where the winner will take all. Mr Cruz won his state of Texas and neighbouring Oklahoma, which was probably better than he had expected. But it was much less than the Southern sweep his strategy of appealing to evangelicals and the very conservative was designed to deliver. In his victory speech, delivered at the Redneck Country Club (where else?) in Houston, Mr Cruz derided Mr Trump as a “Washington dealmaker, profane and vulgar,” and appealed to his party’s patricians, who mostly despise both men, to back him as the likeliest anti-Trump candidate. There are signs that some see sense in that. Lindsey Graham, a veteran senator and failed presidential candidate who had previously described a choice between Mr Cruz and Mr Trump as akin to one between being poisoned or shot, suggested it might be time to choose poison. Mr Cruz received another fillip on March 2nd, when Ben Carson, a former neurosurgeon with a Christian following, who has long been cluttering the Republican field, suggested he was about to quit. Yet with the Bible-belt having largely voted, the going could get tougher for Mr Cruz. That is why, for those Republicans who do not wish to gift their party to a protectionist rabble-rouser, Mr Rubio’s Super Tuesday results were so shattering. Mr Rubio’s advisers had suggested he could win four states. He won only Minnesota, whose experience of Jesse Ventura, a professional wrestler who was the state’s governor for four years until 2003, was cited by many as a reason not to pick Mr Trump, a former WrestleMania star himself. In the days beforehand, the senator from Florida took Mr Trump apart in a televised debate, then ridiculed him on the campaign as a con artist, who quite possibly wet his trousers and whose fondness for fake tan promised to “make America orange again”. It made Mr Rubio look talented and immature, which are the two things unenthusiatic Republicans thought they knew about him already. Mr Trump countered by pulling in a couple of heavyweight endorsements—including from Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey and former Republican candidate—which made Mr Rubio look even more juvenile. “He could be a good president one day, but now he’s copying Trump,” said Chuck Mullens, a plumber in Culpeper County, as he left the polling station without voting, having disliked everyone on the ballot. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar Mr Rubio’s path to the nomination now looks vanishingly tight. If he fails to win Florida, where he is trailing Mr Trump by 20 percentage points, he is toast. Much the same is true for John Kasich, the governor of Ohio and fourth somewhat-serious Republican candidate. He has not won a state, though he ran Mr Trump close in Vermont; he must win Ohio, where he is also trailing Mr Trump, to survive. He is meanwhile damaging Mr Rubio’s dwindling prospects. Had he stepped down before Super Tuesday and his votes gone to Mr Rubio, as most would have, the Floridian would have won Virginia and Vermont. That would have made him look more credible. It would not have prevented Mr Trump being the big winner on a day in which his appeal stretched from hard-upSoutherners to well-heeled New England moderates, via the Washington D.C. commuter belt of northern Virginia—another place Mr Rubio had hoped to flourish. That is why a belated effort by members of the Republican elite, who will now launch a flurry of attack ads against Mr Trump, appears so pathetic. They are trying to save their party from a man who is having great success by identifying them as its biggest problem. In a victory speech delivered in the opulent setting of his seaside pile in Florida (advertised on its website as “the greatest mansion ever built”), Mr Trump tried slightly to allay his party’s concerns. Describing himself as a “unifier”, he said he expected to get along famously with Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives, who had criticised his soft-peddling on the KKK. “And if I don’t,” Mr Trump added, “He’s going to have to pay a big price.”Roe’s foes IN THEIR four-decade fight against Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court ruling of 1973 that recognised a right to abortion, pro-lifers have taken several tacks. One is to curtail the period during which women may end their pregnancies. Another is to ban particularly grisly-sounding techniques like “partial-birth” abortion. Recently, opponents of Roe have been waging a regulatory war of attrition that makes abortion harder and harder to obtain. On March 2nd, a Supreme Court diminished by the loss of Antonin Scalia, the conservative justice who died in February, asked whether a law of 2013 that, in effect, shuts down more than three-quarters of the 40-odd abortion clinics in Texas runs foul of a 1992 precedent prohibiting states from unduly imposing on a woman’s right to choose. Under the law, abortion providers in Texas must have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital and clinics must be expensively fitted out as “ambulatory surgical centres”. Legislators pitch the requirements as a boon to maternal health; detractors decry them as onerous, unwarranted changes that often leave women with nowhere to turn. Scott Keller, the Texas solicitor-general, insisted that legislators had women’s best interests at heart. But he faced a barrage of resistance from the court’s energised liberal jurists. The first salvo came from Ruth Bader Ginsburg, 83 this month. She jumped on Mr Keller’s suggestion that the new law left 25% of Texas women more than 100 miles from the nearest abortion clinic, “not including El Paso, where the Santa Teresa, New Mexico facility” is just a few minutes’ drive away. Justice Ginsburg noted that New Mexico law does not require surgical standards or admitting privileges. Doesn’t Texas say that “we need these things […] to protect our women”? Mr Keller repeated that women in El Paso often use the facility to obtain abortions. Justice Stephen Breyer probed the law’s justification. “Go back in time to the period before the new law was passed,” he said. “Where in the record will I find evidence of women who had complications” stemming from their abortions and “could not get to a hospital” under the previous regime but would have made it to a hospital under the new law? Mr Keller looked defeated. He grew meeker still when pressed by the three female justices to explain why Texas fretted so about abortion, one of the safest medical procedures, while failing to insist on surgical facilities for far riskier ones, like colonoscopies. Despite the fun the liberal justices had with Mr Keller, Texas may not lose Whole Woman’s Health v Hellerstedt when a ruling arrives in June. It would take five justices to overturn the decision upholding the Texas law, and Anthony Kennedy did not seem keen to be the decisive vote. Though he noted that the law served to “increase the number of surgical procedures as opposed to medical procedures, and that this may not be medically wise”, he wondered whether the plaintiffs had presented enough evidence that fewer clinics led to a crisis of abortion supply. A 4-4 split would let the Texas law stand, and allow other states in the Fifth Circuit to swipe at abortion access in similar ways (as Louisiana is already doing). But it would not bind the rest of the country. As the US solicitor-general, Donald Verrilli, neatly summed it up before the justices, the question boils down to whether the right to abortion “really only exists in theory” or “in fact, going forward”.Dark ages“Hope and change, not so much. More like hate and castrate.” Love, actually“Boyfriend prefers Trump. I’m single now.” Lest we forget“Can somebody attack me, please?” True Grit“Ted Cruz is not my favourite by any means…But we may be in a position where we have to rally around Ted Cruz as the only way to stop Donald Trump. And I’m not so sure that would work.” Potty humour“Then he asked for a full length mirror. I don’t know why, because the podium only comes up to here…maybe to make sure his pants weren’t wet.” Bored already“Get on the plane and go home. It’s over there.” How to make friends“[The party] ain’t promising him shit! Trust me on that one.” Upside of a downside“He is the only man…that stood in front of [the] Jewish community and told them, ‘I don’t want your money’.” Humpty Dumpty...“I’m not going to pay for that fucking wall.” …had a great fall...“Things are negotiable...I’ll make the wall two feet shorter, or something.” and couldn’t be put together again“Funny enough, he is bringing us business.”POLITICAL parties are never monoliths. As those inside them are ceaselessly aware, they are fractious and fractured. And yet, especially in two-party democracies, they endure. A mixture of delivering the goods their voters desire, dividing spoils between internal factions and adapting to external change allows them to overcome their centrifugal pressures. They even manage, much of the time, to look more or less coherent while doing so. For most of the 20th century most Americans knew, more or less, what their two parties stood for. These times, though, are out of step. Though political scientists proved slow to pick up on it (see article), America’s parties are more fragmented than usual. The state of the Republicans is particularly parlous. But the contradictions among Democrats, though less obvious, also run deep. Donald Trump’s run for the presidency has prospered despite lacking all the things parties usually provide for a front-runner: not least strategists and policies, money. It is hardly surprising that the Republican Party failed to see Mr Trump coming. What is odder, and much more culpable, is its failure to address the mismatch between its grassroots supporters and its policy agenda into which Mr Trump has tapped so effectively. In its subsequent disarray, the party has come to resemble a newspaper that has just discovered that its readers no longer need it to mediate between themselves and the world. The Republican Party arrived in the 21st century as an alliance of small-state, low-tax, pro-business voters with religiously inspired social conservatives and national-security hawks. It enjoyed a disproportionate popularity among white voters, the result of its successful recruitment of southern whites who disliked the innovations of the civil-rights era and, under Ronald Reagan, of blue-collar workers across the country. This mixture of interest groups had proved pretty successful: it held the White House for 28 of the 40 years from 1969 to 2008. During this time the pro-business lot were the senior partners in the arrangement, not least because they paid for the party’s election campaigns. This is the first primary season in 50 years where that has not held true. The Koch brothers, who have built the wealthiest network of political donors in America with the aim of electing Republicans who will cut regulation and taxes, disapprove of Mr Trump. They have said they will not fund his campaign; and yet he thrives. Faultlines exposed Mr Trump’s ascendancy cannot merely be ascribed to his wealth—though that certainly helps, by allowing him to appeal directly to the concerns of the base rather than those of his donors. He has exposed faultlines within the different camps, as well as between them. Even before his rise, some pro-business Republicans were beginning to despair of the party, the congressional wing of which seemed to enjoy nothing more than shutting down the federal government and playing chicken with the debt ceiling. After the financial crisis, when a Republican-led administration bailed out several large financial institutions, denunciations of crony capitalism became a Republican theme as much as a Democratic one. Mr Trump has deepened the divide on the business wing. In December the head of the national chamber of commerce said he viewed Mr Trump’s candidacy as a form of entertainment. He has also spilt the social conservatives. A libertine history and the look of a roué gone to seed would not in themselves preclude the support of evangelical Christians, who are, after all, keen on repentance. But Mr Trump is not very religious and does not go out of his way to seem so; his adoption of pro-life positions seems insincere. Christian Post, the country’s most popular evangelical news website, recently ran an editorial with the headline, “Donald Trump is a scam. Evangelical voters should back away.” Hitherto powerful socially conservative organisations such as the Family Leader have endorsed Ted Cruz, a Texas senator, instead. But such exhortations have had little effect: Mr Trump has won comfortably with self-described evangelicals in most states. The reason evangelicals vote for Mr Trump has little to do with faith or specifics of policy. It is more a question of attitude. A study by the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, has found that the most reliable way to tell whether a Republican voter was going to support Mr Trump was whether he agreed with the statement: “People like me don’t have any say about what government does.” Trump voters feel voiceless, and whatever attributes Mr Trump lacks, he has a voice. He lends it to them, to express their grievances and their aspirations for greatness, and they love it. It is also a voice that says things which other politicians do not, such as that Mexican immigrants are likely to be drug-dealers and rapists. Such untruths fit into a broader, if largely tacit, racism that has made Mr Trump popular not only with the Ku Klux Klan, but also with the considerably larger number of whites who harbour some racial resentment. Geographically, his support correlates with the frequency of racial epithets in Google searches. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar The weakest of the three Republican factions, the defence hawks, might even prefer a President Hillary Clinton to a President Trump. Mr Trump’s constant refrain about American troops always losing, his tendency towards isolationism, his insulting of prominent veterans such as John McCain, his attacks on George W. Bush as commander-in-chief and, most of all, his apparent enthusiasm for soldiers committing acts that would have them court-martialled, are a recipe for these Republican voters to the Democratic camp. Again, though, part of Mr Trump’s appeal reflects what at least some Republicans like about hawkishness; its association with authority. The Republican Party has spent the past half-century opposing the might of the federal government in every arena other than foreign policy. It now faces the prospect of going into the election led by someone who, surveys suggest, draws his most ardent support from those who would like a more authoritarian president in the White House. At that point it would be hard to say what, if anything, the party stands for. A battle of generations Mr Trump’s ability to blow Republican cracks asunder is unprecedented. But it has been helped by a long-standing unwillingness to face and fix those contradictions. For years the party has concentrated instead on opposing Barack Obama’s policies and, indeed, his legitimacy. With Mr Obama on the way out, that is moot now. He has, however, helped Democrats to know what they must jointly do. As Republicans long to tear down achievements they associate with Mr Obama, Democrats want to protect and uphold them. This has tended to keep the members of the party’s own coalition in agreement. Yet the ties between the voting blocs that favour Democrats—Hispanics, blacks, those with postgraduate degrees, single women, the non-religious, union members and millennials—are subject to change. The primaries have also revealed a powerful urge among activists to move the party leftward. Democrats fare exceptionally well with non-whites: in 2012 one in four of those who voted for Mr Obama were in this category, compared with one in ten of those who voted for Mitt Romney. But the interests of blacks do not always align with those of Hispanics. Fearing more competition for low-wage jobs, the congressional black caucus, allied with the unions, was partly responsible for defeating a push for immigration reform under George W. Bush. The party has found ways round this clash, presenting immigration reform as a question of civil rights; when Mr Obama meets caucus members, immigration reform tends to be omitted in a mutual show of good manners. But the division remains. The current crop of primaries has also made it clear that Democrats are divided along generational lines. Bernie Sanders has thrashed Mrs Clinton in every contest among voters whose formative political experiences were the Iraq war (which she supported) and the financial crisis (blamed on her Wall Street supporters). For those born before the Reagan years, by contrast, the fact that Mr Sanders honeymooned in the Soviet Union disqualifies him from consideration. Older Democrats remember the party’s move to the centre in the 1990s as pragmatic, correct and fruitful; younger ones consider it a betrayal. When its members actually turn out to vote, the Democratic coalition is still formidable. Non-whites make up an ever-increasing share of the electorate. Polling by Gallup shows that the number of Americans who describe themselves as liberal has increased over the past 20 years, while those who call themselves conservative has held steady (see chart.) Self-declared moderates lean Democratic. But often—especially in non-presidential election years—the coalition can’t be bothered. This has led to a party unable to refresh itself. Were Mrs Clinton (68) to win the nomination and then fall under a bus or an indictment, the names often mentioned as possible replacements are John Kerry (72) and Joe Biden (73). During Mr Obama’s presidency Democrats have lost 900 seats in state legislatures, 11 governors, 69 seats in the House and 13 senators. This helps to explain why Mrs Clinton has had no young pretender to voice the opposition to her from within the party. Mr Obama relied on his own apparatus, separate from the party, in his two presidential campaigns. Mrs Clinton has vowed to rebuild the party if she wins. But that supposes that its constituent interest groups continue to see the Democratic Party as the best way to get what they want. Once the presidential election is over, they may find apathy more attractive again—not least because, now that it has acted on heath-care reform and (to an extent) on climate change, the party has been remarkably poor at setting out new worlds to conquer. There is nothing immutable about the way the two parties currently line up. Republicans used to be the big-government progressive party, formed in opposition to slavery and pushing to remodel the South after the civil war; they have also been the small-government party, not only now, but in opposition to the New Deal in the 1930s. Democrats were once the small-government party, opposing those who wanted a more powerful federal government and defending the interests of white southerners against Washington; now they are famous as the big-government party, pushing federal anti-poverty programmes in the 20th century and government involvement in health care in the 21st. Furniture-moving This election could see the furniture rearranged again. Some Republicans wonder if a Trump candidacy might redraw the electoral map, winning over blue-collar whites who don’t normally vote in rustbelt swing states like Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan or Wisconsin. If he loses, the party might still conclude that it needs to pay more attention to the economic anxieties of those who feel left behind. For their part Democrats are counting on Mr Trump to energise members of the coalition that voted twice for President Barack Obama, and to put in play moderate Republicans, notably women, who can expect to be bombarded with Democratic messages about the billionaire’s misogyny. If Mrs Clinton marshals a broad anti-Trump coalition that peels off some habitual Republican voters and combines it with high turnout among traditional Democratic supporters, she will have an opportunity to create a new centrist coalition that may long outlast her. Nobody yet knows whether what is happening in 2016 is an anomaly caused by the one-off political persona Mr Trump has created, or if it is tracing the outline of the future. Whatever the parties look like after November 8th, though, Mr Trump’s success to date has already changed the system, in part by proving that voters value ideological consistency (and rhetorical restraint) much less than the political classes assumed. That could be liberating, if it allows elected representatives to stray from the party line. It could be damaging if the only lines they can stray towards are brutally populist ones. Parties exist to distil a complex set of questions into a binary choice; it is impossible to imagine a big democracy staying healthy without them. Yet in 2020, with Mr Trump in mind, the strongest candidates may start from the assumption that they do not need their parties much at all.
