Two men in a boat ROBERT CRISS does not relish his role as Cassandra of the Mississippi. For years the geologist at Washington University in St Louis has warned policymakers about building houses and businesses on flood plains, walling off rivers with dams, locks, dykes and levees, disregarding the consequences of global warming on weather patterns and the use of outdated statistics for calculating the risk of a major flood. “The devil could not have come up with a better plot,” he says. Torrential rain started on December 26th and lasted three days, during which 9-14 inches (23-35cm) of rain deluged much of Missouri and parts of Illinois, according to the National Weather Service. Thousands had to evacuate their houses; businesses abandoned shops and stock. Amtrak stopped its local train service for four days and long stretches of the I-44 and I-55 interstate highways, as well as 200 state highways, were shut off. Twenty-five people died, mostly because they drove onto a swamped road and their cars flipped over. It will take months to rebuild what has been lost. Yet the bigger question is whether enough was done before the rains came to mitigate the impact of flooding. For Mr Criss the answer is no. He does not understand why the development of commercial and residential property was allowed on flood plains near St Louis, in particular as both the city and the county are losing population. The area should have been kept as farmland, which can absorb water, he argues, and should not be paved over: when the floods come, lost crops are far less costly than lost houses and businesses. Nicholas Pinter at the University of California, Davis adds that the Missouri and the Mississippi are flooding so severely because the middle stretch of the Mississippi (which joins the Missouri at St Louis) has more navigational dykes than any other river reach he knows. It has become a largely man-made construct that bears little resemblance to the river of 200 years ago, which changed shape with the volume of water flowing through it. Yet the statistics used by the Army Corps of Engineers and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to define flood risk are based on the average weather patterns, flooding and the changing shape of the river during the past 100 years. Unless the corps and FEMA update their statistical methods, they will continue to underestimate the flood risk for the region. Missouri policymakers have largely ignored the geologists’ warnings about floods. After the Great Flood in 1993, which destroyed around 100,000 homes and caused nearly $20 billion in damage along the Missouri and upper Mississippi, the Galloway Report, written by a group of experts appointed by the White House, called for federal flood-insurance programmes to discourage development in flood plains. It said that taxpayers should stop bailing out areas that flood regularly. And it recommended that the basins of the Missouri and Mississippi should be managed as one watershed. Very little of this has happened. “This misery will repeat itself,” predicts Mr Criss.Corridor patrol OFFICER Craig Davis reckons 2015 was a fairly peaceful year at Furr High School, on the hardscrabble east side of Houston. True, five of its pupils died violently, including the school’s first-pick quarterback, Michael Davis, who was murdered in a gang fight, and two schoolgirls who were killed in a bus crash. In the state that executes more people than any other, a recent old boy was also charged with three murders. Yet Mr Davis, one of the school’s two police officers, with a revolver, canister of pepper foam and a truncheon hanging from his belt, says he has known worse over his eight years at Furr: “It’s a tough place.” It was with violent schools like Furr in mind that Texas began stationing police officers in its schools in the early 1990s, which helped start a national trend. It proceeded to accelerate on the back of persistent concerns over law and order during the decade; in 1999, after 13 people were massacred at Columbine High School, in Colorado, the federal government launched a supportive funding programme, Cops in Schools. By 2007 an estimated 19,000 school policemen, known as School Resource Officers, were plodding the corridors of America’s schools, in addition to many regular police and private security officers. How many there are now is unclear; there has been little study of the phenomenon, a gap the Department of Education is struggling to fill. But there may be as many as ever, encouraged by yet more federal largesse in the form of a scheme launched under Barack Obama, in response to yet another school shooting, in Connecticut in 2012, in which 20 children were killed. Most American public high schools now have a permanent police presence. It is not clear why. Over the same 25-year period juvenile violent crime rose through the early 1990s but, like the overall crime rate, has since collapsed. Juvenile arrests are also at their lowest level for three decades and juvenile murders at a 30-year low. Gone, too, are excited apprehensions of a feral underclass of pre-teenage “superpredators”, a discredited phrase coined by John DiIulio, a Princeton political scientist. When asked in a national survey, in 2005, why they had brought police onto their campus, only 4% of school principals and the cops themselves cited violence as the main reason. About a quarter of the teachers instead cited media reports of violence elsewhere; a quarter of the cops said the school was unruly. The most popular response was “other”, a category that included the availability of federal funds (what school would not take free money?) or a belief that the policy had something to do with community policing. Preventing school shootings hardly registered; it is a rare sort of calamity, which, as it happens, the presence of armed officers does not prevent. There was a police officer at Columbine during its massacre. Moreover, such shootings tend to happen in schools dominated by middle-class whites, and according to researchers at the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), cops are far more likely to be placed in schools dominated by poor non-whites. The result, because police like to keep themselves busy, has been a disproportionately high number of arrests in such schools, pitching black and Hispanic juveniles into the criminal-justice system. Of 260,000 pupils referred to the police in the 2011-12 school year, 27% were black, though blacks represented only 16% of the student population. And those who become entangled in the justice system are likely to remain so. The opening of a juvenile criminal record—which may not be scrubbed clean until the age of 21—is an augury of further arrests, further convictions and eventual imprisonment, a spiral known to researchers as the “school-to-prison-pipeline”. “What started as an effort to keep guns out of schools has become a way of getting kids out of school,” says Harold Jordan of the ACLU. There are several reasons why the policy has gone bad, which vary from place to place. One is uncertainty about who is in charge, police or principals. Sometimes the cops answer to the school board, sometimes only to the police chief. Often the balance of power is contested in an ill-tempered battle between principals and police. The eagerness of weak, or ill-equipped, teachers to outsource classroom discipline to the cops is another part of the problem. This allegedly contributed to a recent much publicised case of police abuse in South Carolina, where a 16-year-old girl was thrown to the floor and dragged from the classroom by a police officer after she had refused to stop using her mobile phone. The internet has plenty more such horrors; including footage of a sobbing 5-year-old girl in Florida, handcuffed after she threw a tantrum. Draconian laws, inflexibly applied, make matters worse. Until recently in Texas it was a criminal offence to cause a rumpus on a school bus; in South Carolina, it still is one to cause a disturbance in school. In Pennsylvania, among other states, it is a criminal offence to take a weapon, including an almost-harmless pair of nail-scissors, into school, for which even a ten-year-old would face arrest. “It’s the stupidest, craziest thing I’ve ever seen, says Kevin Bethel, Philadelphia’s newly retired deputy-commissioner of police. After arrest—a fate until recently experienced by around 1,600 students in Philadelphia each year—the arrested child is taken to the district police headquarters for fingerprinting and processing, which takes about six hours, much of it spent in a prison cell. Minor offenders, including weeping ten-year-old scissors-carriers, are then let off with the sort of punishment a teacher might have demanded in the first place, such as lines or chores—though if they fail to carry these out, they may wind up in court, alongside more serious offenders. “What does it mean when we take a ten-year-old child into a cell block and we don’t really know why?” asks Mr Bethel. In graphics: America's guns There are patches of progress, however, typically where police chiefs, such as Mr Bethel, have responded to pressure from activists. In 2014 he instructed his officers to stop making arrests over relatively minor infringements, such as schoolyard fights or small amounts of cannabis possession, which accounted for around 60% of the total. Instead he developed an alternative procedure, whereby officers report the miscreants to their parents and then force them to attend lessons in how to behave. This brought arrests in Philadelphia schools down by 54% in 2014 and by another 60% in 2015. Mr Bethel’s aim was that there should be no more than 400 arrests each year. The biggest resistance to his changes comes from teachers. “I advised them I would no longer be their disciplinarian, and they were kind of shocked for a while,” he says. “Some balked, but many are getting on board.” Similar progress is apparent in Houston. As in Philadelphia, this has involved the local police chief responding constructively after his district’s juvenile-arrest record was highlighted by NGOs. When Bertie Simmons, Furr’s octogenarian principal, took charge in 2000, the school’s cops were running amok. “They were doing things with kids that you’d not believe,” she says. “Like grabbing them, shoving them against walls, cuffing them. I was appalled. You shouldn’t treat schoolkids like criminals.” Despite efforts to improve matters, by 2009 Houston was still arresting over 4,000 school students, more than any other school district in Texas. In 2013 Texas passed several laws to make that harder: it raised the qualifying age of some offences and, in effect, decriminalised relatively trifling ones, such as rowdy behaviour on buses. This, in turn, has helped the school district’s police chief, Robert Mock, to make his officers more forbearing; though spitting on the pavement remains a criminal offence, it rarely leads to arrests. Mr Mock says that the 210 school cops under his direction will probably carry out no more than 500 arrests a year—and Houston’s schools have grown no more violent as a result of this restraint. In a generally grim context, that is hopeful. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story gave officer Craig Davis the wrong name. Sorry.WITH its stone tower, Gothic arches and half-timbered walls, the Harvest Bible Chapel in Grimes, Iowa, would make a fine setting for an Agatha Christie murder. But on the religious right the church is notorious as the scene, in 2013, of a different crime. Back then the chapel was being used as a commercial wedding hall when its owners, Betty and Richard Odgaard, declined to host a gay marriage, citing their religious beliefs. Because the building was not legally a church at that point, the Odgaards fell foul of discrimination laws and—rather than celebrate gay unions—closed their wedding business. Today the building is a church again after its sale to a group of Christians—members of the 60m-strong community of Americans who call themselves born-again or evangelical Protestants. Its young pastor, Ryan Jorgenson, calls the Odgaards “heroes”. Like many evangelicals, he sees a pattern of bullying by secular foes and their allies in government. He worries about Christian employers having to fund health insurance that covers birth-control methods targeting fertilised eggs, and wonders if religious colleges will one day have to admit unrepentantly gay students. Mr Jorgenson enters 2016 in a fighting mood. Iowa is a good place to make such a stand. The Midwestern state hosts the first nominating contests of each presidential election cycle. Evangelical Christians typically make up 60% of the activists who brave ice and snow to attend Iowa’s Republican caucuses, which this year fall on February 1st. Most are also very conservative, and Iowa often hands victory to candidates who sound like fire-and-brimstone preachers. Yet their born-again champions seldom go on to win the nomination. A new book, “The Four Faces of the Republican Party” by Henry Olsen and Dante Scala, calculates that only about one in five Republican voters nationwide are “very conservative evangelicals”. In the past the religious right has also struggled to unite around a single, plausible candidate. This year, religious conservatives are determined to maximise their clout. Mr Jorgenson has done his bit. Like several other pastors he has endorsed Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a hardliner who has wooed Iowans with Bible-infused oratory and promises to fight for religious Americans. On January 5th Mr Jorgenson urged church-members to attend “Decision America”, a rally on the steps of the state capitol in Des Moines, launching a 50-state tour by the evangelist Franklin Graham, son of Billy. Mr Graham is no stranger to temporal power. He has backed ballot initiatives opposing gay marriage. He led prayers at the first inauguration of President George W. Bush. But this is the first election in which he will spend months urging Christians to register to vote. The country is in “big-time trouble”, he told a crowd of 2,600 hardy Iowans. The history of American Christianity is full of prayer meetings in which the faithful bewail a nation adrift, and vow—like the tribes of Israel before them—to stand fast in the face of tyrannical rulers. Mr Graham did not disappoint. As his audience murmured “Amens” and softly stamped feet against the cold, he recalled the prophet Nehemiah, who overcame exile and a wicked pagan king to return to Jerusalem and rebuild its walls. Mr Graham drew parallels with the present, telling Iowans: “The moral and political walls of our nation are crumbling.” Mr Graham will not be endorsing any politician or party. Other Christian bigwigs have held meetings with the aim of agreeing on a single candidate, to make best use of a primary calendar which sees early contests in a string of rural and southern states with lots of religious voters. A big Iowan evangelical organisation, the Family Leader, has endorsed Mr Cruz. So has James Dobson, the founder of Focus on the Family, a conservative pressure-group. Other candidates have not given up hope. Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon who has spent years on the Christian lecture circuit, has supporters—though fewer since his slight grasp of foreign policy was exposed. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida stresses his faith and stern views on abortion. Even Donald Trump, a much-married casino-builder, talks of his love for the Bible, and enjoys significant support from evangelicals. INFOGRAPHIC: Republican candidates court evangelical voters Steve Deace, a conservative talk-radio host from Iowa, suggests that evangelical Trump-voters are “frustrated with wimpy politicians and want a bad-ass”. Mr Deace describes listeners who want a president to stand up for religious liberty (or as he puts it, fight against the “rainbow jihad” of the gay-rights movement), and to prevent illegal immigration and terrorism. Mr Deace, a Cruz backer, asserts that religious conservatives in 2016 all want the same question answered: “Who is willing to fight?” Et in Iowa Yet even in Iowa, evangelicals are not monolithic. Jeff Dodge is a pastor at Cornerstone Church, a Southern Baptist mega-church in the college town of Ames. Mr Dodge is a conservative: he opposes abortion and would not conduct a gay marriage. But he is “frustrated” by pastors who endorse politicians and “froth” flocks up about issues like tax rates, about which the Bible has little to say. He puzzles over “Chicken Little” talk of persecution, noting that he preaches to 2,500 Christians each Sunday: “I don’t feel my culture is trying to muzzle me.” Most of all, church-members trust him as a guide to the Bible’s truths, he says: it would be presumptuous to offer his views as a private citizen. “I cringe” when candidates claim God’s support, he adds, noting that one of the ten commandments is: “Don’t take the name of the Lord in vain”. Born-again voters in the general election will be still more diverse: millions of evangelicals are black or from fast-growing Hispanic churches, and worry about government safety nets, poverty or immigrants’ rights as much as about abortion or gay weddings. Too many white evangelicals seem blind to that diversity, and sound like the chaplain corps of the Republican right. If they pick a champion who panders to that narrow identity, they will condemn themselves to irrelevance.IT WAS rowdy and disorganised. At one point it nearly degenerated into a brawl. But the opening on January 5th of Venezuela’s parliament, the first to be elected with an opposition majority in 17 years of autocratic rule, had the feel of a velvet revolution. The portraits of the late Hugo Chávez, the founder of the populist movement that still governs the country, and Simón Bolívar, the 19th-century liberator whom the chavistas claimed as inspiration, had been taken down. Speeches by opposition deputies, once routinely cut short by the bullying former president of the National Assembly, Diosdado Cabello, were heard in full. Dozens of police guards around the building leaned into their car radios to hear politicians rail against the authoritarian and incompetent rule of the current president, Nicolás Maduro. “This is a wake-up call,” said a soldier as he listened raptly to the proceedings.  The chavistas did not put up with the harangues for long. After less than an hour they walked out—in protest at supposed procedural errors by the new president of the assembly, Henry Ramos. Even then they could not escape interrogation. Parliament’s new masters had opened its doors to all journalists, not just pro-government ones as before. The normally cocky Mr Cabello, who led the walkout, looked distinctly uncomfortable when confronted by reporters who asked mildly testing questions on live television. Cilia Flores, Venezuela’s first lady, who is one of 54 chavistas in parliament, icily refused to answer one about two nephews who are facing narcotics charges in the United States.  Chavismo has been wounded, but it is far from defeated. Parliament aside, all the main institutions of government remain under its control. The setback to the regime has made it more authoritarian. Before parliament’s opening Venezuela’s Supreme Court had ruled that four of the incoming MPs from the state of Amazonas, three of them from the opposition Democratic Unity alliance (MUD), could not be sworn in. They are the subjects of investigations into possible electoral fraud. This ruling threw into doubt the two-thirds majority the MUD appeared to win in the election on December 6th. Such a “supermajority” would allow the opposition to begin the process of appointing and dismissing Supreme Court judges and to convene a convention to rewrite the constitution. The day after its opening parliament defiantly swore in the three MUD deputies, restoring the opposition’s two-thirds majority. Supreme weapon In the battle that now looms with parliament, the Supreme Court may become the regime’s main weapon. One of the last acts of the outgoing assembly was to stuff the court with 13 new pro-government judges. Mr Maduro has already suggested that all legislation that he disagrees with, including a proposed amnesty to secure the release of scores of political prisoners, will be deemed unconstitutional by the Supreme Court. “It is difficult to imagine that congress can have an institutional conflict against the Supreme Court and win,” says Luis Vicente León, a pollster.  The government may hope to provoke divisions within the MUD. Its representatives in the National Assembly are from a hotchpotch of 13 parties, united in their desire to defeat chavismo but often divided over the best means to do so. Mr Ramos, a cantankerous veteran from the Democratic Action party, which governed Venezuela before Chávez, was the choice of smaller parties within the MUD. They fear domination by the younger Justice First party, led by Henrique Capriles, who nearly won a presidential election in 2013. Mr Ramos is himself a divisive figure. Ahead of parliament’s opening session he confirmed that he would seek the constitutional removal of Mr Maduro from the presidency within six months, presumably by launching a referendum to recall him from office. Moderates in the coalition have resisted issuing such a clear challenge to the executive so soon. Time is working against the regime. The price of Venezuela’s heavy oil, virtually its only export, dipped to under $30 a barrel in December, its lowest since February 2004. Default on some of its $98 billion of foreign debt is “becoming hard to avoid,” says Barclays Bank. Over 2015 and 2016 the economy is likely to shrink by nearly 15%. Shortages of basic consumer goods will get worse. In the absence of official figures, analysts reckon that inflation is nearly 200%, the highest rate in the world. A decree by Mr Maduro, enacted before the new parliament opened, shows that the regime has little intention of doing anything new about the dire state of the economy. It strips the assembly of its right to appoint directors of the Central Bank, or even to question them. As the confrontation between president and parliament worsens, Venezuelans wonder what role the army will play. On the night of the parliamentary election in December, the country’s defence minister, Vladimir Padrino López, declared in an unscheduled appearance on state television that the army would “uphold the constitution”. Some analysts saw that as a warning to government hardliners to accept the results. The night before parliament opened, General Padrino López went public again. “The Bolivarian Armed Forces is not a means to subvert the constitutional order,” he tweeted, somewhat cryptically. The government’s eccentric claims about what is constitutional put the armed forces in an awkward position. “The military says it is going to defend the law, but what is the law?” wonders Mr León. Venezuela’s looming struggle is largely about the answer to that question.Mayor, and martyr POLITICS is a risky business in Mexico. Seven candidates in mid-term elections last June were murdered and 70 were attacked. In the past eight years, 40 mayors have been killed, says the National Federation of Municipalities. The latest murder is among the most shocking: on January 2nd Gisela Mota, mayor of Temixco, about 85km (53 miles) south of Mexico City, was killed in her home by several assassins just one day after her inauguration. It is fairly clear who killed Ms Mota, but not why. The suspects are thought to have links to Los Rojos, a drug gang. Police killed two and captured three. Ms Mota, a former congresswoman from the left-wing Party of the Democratic Revolution, had vowed to fight drug trafficking. Temixco is an important way-station on one of the main routes for moving drugs to Mexico City. But after only a day in office she hardly had time to threaten the region’s drug dealers. Graco Ramírez, the governor of Morelos, the state to which Temixco belongs, offers a different theory. He thinks Ms Mota was killed because she supported the state’s takeover of local policing, a policy known as mando único (single command). Mexico has 2,000 local police forces, in addition to state and federal constabularies. Many of them are short of funds and badly managed. Some, and the mayors who run them, are in league with the criminals. The state takeover of local policing was the big crime-fighting idea that Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, came up with after the disappearance in 2014 of 43 students in Iguala in the southern state of Guerrero. That appears to have been the work of local police acting in concert with a drug gang. The town’s ex-mayor has been charged with engaging in organised crime. Advocates of mando único claim that states can modernise police forces, co-ordinate them better and give them more money. Mayors will face less risk if they are not directly involved in police work. And the corrupt ones will have less opportunity to subvert it. The day after Ms Mota’s murder Mr Ramírez imposed mando único on 15 municipalities, saying the measure was necessary to keep order. If Ms Mota was killed by gangsters as punishment for supporting mando único, the murder triggered the action they sought to prevent. Critics of the policy say there is no proof that it modernises policing. Forces under state command are not immune to corruption. Two ex-governors of the state of Tamaulipas are wanted by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration. Before Ms Mota was slain, other mayors seemed to face greater risks. In the past decade more have been killed in the poor southern states of Michoacán and Oaxaca than anywhere else. Several mayors in northern Mexico, where drugs are dispatched to the United States, are afraid to work in the towns that elected them, says Bernardo Gómez of Misiones Regionales de Seguridad, a security consultancy. Mando único may offer them less protection than more and better bodyguards would. When a mayor is murdered, police should pursue not just the killers but their bosses, says Alejandro Hope, a security analyst. “If you kill a mayor and nothing happens, the next mayor will just give in.”CANADIANS obsessively compare their country with a certain neighbouring superpower. Often, the contrast is reassuring. Few Canadians would want the United States’ lax gun laws or its ridiculously expensive health care. Economic comparisons are usually more sobering. Canadians are less rich than Americans and have fewer globally famous brands. Silicon Valley exports high-tech disruption; Alberta’s tar sands produce pollution. For Canadians who feel economically inferior, a recent report comparing millennials on both sides of the border had cheering news. Canadians born in the 1980s are better off than their American peers. The study by TD Bank, called “Canadian and US Millennials: One of These Is Not Like the Other”, was headline news when it was published in December. Canadians aged 25 to 34 are more likely to have jobs than Americans of the same age (nearly 80% are employed, compared with less than 75% of Americans). American millennials are worse off than their compatriots from Generation X (the cohort that came just before them). In Canada millennials’ household incomes are 16% higher. Just over half are homeowners, compared with 36% in the United States. Much of the millennial advantage can be traced to Canadian paternalism—that of the state and that of the youngsters’ indulgent parents. Canada’s public universities charge much lower tuition fees than their largely private American rivals, so students graduate with less debt. More important is the contribution of millennial women, whose employment rate is seven percentage points higher than that of their American sisters. Their greater willingness to work has a lot to do with laws that oblige employers to give new parents paid leave of up to 50 weeks. The United States, by contrast, is one of the few countries that do not mandate paid maternity leave. Canada avoided the housing-market crash that struck the United States in the late 2000s, thanks to prudent banking regulation. That enabled parents to help their children buy their first homes. But this points to another factor, which is less cause for self-congratulation: a big part of Canadian millennials’ wealth is explained by the barely interrupted rise in house prices. Although banks are still prudent, low interest rates have encouraged house-buying and prices are reaching scary levels. If they drop, so will millennials’ spirits.  UNDETERRED by the rain, the crowd leaps to its feet shouting “We’re going to win” in Taiwanese as their presidential candidate, Tsai Ing-wen, begins her stump speech. Some rattle piggy banks to show that their party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), relies on, and serves, the little guy—as opposed to the ruling Kuomintang (KMT), backed by businesses and fat cats and one of the world’s richest political institutions. Taiwan’s voters go to the polls on January 16th in what is likely to prove a momentous election both for the domestic politics on the island and for its relations with the Communist government in China that claims sovereignty over it. Eight years of uneasy truce across the Taiwan Strait are coming to an end. Since taking office in 2008, the outgoing president, Ma Ying-jeou, has engineered the deepest rapprochement between Taiwan and China ever seen, signing an unprecedented 23 pacts with the mainland, including a partial free-trade agreement. It culminated in an unprecedented meeting in November between Mr Ma and Xi Jinping, China’s president, in Singapore. But if the rapprochement under Mr Ma was a test of whether closer ties would help China’s long-term goal of peaceful unification, it failed. For the past six months Ms Tsai, whose party leans towards formal independence for Taiwan, has been miles ahead in the polls, with the support of 40-45% of voters. The KMT’s Eric Chu has 20-25% and another candidate, James Soong, a former KMT heavyweight, about 15%. Taiwanese polls can be unreliable, and many voters are undecided. But if Mr Chu were to win, it would be a shock. Taiwan elects its parliament, the Legislative Yuan, on the same day. That race is closer. But the DPP’s secretary-general, Joseph Wu, thinks his party can win it too, either outright or in coalition with two smaller parties—and the polls suggest he may be right. If so, it would be the first time any party other than the KMT has controlled the country’s legislature since the KMT fled to the island at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949. The election result will have regional consequences, but the campaign itself is being fought on livelihood issues. The economy appears to have grown by only 1% in 2015, less than in 2014. Taiwan is doing worse than other export-oriented Asian economies such as South Korea. Salaries are stagnant, youth unemployment is up and home ownership is beyond the reach of many. One study found that the capital, Taipei, has become one of the world’s costliest cities relative to income, with the ratio of median house prices to median household income rising from 8.9 in 2005 to 15.7 in 2014—nearly twice the level of London. Concerns like these have dented the KMT’s reputation for economic competence. Self-inflicted wounds have not helped either. Most of the KMT’s bigwigs refused to run for president, fearing defeat. So its chairman, Eric Chu, put forward Hung Hsiu-chu, whose pro-China views proved so extreme that they nearly split the party. Mr Chu ditched her just months before the poll and ran for president himself. Ms Hung’s backers, many of them old-guard KMT voters, may abstain in protest. The party which for decades has dominated politics faces humiliation. That would have profound implications for China. For years, the Chinese Communist Party’s policy towards Taiwan has been based on patience and economic integration. But the election campaign suggests that integration is a liability and that time may not be on China’s side. In 1992, according to the Election Studies Centre at National Chengchi University in Taipei, 18% of respondents identified themselves as Taiwanese only. A further 46% thought of themselves as both Taiwanese and Chinese. Today 59% call themselves Taiwanese, while 34% identify as both—ie, very few consider themselves Chinese first and foremost. Patience doesn’t pay Among 20- to 29-year-olds, three-quarters think of themselves as Taiwanese. For them China is a foreign country, and the political ripples of this change are now being felt. In early 2014 students occupied parliament for three weeks in a protest against a proposed services deal with China. This proved to be a turning point: the KMT went on to be thrashed in municipal elections in late 2014. Some of the student leaders have formed their own party to contest the legislative election, joining 17 other groups and 556 candidates, who range from a heavy-metal front man to a former triad crime boss. The last time Taiwan chose a DPP president, Chen Shui-bian, in 2000, cross-strait tensions escalated. Given China’s increasing assertiveness in the region under Mr Xi, things could be even more dangerous now. China has been piling pressure on Ms Tsai. Mr Xi says he wants a “final resolution” of differences over Taiwan, adding that this is not something to leave for the next generation. China is demanding that Ms Tsai approve the “1992 consensus”, a formula by which China and the KMT agreed there was only one China—but disagreed about what that meant in practice. Ms Tsai has long said no such consensus exists, though when asked about it in a presidential debate, she called it “one option”. Ms Tsai is a very different figure from Mr Chen, who delighted in provoking China (and was later jailed for corruption). She is a low-key, English-educated lawyer schooled in international trade rather than in the rhetoric of Taiwanese nationalism. She has gone out of her way to assure China and America, Taiwan’s guarantor, that she backs the status quo and will be cautious. Many of her proposals, such as that Taiwan should expand its soft power through non-governmental organisations, seem designed to be uncontroversial. If her party takes control of the legislature, that would remove a source of instability: conflict with lawmakers made Mr Chen’s presidency even more unpredictable than it otherwise would have been. Yet whatever Ms Tsai’s intentions, a lot could go wrong. Taiwanese politics is famously raucous, and the DPP’s radicals seeking formal independence might yet cause problems. Mr Xi, in turn, could come under pressure from military diehards arguing that China has been too patient. In one of the last foreign-policy vestiges of the “one China” idea, China and Taiwan have similar claims in the South China Sea, a nerve-racking part of the globe. If a new government in Taiwan starts tinkering with its stance on the sea, China might easily take offence. The election of an independence-leaning president comes at a dangerous moment.Next for the chopping block: Tsukiji itself ON JANUARY 5th, in a pre-dawn ritual going back decades, a handbell rang to mark the year’s first auction at Tsukiji, Tokyo’s sprawling fish market. The star attraction was a glistening 200kg tuna, sold to a sushi restaurant chain for ¥14m ($118,000). But the sale was tinged with nostalgia and even bitterness. This time next year the wholesale market, the world’s busiest, will be gone. Squeezed between the Sumida river and the Ginza shopping district, Tsukiji is creaking at the seams. Some 60,000 people work under its leaky roof, and hundreds of forklifts, carrying everything from sea urchins to whale meat, careen across bumpy floors. The site’s owner, the city government, wants it moved. That is unpopular. Traders resent being yanked to a sterile new site to the south. The new market is being built on a wharf whose soil is contaminated by the toxic effluent from a former gasworks. The clean-up and negotiations delayed the move for over a decade. The final blow was Tokyo’s successful bid to host the 2020 Olympics. A new traffic artery will cut through Tsukiji, transporting visitors to the games’ venues. Part of the site will become a temporary press centre, says Yutaka Maeyasui, the executive in charge of shifting the market. Our time is up, he says, glancing around his decrepit office. The site has become too small, old and crowded. An earthquake could bring the roof down. Many traders below Mr Maeyasui’s office belong to families that have been here since the market opened in the 1930s, after the Great Kanto earthquake of 1923 levelled its predecessor. “You won’t find anyone here who supports the relocation,” says Chieko Oyoshi, who runs the tuna business her grandfather founded. Big supermarket chains and wholesalers already eat into her business by dealing directly with the ports and fish farms that supply Tsukiji. The move will kill whatever trade is left, she laments. One of the last links to the city’s mercantile past, Tsukiji has changed little in decades. Men lick pencil stubs before writing on scraps of paper. A new computer would die of loneliness. One of the few modern devices is a digital clock counting down the days till November, when most of the activity will fall silent, along with Tsukiji’s beautiful bedlam.
