OUT in the farthest reaches of Lagos, a bumpy boat ride across the city’s dividing lagoon, Egbin power plant is trying to light up one of the world’s darkest nations. Six turbines growl in its huge belly, watched over by mechanics in a futuristic control room. They say the place is barely recognisable since privatisation in 2013. Output has rocketed since Sahara Group, a Nigerian energy conglomerate, took over. When running at full steam, Egbin generates almost a quarter of the whole country’s electricity. That is not a particularly stretching target. Of Nigeria’s many daily headaches, power is perhaps the worst. After years in which state-owned power plants decayed, the government changed course by selling power stations and the distribution grids that carry power to homes and businesses. This bold stroke was meant to turn the lights on, and indeed it has encouraged investors to put millions of dollars into upgrading the battered system. Yet the supply of power has failed to respond as hoped in the two years since privatisation. At the moment the country’s big stations produce a pitiful 2,800MW, which is about as much as is used by Edinburgh. Only just over half of Nigerians have access to electricity, and it is still harder for businesses to hook up to the grid than almost anywhere else. One reason why privatisation has failed to improve Nigeria’s power supply is that the process itself was flawed from the start. Even as companies were bidding to buy power stations or distribution companies, striking staff prevented them from looking at what they were buying. Once the deals were done they found they had bought rundown equipment and companies whose books had been systematically cooked. More important, though, was that many could not get the gas they needed to power their plants. Government meddling held down gas prices, which meant that many producers would simply flare it off (while extracting oil) instead of bothering to sell it at a deep loss. Moreover, the pipes meant to carry the flammable stuff are rusting and regularly vandalised by thugs demanding money to protect them. The privatisation process was also incomplete and left the transmission grid (which carries electricity from power stations to the local distribution grids) in the hands of the state. It has not invested much, so huge amounts of power fizzle out on its dilapidated lines. Even if power plants could generate more electricity, the grid would not be able to handle it. At Egbin a handful of people employed by the state-owned transmission network sit watching YouTube clips as their private-sector colleagues beaver away. Power plants are also owed colossal sums by the agencies that act as middlemen between generation companies and the distributors. Egbin alone is some $225m out of pocket. The intermediaries, in turn, blame distributors, saying they have not been collecting cash from their customers. As for the distributors, they say that the tariffs they are allowed to charge are too low to cover their costs and that, in any case, Nigerians do not pay their bills. Depressingly, the biggest offender is the government, whose various departments and agencies owe almost $300m. “It’s difficult for anyone to go to a military barracks and order them to pay—except if you’ve written your will,” says one insider. More than a year ago the Central Bank of Nigeria organised a $1 billion loan to plug the gap and avoid a wave of insolvencies among power generators, but only a fraction has been disbursed. Since then a falling currency and shortages of foreign exchange have made it harder for private power producers to service debts denominated in dollars, a currency many chose because it offered lower interest rates than borrowing in naira. Finding cash (and hard currency in particular) to buy gas, maintain machinery and pay technical partners is a growing strain. Dallas Peavey, Egbin’s chief executive, reckons that without repayment or preferential access to foreign currency he can keep the country’s biggest power station running for just another four weeks. Still, there are glimmers of hope. In recent years the government has raised the price of gas, and supplies are growing more reliable. Distribution companies are installing new meters, which are harder to fiddle. Unpaid public electricity bills are being chased up. Most crucially, tariffs were increased in February by as much as 45%. It did not go down at all well with locals. But if Nigerians can be convinced to pay their bills, it ought to get some cash flowing through the system. That would be a start.Warner Bros watch out! A PIXELLATED helicopter destroys skyscrapers in Kampala. A shoot-out ensues, with cut-and-paste explosions and blood splats. The special effects in “Who Killed Captain Alex?”, a Ugandan action comedy, resemble a 1990s video game. But what do you expect for a budget of less than $200? Isaac Nabwana has written, directed and edited more than 47 films since 2008, featuring everything from flesh-eating zombies to kung-fu kids. His set is the dusty yard outside his home in Wakaliga, a slum that sometimes has month-long power cuts. (Inevitably, the area is now called “Wakaliwood”.) The actors make their own costumes. A local samosa seller, Dauda Bisaso, forges guns and camera tripods from scrap metal. (He has also played villains in 11 of Mr Nabwana’s films.) Make-up artists used to splash on cow blood to simulate wounds. But then someone caught tetanus and they switched to red food colouring. Filmgoers in the slums like lots of violence. They also enjoy live commentary from a “ video joker”, who usually stands in the cinema keeping the tension high. On the soundtrack of “Who Killed Captain Alex?” , VJ Emmie plays the same role. “Action is coming, I promise you,” he assures viewers. Established Kampala distributors once refused to take Luganda-language films featuring unknown actors. Now they clamour to sell Mr Nabwana’s oeuvre. His sales team hawk DVDs door-to-door for 1,500-2,000 shillings (45-60 American cents), keeping 50% of the proceeds. But they have stiff competition: you can buy a DVD with four American or Nigerian films on it for 1,000 shillings. There is also a window of just five to six days in which to maximise sales before pirates copy the work. Harriet Nabwana, Mr Nabwana’s wife and accountant, estimates that 20,000 legitimate copies of a film are usually sold in that crucial first week and around 60,000 in the first month. They still lose money, though. Blank DVDs cost 600 shillings each. Copying equipment, electricity and transport are pricey, too. All the actors have day jobs; Mr Nabwana, a former brickmaker, films music videos. He complains that the police are ignorant or careless of anti-piracy laws. Wakaliwood has been on a steadier footing since raising more than $13,000 on Kickstarter a year ago. The trailer for “Who Killed Captain Alex?” has been watched more than 2.5m times on YouTube. Mr Nabwana can now afford hard drives to back up his films, and a scrap-metal helicopter is taking shape in his yard. His dream is to buy land for a studio to teach the next generation of Ugandan film-makers. Mr Bisaso’s dream is “to be Bruce Willis in Uganda”.Long walk to the detention centre SOME African migrants forge across the Mediterranean in flimsy boats. Others take a somewhat less risky (and cheaper) journey, heading for the bright lights of South Africa. Unemployment may be a shocking 34% south of the Limpopo river, but there are still plenty of opportunities for those who are prepared to work hard. Many migrants follow in the footsteps of their compatriots. Malawians and Mozambicans are often found tending lush suburban gardens. Somalis run tiny convenience stores, known as spaza shops, in black townships. Johannesburg’s “Little Addis” bustles with Ethiopian traders and the sound of Amharic. Congolese and Cameroonian vendors hawk cassava and plantains in Yeoville, another Johannesburg neighbourhood. Zimbabweans, who are typically better educated than their South African peers, can be found totting up company accounts, working as mining engineers or, failing that, waiting on tables. For many Africans, South Africa seems a stable, functional, prosperous place. It is also a potential stepping stone to the rest of the world. Getting there is not easy. Many do it in stages, finding work along the way. Some are arrested and locked up. On South Africa’s border with Zimbabwe migrants must ford crocodile-infested rivers. Happily, the main fence is so tattered that you can simply walk through it. At many posts, border guards demand bribes. Some of the greatest dangers for migrants arise after they arrive. Last year seven people were reportedly killed in a spate of anti-foreigner violence, though the real number is probably much higher since most attacks never make the news. Thousands of immigrants fled their homes and businesses. Among them was Salat Abdullahi, 20, who moved from Somalia to Soweto to run a spaza shop with his older brother. They ran away when xenophobic locals looted and destroyed it. “We came here with nothing, and made a business,” Mr Abdullahi said. “They don’t like that.” After the violence against migrants came a crackdown on the victims: more than 15,000 immigrants were arrested and deported in a government sweep. Many were held in a detention centre notorious for overcrowding, corruption and abuse. Xenophobia has spread since 1994, when the fall of apartheid led to an inflow of black migrants from across the continent. The South African government has discouraged immigration, despite a shortage of home-grown skills, by tightening border controls and laws. It sees foreigners as competing with locals for scarce jobs rather than as boosting the economy with their talent and entrepreneurial nous. Despite a widespread perception among South Africans that their country is packed with immigrants, the latest census found just 2.2m of them, or less than 5% of the population (though people in the country illegally probably don’t confess this to census officers, so the true figure is higher). In Johannesburg, the most cosmopolitan of South African cities, 13% of the population was born abroad. Many of those who come seek asylum: the South African government lets refugees work and even obtain some public services while their papers are being processed. Between 2008 and 2012 South Africa received 778,000 asylum applications, in a system that is slow and riddled with corruption. Despite the well-documented hostility and harassment, foreigners are still more likely to be employed than South Africans. Often they work in the informal sector, or do jobs that locals are not willing to take. Enterprising migrants rent shops from South Africans and thereby create jobs. Johannesburg, built on gold mines and migrant labour, is becoming a truly international city. But local elections this year could be the catalyst for more foreigner-bashing.IN THE eyes of many foreigners, two numbers encapsulate French economic policy over the past decade or so: 75 and 35. The first refers to the top income-tax rate of 75%, promised by François Hollande to seduce the left when he was the Socialist presidential candidate in 2012. The second is the 35-hour maximum working week, devised by a Socialist government in 2000 and later retained by the centre-right. Each has been a totem of French social preferences. Yet, to the consternation of some of his voters, Mr Hollande applied the 75% tax rate for only two years, and then binned it. Now he has drawn up plans that could, in effect, demolish the 35-hour week, too. Mr Hollande’s government is reviewing a draft labour law that would remove a series of constraints French firms face, both when trying to adapt working time to shifting business cycles and when deciding whether to hire staff. In particular, it devolves to firms the right to negotiate longer hours and overtime rates with their own trade unions, rather than having to follow rules dictated by national industry-wide deals. The 35-hour cap would remain in force, but it would become more of a trigger for overtime pay than a rigid constraint on hours worked. These could reach 46 hours a week, for a maximum of 16 weeks. Firms would also have greater freedom to shorten working hours and reduce pay, which can currently be done only in times of “serious economic difficulty”. Emmanuel Macron, the economy minister, has called such measures the “de facto” end of the 35-hour week. At the same time, the law would lower existing high barriers to laying off workers. These discourage firms from creating permanent jobs, and leave huge numbers of “outsiders”, particularly young people, temping. For one thing, it would cap awards for unfair dismissal, which are made by labour tribunals. Laid-off French workers bring such cases frequently; they can take years and cost anything from €2,500 to €310,000 ($2,700 to $337,000) by one estimate. The underlying principle, laid out in government-commissioned reports over the past six months, is simple and radical. The country’s ponderous labour code, currently longer than the Bible, should limit itself to basic protection of workers, and leave bosses and unions within firms to hammer out finer details. This is based on the belief that French employees—only 8% of whom belong to a union—are more pragmatic and flexible than the national union leaders in Paris who supposedly negotiate on their behalf. At a car factory making Smart vehicles in eastern France, for instance, a recent deal to work 39 hours a week was approved by most employees, yet blocked by the firm’s unions. Under the new law, if no deal can be reached with a company’s unions, employees may vote in a binding internal referendum. The draft law does not deal with all the rigidities of the French labour code. Nonetheless, “it’s the most important piece of labour-market legislation for 15 years,” says Ludovic Subran, chief economist at Eurler Hermes, a credit-insurance firm. It is the closest France has got to the reformist Jobs Act rammed through in Italy by Matteo Renzi’s government. And it could be the legacy that Manuel Valls, the ambitious centre-left prime minister, seeks as he and Mr Macron try to steer the Socialists in a more market-friendly direction. The great difficulty is political. For much of the left, the 35-hour week remains not only a badge of progress but the mark of a preference: for shorter hours, more holidays and higher productivity—even at the price of fewer jobs. French productivity per hour remains far higher than Britain’s and even a touch above Germany’s (though yearly hours worked in France are lower, and the unemployment rate twice as high). In fact, the French already work more than 35 hours a week on average, partly because so many employees get extra holidays to compensate. White-collar employees at EDF, an energy firm, average 39 working hours a week, but until recently got 23 extra days off each year on top of the statutory five weeks’ holiday. (A hard-won deal has reduced this to a mere 16.) Managing so much absence has become an art. “Employees prefer to work less, earn less and have more time,” says Pierre Vauterin, who runs a firm that makes ball bearings on the outskirts of Paris. Challenging this doctrine is becoming a stinging headache. Already, Mr Valls has postponed the presentation of his draft law to the cabinet, thanks to an uproar within his own party and the threat of street protests by unions and students. In a barbed article in Le Monde, Martine Aubry, mayor of Lille and architect of the 35-hour week, accused him of selling out socialist ideals. “Who could imagine”, she asked, “that making redundancies easier…will encourage employment?” Mr Hollande is enfeebled. Even France’s more moderate unionists are wary. If Mr Valls waters down the draft, his reformist credentials will be damaged. If he pushes ahead, he could find himself with a choice between unmanageable unrest—or resignation.WHEN polling stations closed on February 26th, Fine Gael and Labour, the two parties that have governed Ireland since 2011, were hoping for a surprise result like the one Britain’s Conservatives achieved last May. They had come to power with the largest majority in Irish history, but five years of austerity had drained their support. Instead, the result was worse than expected: the political fragmentation seen in recent elections across Europe hit both parties hard. Fine Gael, a centre-right party whose leader Enda Kenny has been taoiseach (prime minister) since 2011, lost nearly a third of its vote. Labour, its centre-left partner, suffered worse still, losing two-thirds. The polls had predicted Labour’s rout, but for Fine Gael the shock was greater. Its gaffe-prone campaign was clearly not up to scratch: at one point Mr Kenny managed to insult some of his own constituents as champion “whingers”. Fine Gael relied on broadcast messages aimed at all voters. This proved less effective than the Conservatives’ campaign last year, which targeted swing voters with tailored messages. More tellingly, Fine Gael’s slogan, “Let’s keep the recovery going”, which it borrowed from the Conservatives, failed to resonate. As in recent elections in Portugal and Spain, the emphasis on economic competence fell flat with voters, says Dan O’Brien of the Institute of International and European Affairs, a Dublin think-tank. Although Ireland recorded GDP growth of nearly 7% in 2015, one exit poll found that only 26% of voters felt better off than a year ago. The country’s GDP figures include profits of multinational firms headquartered for tax reasons in Ireland, but much of that money never reaches the Irish. GNP, which excludes income earned by foreigners, has been flat in real terms since the end of 2014. The opposition exploited the feeling that many were being left out of the recovery. Fianna Fail, the populist centrist party that dominated Irish politics before the financial crisis, gained 24 seats. Sinn Fein, a hard-left nationalist party with strong working-class support, gained seats too, though not as many as it had hoped. Smaller left-leaning parties such as the AAA-PBP and a wide range of independents also did well, gaining a record 30% of the vote. Because the anti-government vote was split between so many parties, Fine Gael still has the most seats. As in Spain, it is thus unclear who will form the government. Although Fine Gael and Fianna Fail together have a majority of 30, a grand coalition would be difficult. Both parties’ activists are tribal, and have been since their split during the civil war of the early 1920s. Besides, Fianna Fail fears it would lose support if it became Fine Gael’s junior coalition partner, just as the (Irish) Labour party has since 2011. Both have also ruled out any coalition involving Sinn Fein, which they see as fiscally irresponsible and tainted by links to violence and the IRA in Northern Ireland. Fianna Fail says it does not want to leave Sinn Fein as the only official opposition party either. That appears to leave one solution: some sort of temporary deal between Fine Gael and Fianna Fail, with another election called after the budget later this year. The political uncertainty comes at a bad time. Slowing growth will limit what Ireland can do without breaching its EU deficit targets. And political fragmentation threatens a return to the politics of giveaways, when Ireland should instead be running a surplus to prepare for the next downturn, says Colm McCarthy of University College Dublin. Euro membership puts Irish policymakers under pressure to show much greater fiscal discipline. Whether Irish politics can withstand the pressure is unclear.GREECE’S migrant crisis is getting worse. Macedonia has closed its border to all but a trickle of migrants, following the example of Austria and other countries along the so-called West Balkans route to Germany. Yet desperate Syrians and Iraqis continue to arrive at the Idomeni crossing point. On February 29th Macedonian police used tear gas against scores of migrants trying to break down the border fence. As The Economist went to press, more than 12,000 people were crammed into a tent camp with facilities for only 1,500. Food is in short supply. “It’s a tense situation,” says Panagiota Siafaka, a social worker with the UN High Commission for Refugees. So long as the border remained open, Greece could manage the flow of arrivals from Turkey. Now almost 30,000 migrants are bottled up in Greece. Nikos Kotzias, the foreign minister, expects the number to reach 150,000; local aid agencies worry that 200,000 people may arrive in March alone. Reception centres around Athens for migrants are hopelessly overcrowded. Half a dozen new ones, mostly refurbished former military camps, are quickly filling up. Local and international charities provide food and medical care. “The state seems absent, but luckily ordinary people are here every day to help,” says Mariana, a paediatrician working at Piraeus port, gesturing towards a group of elderly Greek women handing out bananas and chocolate bars to harassed mothers in headscarves. Things will improve, if only gradually. Greece expects to receive a large chunk of the EU’s new €700m ($760m), three-year humanitarian aid package for countries that host a lot of migrants. Of that, €300m would be spent this year. Athens-based aid agencies hope that funds will bypass the slow-moving Greek bureaucracy, going straight to needy migrants in the form of vouchers for food and housing. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers But stemming the flow of migrants from Turkey is proving hard. A NATO naval mission was due to begin monitoring the strait between Greece and Turkey on February 29th, electronically locating smugglers’ boats so Turkish coastguards could nudge them back to shore. But on March 2nd the NATO vessels were still in port. The Greek defence ministry said Turkey had raised “technical problems”. EU leaders hope for a breakthrough at a summit on March 7th with Ahmet Davutoglu, Turkey’s prime minister. The Turkish government has yet to crack down on the people-smugglers. Diplomats in Athens believe the Turks will make a deal conditional on EU countries resettling Syrians from refugee camps in southern Turkey. Meanwhile, Turkey has agreed to take back economic migrants who crossed to the Greek islands from Turkey. After weeks of bureaucratic exchanges between the Greek and Turkish police, a first group of 270 Moroccans, Tunisians and Algerians were handed into Turkish custody on March 2nd at the land border in Thrace. A group of 150 Pakistanis will be next. It is a modest start, yet even a small reduction in numbers helps relieve Greece’s migrant burden.MORE herbicides contain glyphosate, a weedkilling chemical, than any other agent. Monsanto, an agricultural giant, first sold Roundup, a product containing the stuff, to farmers in the 1970s. Since then use of glyphosate-based concoctions has increased about 100-fold; gardeners as well as farmers have taken to it for killing weeds and keeping paths clear. The firm’s last patent on it expired in 2000, and farmers from Brazil to Russia spray it as never before. But as larger quantities are used, concerns grow over the harm some say it may cause. On March 7th a European Union (EU) committee will vote on whether to renew approval of glyphosate for the next 15 years. Farmers value glyphosate for reasons that have changed since it first appeared. Once a kill-all for unwanted weeds, it was transformed in 1996 when Monsanto developed genetically engineered crops able to withstand it. In 2014 selling Roundup and modified seeds earned the company $5 billion in America alone. It is also useful in drying crops before harvests. Estimates suggest that two-thirds of all the glyphosate ever sprayed in America has been applied in the past ten years. Glyphosate’s benefits vary depending on what crop it is sprayed on. But no organisation tracks pesticide use by type across Europe, making comparisons difficult. Monsanto claims that using glyphosate can raise crop yields between 30% and 60%—a huge boost. According to a 2011 estimate by Michael Schmitz, head of the Institute of Agribusiness, a German research organisation, a ban on glyphosate in the EU could cause annual losses of €1 billion-3.1 billion ($1.1 billion-3.4 billion). Some scientists claim that dousing crops in glyphosate may be harmful, however. It lingers in soils and water for much longer than studies once suggested. Low levels of the stuff have been detected in products from bread to pantyliners. And as resistance to glyphosate increases in plants, as it has in recent decades, changes to cropping and tillage patterns may be needed—alongside gallons of other pesticides—to ensure good harvests. The hottest debate surrounds glyphosate and human health. Last July the WHO’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) found that the herbicide is “probably” carcinogenic. But six months later the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), which oversees the assessment of active chemical substances within the EU, cleared glyphosate of causing cancer. The two bodies traded furious letters throughout January and February; the spat is unprecedented. IARC argues that the research on which EFSA based its decision, completed by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, ignored an association between non-Hodgkin lymphoma and glyphosate seen in certain research and relied on studies not publicly available, while it denigrated peer-reviewed ones. The furore led France’s Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety (ANSES) to step in. It concluded that glyphosate “arguably could be classified” as a substance “suspected of being carcinogenic to humans”. EFSA plays an active role in the EU’s pesticide-approval process; IARC does not. But the European Ombudsman, Emily O’Reilly, found that process flawed after a long inquiry that ended on February 22nd. She criticised the European Commission for approving chemicals before there was “sufficient information to say that they were completely safe”. The authority now has until 2018 to ensure that those keen to clear a substance provide more data to show that it is harmless. The dispute suggests that more research is needed. For one thing, certain ingredients with which glyphosate is mixed to form pesticides are more toxic to humans than the substance itself. But regulators examine only the compound, not the cocktail. For another, traditional toxicological tests could miss the weedkiller’s possible effects on endocrinological, reproductive and developmental systems. Others, too, struggle with what to do about glyphosate. The Canadians have little problem with it. America’s Environmental Protection Agency failed to produce a planned risk assessment on it last year. California’s ultra-cautious environmental agency added the herbicide to a list of carcinogens last September. Monsanto is challenging the move in court. Robust studies into glyphosate’s effects should be considered carefully alongside better data on the role it plays in feeding the world. The ways farmers use the compound have evolved. The ways regulators evaluate its safety should, too.MORE than 1m refugees arrived in Germany last year, mainly young Muslim men. They entered a society that, relative to other Western countries, has embraced multiculturalism only recently. Suddenly these foreigners are in co-ed schools, discos, swimming pools, hospitals and parks. Some of their interactions with their hosts go easily. Others do not—as epitomised by New Year’s Eve in Cologne, where gangs of North African men sexually assaulted scores of German women who had come to watch the fireworks. Germans who only a year ago oozed confidence about their economy and their country are now losing faith that they “can manage”, as Angela Merkel, the chancellor, likes to put it. Many fear the crisis will render Germany unrecognisable. A sense of loss pervades many conversations. To grasp this trauma it helps to understand the German zeitgeist that developed (mainly in the former West Germany) in the post-war years, and lingered in the reunited country. Germans call it Heile Welt. The term means something like “wholesome world”, and describes an orderly, idyllic state. It may connote the nurturing environment parents create for their children to protect them from life’s ugliness, or a private oasis of peace amid public chaos. It was a state of mind that Germans clung to after the second world war. Because it implies a degree of escapism, the term can be used sardonically. In 1973 Loriot, West Germany’s most incisive humourist, chose it for the title of an anthology of cartoons skewering his country’s bourgeois pretensions. In 1998 it was the title of a novel by Walter Kempowski, set in 1961, in which a teacher moves to an idyllic village but discovers that behind every silence and glance lurks a demon of the Nazi past. In the immediate post-war years, with Holocaust, firebombing, mass rape and the carving up of their nation still recent memories, Germans flocked to watch Heimat (“homeland”) films. Usually shot in the Alps or in heaths and forests, they featured clean, simple tales of love and friendship between pure women and men dressed in regional garb. Outside the cinemas, Germans revelled in their “economic miracle”, as they rebuilt a devastated country into a commercial powerhouse. Foreigners were allowed into this Heile Welt, but not entirely accepted. To man its assembly lines, Germany invited workers from southern Europe and especially Turkey. The millionth arrived in 1964 and got a motorcycle as a gift. By the time the programme ended in 1973, 4m foreigners lived in West Germany. But they were called “guest workers” rather than immigrants, on the premise that they would ultimately leave again. Unsurprisingly, most stayed. Yet mainstream Germany continued to see itself as ethnically homogenous—a Heile Welt in a tribal sense. As part of Heile Welt, West Germans atoned for their past by becoming good democrats, good Europeans and ardent pacifists. But they did so like a teenager who experiments with increasing autonomy, confident that his uncool but protective parents are always standing by. For West Germany, dad was America, which held its aegis over the country throughout the cold war. Mum was France, which despite its nervous vanity gracefully accepted Germany back into the European family. The dystopian flip side of Heile Welt was never far away. If the cold war had ever turned hot, Germany would have been vaporised first. (“The shorter the range, the deader the Germans,” missile strategists used to quip.) West Germany even had terrorism. But its terrorists were native white leftists who killed industrial tycoons. Ordinary Germans never felt threatened. In their private lives Germans created micro-idylls. They kept garden plots orderly, guarded by the requisite gnome. East Germans seeking refuge from the cynically implausible Heile Welt offered by communism retreated to “the niches”: private book readings among intellectuals, or nude bathing with friends by pristine lakes. East or west, order was paramount. Visitors were impressed (if not intimidated) by how fastidiously Germans separated their white, brown and green glass for recycling. One by one, these facets of Heile Welt are becoming brittle. Russia is aggressive again; Germans fret that, when it comes to it, the ageing American dad may not show up. Having cultivated non-violence to the point of pacifism, they now realise that defence of their state and their values may someday require them to fight, kill and die again. The terrorists they now face are not German leftists, but foreigners ready to kill women and children. Globalisation no longer just means exporting BMWs, but also allowing in Muslim refugees, some of them with attitudes on gender and Jews that Germans find offensive. Gnomic wisdom Some Germans react by fleeing into ever tinier Heile Welten. “We are becoming ever more like our garden gnomes,” says Wolfgang Nowak, one of Germany’s most astute social observers—inward-facing rather than open-minded. Every Monday a movement called Pegida, or “Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the Occident”, marches through Dresden. For many in the surrounding area of Saxony, these gatherings have become convivial rituals similar to American tailgate barbecues, but to outsiders they appear xenophobic and menacing. Even moderate Germans are turning against globalisation. Many see a free-trade area being negotiated between America and the EU not as an opportunity but as yet another threat to their way of life. Above all, the tone of German conversations is changing. Language in the era of Heile Welt was sanitised, with political correctness often taken to ludicrous extremes. Now, in the name of “telling it as it is”, it is becoming coarser and aggressive. It is not clear what kind of world will replace the wholesome one the Germans once dreamed up. But it will be a rougher one.
