IF YOU want to get rich, goes a Chinese saying, first build a road. George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor, seems to agree. He seldom misses a chance to put on a hard hat and proclaim the virtues of more roads and railways. His idea of a “Northern Powerhouse” would boost the north of England with a big new transport network that better connects the region. Certainly, if people are not stuck in traffic jams or can work in peace on a train they can get more done, leading to higher productivity and increased wages. Yet for all the rhetoric, in recent years British infrastructure has been deteriorating. Roads are more clogged: the percentage of journeys on main routes that are classed as “on time” has fallen by six percentage points since 2010. Trains are getting more crowded, too: a quarter of trains arriving in London in rush hour are overcrowded, up from a fifth in 2010. Commuters are putting up with creaky carriages: in 2005-15 the average age of the rolling stock rose from 15 to 20 years. The number of local buses has fallen by 2.5% since 2010, even though the population has grown by 3%. The World Economic Forum ranks the quality of Britain’s overall infrastructure 24th in the world, down from 19th in 2006, and behind Iceland and America (which is 13th). It is unlikely that things will improve soon. When the coalition government came to power in 2010, Britain was already one of the lowest spenders on infrastructure in Europe. But as Mr Osborne tries to balance the books, public-sector investment is projected to fall from 3.2% of GDP in 2010 to just 1.4% in 2020. A small infrastructure budget is not necessarily a bad thing, if the money is used wisely. This often means spending on unsexy things—improving traffic lights and so forth—rather than big, expensive undertakings. In 2006 Sir Rod Eddington, an Australian businessman, published a government-backed review of Britain’s infrastructure provision, warning against grands projets for having cost-benefit ratios that are often worse than other less-exciting transport projects. Politicians like to be photographed at big digs, but the returns from such projects are hard to predict. Sometimes there is no option but to build big. On many London Underground lines—which already run as many as 30 trains an hour—it is hard to make incremental improvements; the only sensible way to create new capacity is to build a new line, as the government is doing now with Crossrail, an east-to-west London link. Still, it has mostly ignored the recommendations of the Eddington review, says John Van Reenen of the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics, instead focusing its energy on larger, shinier projects. The addition of a third runway at Heathrow airport, for example, would cost over £20 billion ($28 billion). Transport for the North, the infrastructure arm of the powerhouse idea, envisages building an 18-mile road tunnel, perhaps Europe’s longest, under the Pennine hills, and constructing other expensive new highways. The tunnel alone could cost up to £6 billion. Meanwhile, £1.5 billion is likely to be spent improving a few miles of road between Cambridge and Huntingdon. Government figures suggest that since 2011 the expected cost of the average public infrastructure project has roughly doubled. As a result less money is available for smaller upgrades. Funding for local roads has been cut by 20% in real terms since 2010. Analysis by the RAC Foundation, an independent think-tank, found that the number of potholes being filled in per year has increased fourfold since 2005, suggesting that costly, long-term repair is being sacrificed in favour of patching up. Government support for local bus services is down by 20% in five years. Not down the tubes Another consequence of tighter budgets is that the state relies more heavily on the private sector to fund infrastructure projects. An extension to the Northern Line of the London Underground is a good example. The Greater London Authority is borrowing £1 billion. But that will ultimately be repaid, largely by the scheme’s direct beneficiaries, in the form of an uplift in business rates alongside developer contributions, says Alexander Jan of Arup, a consultancy. Ultimately, the government will pay little towards the project from general taxation. Prosperous cities are most likely to be able to generate big contributions from the private sector and thus better infrastructure, says Mr Jan; poor places may miss out. In recent years, government figures suggest, London has taken up a bigger share of Britain’s overall infrastructure spend. Business gripes that, although it may be expected to shoulder more of the cost, it is not always consulted enough. Kate Willard, an executive at Stobart Group, which runs airports and other big projects, argues that politicians do not take sufficient account of future shopping patterns and retail trends when making their infrastructure plans. Andy Clarke, the head of Asda, a supermarket chain, believes that productivity could be boosted as much by getting high-speed broadband as by building HS2, the £50 billion new railway being built between London and the Midlands. Stand up for your rights Fortunately, as well as building shiny new stuff there are also low-cost ways of improving infrastructure. Transport nerds favour ripping seats out of certain carriages in commuter trains, making them look more like Underground trains and thus increasing their capacity (though with little regard for passengers’ comfort). Those willing to stand could pay less. “Smart motorways”, which were first deployed in 2006, use the hard shoulder as an extra lane at busy times. One plan popular with economists is to use “dynamic pricing”—similar to that used by taxi apps—where prices rise at peak times to discourage people from travelling. Thanks to a series of subtle changes, this could soon be a reality across Britain. In 2015 the Highways Agency, which manages motorways, was converted into a free-standing company owned by the state (renamed Highways England), meaning it has secure funding for the foreseeable future. Road tax, which is now largely payable electronically and enforced with cameras that recognise number plates, will be earmarked for Highways England, says Mr Jan. In theory, the stage is set for the government to start charging for using certain roads. Many are hoping that Mr Osborne will make such a change in his budget on March 16th. Dynamic pricing for rail travel seems off the table, though: the government considered a plan for “super-peak” tickets, only to drop it in 2013. If, as seems probable, a big boost of public money does not arrive, Britain will have to take such radical decisions. Creaky infrastructure is already weighing on productivity and wages. Without a change of direction, the load will get ever heavier.“WHAT I want is facts…facts alone are wanted in life.” Thomas Gradgrind’s grim message in Charles Dickens’s “Hard Times” is echoed in the debate ahead of the referendum on June 23rd about whether Britain should leave the European Union. Voters confused by claims made by opposing sides and in the media are asking for plain facts on Britain’s EU membership so they can make up their minds. Sadly, hard facts are hard to find. There is a good reason for this: nobody knows what would happen post-Brexit. That is especially true of the trade deal that Britain would have to negotiate with the EU—and how long that might take (the government this week suggested up to ten years). But there is also a bad reason: that the uncertainty lets all sides distort, exaggerate or simply make up their own facts. Three examples illustrate this. The first is an old assertion that 3m jobs in Britain depend on trade with the EU. In fact, because of the close links among European economies, many economists reckon the true figure is higher. Yet the claim sometimes made by pro-EU voices that all these jobs would be at risk post-Brexit is a nonsense. Nobody can plausibly argue that all trade with the EU would cease. Anyway, job creation depends more on demand, wage levels and labour laws than on membership of a trade block. The second example concerns the British contribution to the EU budget. Leavers claim that Britain pays an unfairly large amount of almost £20 billion ($28 billion) a year to Brussels, or £55m a day. In fact this is the gross amount before deducting both the rebate won by Margaret Thatcher in 1984 and the money the EU spends in Britain. Adjusting for these, and for the funnelling of some foreign-aid spending via Brussels, the net payment is less than one-third as big, at £17m a day—and Britain is only the eighth-largest contributor per head. The third example is competing claims about trade patterns. Remain campaigners say the EU takes 45-50% of British exports, whereas Britain accounts for a tenth or less of the EU’s. Yet Nigel Farage, leader of the anti-EU UK Independence Party, has said Britain takes 20% of EU exports, giving it a stronger hand in future trade talks. One issue here is which source to use: Europe’s statistical office, the British government and the IMF all have different figures. Another is whether to cover just goods or to add services. But the biggest question is whether to count the EU as a block, discounting all intra-EU exports. Doing that puts the share of EU exports going to Britain at almost 16%. But John Springford of the Centre for European Reform, a think-tank, points out that, in trade negotiations, individual countries, not the EU as a whole, decide what to accept. Britain’s share of all other EU countries’ exports is only around 8%, he says (our chart, using IMF figures, puts it even lower), and in many individual cases a lot less, leaving it in a weaker bargaining position. The arguments over facts in these areas are as nothing compared with the differences on migration and sovereignty—nor compared with the bitter rows within the Tory party (see article). What should undecided or poorly informed voters do? Fortunately, there are some good sources they can turn to. Two websites, the broadly neutral fullfact.org and the pro-EU infacts.org, both puncture myths in the debate. The House of Commons library produces excellent reports, which are available online. And a group of academics led by Anand Menon of King’s College, London, have set up “The UK in a Changing Europe”, financed by the Economic and Social Research Council, which has a lively website. The Economist is not neutral in this debate: we believe Brexit would be bad for Britain, Europe and the world. But we also want to explain the issues and present the facts. So over the next four months, we will publish a series of Brexit briefs that seek to do this, as dispassionately as possible—in the hope of satisfying even the Gradgrinds among our readers.Two-bedroom flats a steal “I CAN’T imagine it not being there,” says Kathy Daly, a resident of north London for 64 years, reflecting the feelings of many living around Holloway prison. This summer, the largest women’s prison in western Europe, first built in 1852, will close, to make way for new homes. The move is part of a bigger drive to sell off government assets. In its spending review in November, the government encouraged departments to find land and property to vacate and sell, with the aim of raising around £5 billion ($7 billion) up to 2020. Financial and corporate assets are also being flogged to the private sector: this financial year the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), the government’s independent forecaster, thinks the Treasury will raise £30 billion from selling assets like shares in Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland—which were bought during the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009—and Royal Mail, with an extra £47 billion expected over the next five years. These asset sales will provide cash that George Osborne, the chancellor, can use to pay down public debt, which swelled from 37% of GDP in 2007 to 83% this year. Selling off state assets can benefit society, if private owners can whip them into better shape. The decision also rests on the difference between the returns to the asset and the government’s own borrowing costs; there is less urgency in paying down public debt while interest rates are so low. Any big improvement in the public finances will usually be largely illusory; debt might drop, but selling will swap a future flow of income for up-front cash. The government balance-sheet will be restructured, not necessarily improved. In November the government boasted that the land released by departments could free up space for 161,000 new homes, spurring economic growth. The proceeds from selling older prisons will be ploughed back into building nine shiny new ones, which the government hopes will save £80m in running costs each year. The newer prisons will be in cheaper locations; some women in Holloway prison will be relocated to a prison in Sutton, a south-western suburb, where a two-bedroom flat costs £300,000, compared with £600,000 in Holloway. But rows are already brewing; sometimes public services add extra social value by being located in prime spots; some worry about moving prisoners far from their families. And there are questions over how many affordable homes will be built on the Holloway site. Ms Daly is not keen on the idea of luxury flats beyond the means of local residents. Language used by senior members of the government indicates that there might be more to gain than just a leaner state. In a leaked letter to the county council in his local constituency, the prime minister, David Cameron, complained that local services were being cut without considering “savings” that could be made in the form of asset sales. In his leaked response, the council leader echoed the words of economists before and since, that “capital income cannot be used to support revenue costs—it is neither legal, nor sustainable, in the long term since they are one-off receipts”. Although some dispute whether the government is right to be selling its land, few would argue for holding on to the bank shares for ever. Buying the assets was meant to preserve financial stability, but now things are calmer the case for owning them has weakened. The government is keen to get the most from the sales. After market turmoil, on January 28th Mr Osborne announced that he would delay the sale of a tranche of Lloyds shares. Cynics suspect that the chancellor is interested in more than maximising value. One of his fiscal targets is to have debt falling as a share of GDP in every year after 2015–16, but in December the OBR pointed out that this year he would only achieve this because of planned asset sales. And it also pointed out that offering some of the shares at a discount (not to mention giving away some shares in Royal Mail) actually worsens the public finances. In some cases the struggle to achieve good value for money has prevented a quick sale. The government announced its plans to sell the student-loan book back in 2013. Currently the OBR predicts that investors would give the government around £12 billion in exchange for student-loan repayments, worth around £1.5 billion each year by 2020–21. It is unclear how much extra value could be squeezed from the asset by a private buyer, though a spokesman for the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills said unfavourable market conditions were the main reason for the delay. One worry is that the government will get a poor deal as it unloads treasures onto the private sector. An internal government evaluation of its stake in Eurostar priced it at £305m, and then saw it sold for nearly double that. The Treasury has since set up bodies to manage such sales. On February 26th Mr Osborne warned of looming “storm clouds” hurting economic growth and requiring bigger cuts to spending. The government owns £1.3 trillion of assets—the Ministry of Defence alone owns roughly 1% of all land in Britain—so speeding up the sell-off might look tempting. But a fire sale would burn a hole in the public finances, not fix them.AT CHARTER Academy, a small, immaculately kept secondary school in Portsmouth, children who qualify for free school meals—63% of the school’s pupils—are also given a free uniform. Mums are invited in to chat about their children’s progress over a glass of wine; dads prefer watching their children on boxing nights, says Dame Sharon Hollows, the school’s headteacher. “A lot of the parents had a poor experience at school, it’s about making them feel more comfortable,” she adds. If a child is taken into care, someone from the school takes them shopping to make sure they have enough clothes. When a child doesn’t turn up to school, staff head out in a leased car to look for them. The turnaround has been fast: in 2009, the year the school became an academy, 23 children applied for 120 places; last year, 200 applied. During a 2014 visit to the school, the prime minister, David Cameron hailed the “extraordinary achievement”. Some of these measures would have been introduced anyway, but many have been made possible by the huge boost to the school’s funding provided by the “pupil premium”, says Dame Sharon. The policy was introduced by the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition in 2011 to improve the academic performance of the poorest children. Schools receive additional funding for every child on free school meals (now £1,320—or $1,850—for primary schools, and £935 for secondary schools) and can spend the money how they see fit, with parents, governors and inspectors keeping tabs. In 2014-15, £2.5 billion was spent on the policy, 6% of the schools budget. Nick Clegg, the former deputy prime minister, called the premium one of his proudest legacies. Evidence suggests academic progress may be slow. The gap between children on free school meals and others at GCSE—the exams taken aged 16—has remained high if measured by the percentage of children attaining five A*-C grades. Indeed, the gap between the performance of rich and poor children in Britain is larger than average for the OECD club of mostly rich countries. But there are signs of progress: the gap in exam results taken aged 11 has narrowed, as has GCSE performance if measured by results in eight core subjects. Headteachers appreciate the flexibility the funding gives them. “It has allowed us to be much more creative, to take more risks,” says Hazel Pulley of Parkfield Community School in Birmingham. One of the school’s successful interventions was hiring teachers to work solely on communication in early years, since most of its pupils don’t speak English as a first language. Many schools use the money to help individual pupils: one in Sheffield bought a bike for a pupil struggling to care for his siblings and get to school on time. Meanwhile, the government has poured funding into studies looking at how best to spend money, providing the Educational Endowment Foundation (EEF), a charity, with £137m. It collates evidence from abroad and funds studies at home: around one-quarter of English schools are involved in randomised control trials run by the charity. Schools increasingly turn to the research for guidance: two-thirds now consult the EEF’s advice, up from one-third in 2012, according to a report by the National Audit Office (NAO), which scrutinises government spending. Surveys by the National Foundation for Educational Research, a charity, found that the most common interventions in the first years of the pupil premium were to reduce class sizes and increase numbers of support staff—neither of which are judged to be effective by the EEF. Now schools are more likely to put in place one-to-one tuition and pupil feedback—both of which are highly rated. Yet, for some headteachers, “the idea that you turn to evidence is just not part of the culture,” says Sir Kevan Collins of the EEF. A number of cheap, effective approaches, such as using older children to tutor younger ones, are still rarely used. Some 44% of schools have spent part of the pupil premium sprucing up classrooms or the school environment, which has little impact on student performance. Nearly eight in ten schools use the extra money to support activities that benefit all pupils, which makes sense only where there are many pupils on free school meals. Some argue that pupil-premium spending should be subject to tighter scrutiny. Others suggest that schools have become too reliant on research by the EEF for evidence of what works. Yet such debates are partly proof of the premium’s success. How to raise the attainment of children from poor backgrounds is now a focus for educators. Before the premium, 57% of school leaders said they aimed support at their most disadvantaged pupils; 94% now do, says the NAO. With such a wide gap in attainment between children from rich and poor families, that is no bad thing.BRITAIN’S big supermarkets have had a dismal few years. Aldi and Lidl, two upstart German-owned discounters, have taken huge bites out of their market share, margins have been squeezed and record losses have mounted. One refuge, however, was in online shopping, which Aldi and Lidl have been reluctant to embrace, despite the fact that British consumers are Europe’s most enthusiastic e-shoppers. Online grocery sales have been growing strongly, and the likes of Tesco, the biggest supermarket, and Sainsbury’s, have taken full advantage. Tesco, which runs a “Click+Collect” service, has about 40% of the online market. Now, however, that refuge is looking less safe. On February 29th Amazon, an American online retailer, announced that it will start selling fresh food and groceries as well, in a tie-up with the fourth-largest British supermarket, Morrisons. Thus Amazon, with deep pockets and a wealth of experience offering food online in American cities, will now go head-to-head with Tesco and others. The move had been expected, but that will be of no comfort to its new rivals. Shares in Tesco and Sainsbury’s were down on the news, while shares in Ocado, an online-only grocer, plummeted by about 10%. Shares in Morrisons rose. It has suffered more than most at the hands of Lidl and Aldi, selling, as it does, to the same customers in the same areas of the country. Yet the deal with Amazon gives it a straightforward new sales channel into the online market. Morrisons also makes its own food products, and under the new agreement it will supply fresh and frozen foods to Amazon to sell on its Prime Now and Pantry services. Until now, the Pantry service had offered only household goods such as cleaning products, drinks and pet food. Morrisons has an existing arrangement to sell its groceries to Ocado, and there are fears that the Amazon deal could undermine that. But Ocado hopes that the intervention of the American giant will just increase the market instead. For Amazon, this is probably just the beginning of its journey into Britain’s grocery market, which is worth about £180 billion ($254 billion) a year. “It is a real race now,” says Ray Gaul, an analyst at Kantar Retail, of the online market. And to add to the competitive pressures, the Amazon move comes only a month after Aldi launched its first British online-shopping service. This is, for the moment, limited to wine, offering hefty discounts on boxes of six, but there will undoubtedly be more to come. The north of England used to be the bastion of Aldi and Lidl, but Aldi is now advertising this service heavily in London, Tesco’s and Sainsbury’s backyard. The two discounters also have ambitious plans to open many more shops in the capital. The new competition should be good for online shoppers, but less so, perhaps, for the 3m or so people who work in retailing. The same day as the Amazon announcement, the British Retail Consortium, a trade body, published a report predicting that 900,000 jobs could be lost in the industry by 2025. The authors blame this partly on the cost of the new “national living wage” and apprenticeship levies, but also the rise in online shopping and the increasing costs of running shops on the high street. Avocados and cheese twists straight to the door won’t be helping everyone.Less strain than the train BULLDOZERS and demolition teams moved into the migrant camp at the French port of Calais on February 29th, part of the latest attempt to resolve the problems that have plagued the port for years. Migrants breaking into lorries and rushing the rail tunnel to England have caused frequent delays to rail services, affecting schedules nearly every week last summer. Yet scenes of burning tents and migrants scaling fences have done little to dampen a little-expected commercial resurgence: for cross-channel ferry firms. When the Channel Tunnel opened in 1994 between Folkestone and Calais, many thought that the speed and convenience of rail travel would put ferries out of business. In the late 1990s the tunnel and the advent of cut-price air fares hit the ferry market hard (see chart). But as new figures published last week show, ferry companies sailing to and from Dover, at least, have managed to stay afloat. They have even seen demand grow since 2012. Operators believe that ferries will always have a role providing extra capacity. This is partly because it is still cheaper, on average, to cross the channel by boat than by train, says Torben Carlsen, chief financial officer at DFDS, a ferry company. The average price of taking a car with two passengers on the ferry from Kent to France is less than £50 ($70); the standard fare for taking the tunnel is £76. Many drivers do not like the shuttle services through the tunnel, either because they fear boarding the train will damage their vehicles or because it is less comfortable: the tunnel often gets very hot and there are no catering services onboard the trains. P&O, DFDS’s main rival on the route, has started to emphasise the comparative comfort of ferry travel in its advertising, trying to borrow the glamorous image of cruising for its more mundane voyages. This has also helped boost ancillary revenues. Although the end of duty-free shopping within the EU in 1999 cut profits from onboard shops, new revenue streams, including posher restaurants, Wi-Fi and business-lounge entry, have helped make up the difference. Ferry firms have been hit by migrant problems, too. Immigrants have regularly tried to stow away in cars and lorries waiting to board ferries at Calais; in January dozens of them managed to storm the gangway onto P&O’s Pride of Britain. The disruption led to the delay or cancellation of many sailings. Wildcat strikes by workers in Calais also contributed to a dip in ferry services last summer, as did the EU’s decision to close down MyFerryLink, a service owned by Eurotunnel (which also owns the Channel Tunnel) for anti-competitive behaviour last July. The disruptions particularly affected cross-channel freight traffic, some of which was forced to use other ferry routes or air freight. However, the chaos in Calais failed to deter passengers from taking a boat to other destinations. Although numbers on the DoverCalais route fell by 800,000 in 2015, demand grew by a similar amount between Dover and Dunkirk. Maintaining their market share helped ferry firms swing back into profit for the first time since the financial crisis. P&O made £13m in profit in 2015 after a loss of £10m the year before. DFDS broke even on its cross-channel routes for the first time ever, on the back of lower fuel costs and higher occupancy rates. Both firms are ramping up capacity in the expectation that clearance of the migrant camps will mean less disruption this summer, for both trains and boats. Two new ships have entered service with DFDS in February to meet the expected demand. It seems it will take more than a tunnel to put an end to Britain’s long-running ferry services.EYES hooded, features blade-sharp and shoulders square, Margaret Thatcher looked every bit her caricature as she addressed the House of Commons on October 30th 1990. Just returned from a European summit in Rome, she sounded it, too. The prime minister took aim at the Commission’s federal ambitions and boomed her dissent: “No. No. No.” So stark was this objection to the continent’s integration that Geoffrey Howe, her former foreign secretary, resigned two days later, triggering her fall from office. Partly because of the drama of those days, Europe has since transfixed and sundered the Conservative Party. That seems especially so now, as Britain’s in-out referendum campaign gets rolling. Having promised the vote three years ago in an (apparently vain) attempt to cure the Tories of their neurosis, David Cameron hoped to limit support for Brexit to his party’s margins. But at the latest count a little under half of his 330 MPs are for Out, among them two big names: Michael Gove, the justice secretary, and Boris Johnson, London’s mayor. Merely disappointed in the former (a convinced eurosceptic), the prime minister is incandescent at the latter (a political opportunist). In a statement to the Commons on February 22nd he issued a string of barely veiled attacks on Mr Johnson’s arguments and motives as his target looked on, rather sheepishly, from the back benches. The family feud will only intensify in the months leading up to the referendum on June 23rd. Piqued by Mr Cameron’s barbs, the popular mayor is now throwing his full weight behind the Out campaign. On March 1st he dismissed dire government warnings about the risks of Brexit as baloney. Meanwhile otherwise loyal MPs mock the prime minister’s “renegotiation” of Britain’s EU membership with Trump-esque scorn. Out in the country some six in ten Tory members plan to vote to leave the EU according to YouGov. Strategists worry about how to “heal the wounds” after the referendum. So it is tempting to see the surprisingly sudden and vitriolic confrontation between parts of the party as the latest chapter in its long history of eruptions over Europe. That story encompasses first Thatcher and her Europhile assassins, then John—now Sir John—Major and the anti-Brussels “bastards”, as he called them, in his cabinet and later the party’s irritable 13 years in opposition. But what is happening now is different. Take the comparison with the Major years. In the 1990s the Conservative fringe was calling for Brexit, but a significant section of the party also remained wedded to the European ideal. In 1994, two years after Britain’s humiliating crash out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, the forerunner to the euro, almost a third of Tory members supported further integration and almost a quarter wanted a federal Europe. Although Sir John insisted that Britain must remain at the “heart of Europe”, in 1996 party bigwigs chided him for being insufficiently pro-European. In the intervening years Europe’s economic woes—combined with the drum beat of the anti-EU newspapers, Mr Cameron’s ill-advised Eurosceptic overtures to his base and the rise of the UK Independence Party—have transformed the picture. Look past today’s theatrics and it is clear that almost the whole party has rallied around what, two decades ago, would have counted as its anti-EU pole. On one extreme are hard nationalists who want a complete breach. On the other are a handful of convinced Europhiles. But the vast majority, spanning In and Out camps, agrees that Britain should be in the EU’s outermost orbit: beyond the euro zone and the (notionally) borderless Schengen zone, exempt from as many rules and costs as is practical and under no circumstances subject to further integration. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union The referendum debate, however bad-tempered, merely concerns the most beneficial way to achieve this semi-detachment; it is about procedure more than principle. Most Conservative supporters of membership argue that Britain’s interests are best served by remaining a member and securing opt-outs reinforcing its “special” position on the edge of a multi-speed union. Some on this side (like Oliver Letwin, who runs the Cabinet Office) actually support Brexit but think now the wrong time. Their opponents generally want the country to quit, retain its access to the single market—perhaps at the price of some continued pooling of power—and assume an observer status in the European institutions. “We’re all Eurosceptics now,” reckons Michael Fallon, the defence secretary (and a typically unsentimental In voter). The best example of the muddy reality of what at first glance looks like a binary divide is Mr Johnson who, by his own admission, has been “veering all over the place like a shopping trolley” on the subject. Having initially endorsed Out on the grounds that it would enable Britain to demand and secure a bespoke form of half-membership, he switched to admitting “out means out” when Mr Cameron refuted his claim, but still hints at the possibility of some sort of intermediate option. Bastards get the last laugh The Tory party’s convergence on this territory will continue beyond June. Whatever the result of the vote, London’s mayor stands a good chance of succeeding Mr Cameron (YouGov gives him a 21-point lead among party members) whenever the prime minister chooses, or is forced, to step down. The elevated salience of the EU question means it will dominate candidate selections, propelling the parliamentary party in a yet more Eurosceptic direction. Even if the country votes In there could be talk of a new referendum in the near future. And either way, any notion of Britain being at the heart of Europe will be dead. Thus although today’s campaign will bruise egos and break friendships, the bigger story is of a creeping consensus: over years of squabbling a once keenly pro-European party has gradually embraced a peripheral status in the union. In 1990 Thatcher’s Euroscepticism shocked her party. Now it looks restrained. Economist.com/blogs/bagehotIF A satirist were to create a parody of an international conference, amping up the insularity and tedious intricacies for comic effect, he might come up with something rather like the meeting that will take place this week in Marrakech. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, known as ICANN, will bring together 1,300 participants for 346 sessions. The gatherings include “NCPH Reception and Informal Meeting: CSG with the NCSG” and “CJK Generation Panels Co-ordination Mtg with Integration Panel”. Barring any last-minute hiccups, though, something remarkable will happen at the meeting. After two years of negotiations, ICANN is set to agree on a reform that would turn it into a new kind of international organisation. If this goes ahead, a crucial global resource, the internet’s address system, will soon be managed by a body that is largely independent of national governments. And some of ICANN’s champions reckon this is just a start. In future, similar outfits could be tasked with handling other internet issues that perplex governments, such as cyber-security and invasions of privacy. The beauty of the internet is its openness. As long as people stick to its technical standards, anybody can add a new branch or service. For everything to connect, though, the network needs a central address book, which includes domain names (such as economist.com) and internet-protocol addresses (such as 216.239.38.21). Whoever controls the address book can censor the internet: delete a domain name and a website can no longer be found. That is why, as the internet grew up, America decided not to hand control to the United Nations or another international body steered by governments. Instead, in 1998 it helped create ICANN, a global organisation that gives a say to everybody with an interest in the smooth running of the network, whether they be officials, engineers, domain-name holders or just internet users. Because few precedents existed, and because of a fear that ICANN would lack legitimacy, America kept it on a long leash. American approval is still required in some areas, including changes to the innards of the internet’s address system. Most were happy with the arrangement at first. But American oversight came to seem odd as the internet grew into a vast global resource with much traffic no longer passing over American cables (see chart). Then came revelations that the National Security Agency had spied on internet users in America and elsewhere. The snooping was unrelated to the management of internet addresses. But America’s Department of Commerce, which oversees ICANN, was provoked to announce in March 2014 that it would relinquish its role if it were convinced that ICANN would be truly independent and able to resist power grabs by other governments and commercial interests. America’s decision to let go triggered much wrangling and some stalling by those who benefit from the status quo. Gradually, though, plans for an independent organisation have come together. The new ICANN will resemble a state, says Thomas Rickert of eco, Germany’s internet association and co-chairman of one of the main negotiation committees. It will have a government (the organisation’s board), a constitution (its by-laws, which include its mission and “core values”), a judiciary (an “independent review process”, which leads to binding recommendations) and a citizenry of sorts (half-a-dozen “supporting organisations” and “advisory committees”, which represent the different interest groups). These will have the right to kick out the board and block its budget. Even some of ICANN’s harshest critics, such as Milton Mueller of the Georgia Institute of Technology, say the proposals are pretty good on balance—though he would like the citizenry to have more powers. One point, however, could cause trouble in Marrakech. More than a dozen countries, including Brazil, France and Russia, argue that governments will have too little sway in the new structure. ICANN’s board is obliged formally to weigh advice from a government advisory council only if that group has adopted such advice with “full consensus”, meaning no government openly objects. The dissenting countries say that full consensus will be tough to achieve. Governments are being expected to jump over a higher bar than others, complains one representative from a dissenting state. Discussions are likely to be heated, if incomprehensible to outsiders, but few expect the reform plans to be derailed in Marrakech. How American politicians will react is another matter. Some Republicans, in particular Senator Ted Cruz, who is running for president, dislike the idea of America letting go of ICANN. Opponents have not managed to pass legislation that would give Congress the right to stop the change: as things stand, a report sent to the relevant committees would suffice. But Republicans have blocked the commerce department from spending any money on the transition. Reform could well become mired in the presidential race, and other hurdles could pop up. Some lawmakers now argue that giving ICANN more independence amounts to the transfer of government property, which requires a vote by Congress. Dissenting governments and recalcitrant Republicans notwithstanding, an independent ICANN is not only likely to come to pass but also to become a model for other sorts of internet governance. The network is becoming Balkanised, with each country seeking to control what goes on within its own borders. Without generally accepted global rules, governments are bound to create their own, even if these cannot be implemented. “Multi-stakeholder” outfits like ICANN, where all opinions are aired, might well be the best hope to come up with rules that work. The consensual model is hardly perfect. It seems to work well for settling technical questions (see article) but can stumble when things get more political. And it is not clear who would launch other ICANN-like organisations. NETmundial, an initiative created in 2014 to do just that, has only produced some worthy “internet governance principles”. Perhaps Fadi Chehadé, ICANN’s president and one of the instigators of NETmundial, will be more successful getting such efforts off the ground in his new job. He will step down after the meeting in Marrakech, to be succeeded by Göran Marby, a Swedish telecoms regulator, and join the World Economic Forum to create all sorts of multi-stakeholder groups. “We need many little ICANNs,” he says.The wizard of the web TODAY ICANN is almost synonymous with internet governance (see article). But spare a thought for the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Without this little-known outfit, which developed many of the internet’s technical standards, the network would not even exist. The IETF just celebrated its 30th anniversary. Will it be around in another 30 years? The IETF, which was born at a meeting in San Diego, is known for its pragmatic way of making decisions. Rather than having governments or companies haggle over changes to networking protocols or routing services, “rough consensus and running code” is the rule. “Not everyone has to agree. And no votes are counted,” explains Scott Bradner, one the group’s grey-bearded elders (pictured). If the difference between two options is merely cosmetic, the IETF generally goes ahead with the more popular one if dissenters do not number more than about 20-30% of the total, although there is no firm rule. That proportion shrinks to 5-10% when a more fundamental choice must be made. At first IETF meetings were a festival for academics and engineers such as Mr Bradner. But as the internet has grown and become vital to companies’ fortunes, that has changed. First, representatives of big makers of networking gear such as Cisco and Ericsson began to turn up. They were followed by delegates from online giants like Facebook and Google. Now a large Asian contingent is present. When the IETF met in Yokohama last November, Cisco sent around 100 engineers, Google 50 and Huawei, a Chinese hardware maker, about 60. Jari Arkko, the IETF’s chairman (who also works for Ericsson) wants it to remain the place where exciting new technologies are discussed. But it seems to be turning into more of a conventional standards body. Commercial interests weigh heavily and issues take ever longer to sort out, says Kieren McCarthy, a longtime observer of internet-governance groups. Increasingly, internet standards are being set by more specialised groups covering the web, mobile technology and the internet of things. The pioneers are retiring: Mr Bradner will say goodbye in the next few months. But even if the organisation becomes less relevant, its decision-making standard of “rough consensus and running code” is likely to endure. Most internet-related technical groups follow it. The IETF’s dress code is influential, too. “Many newcomers are often embarrassed when they show up Monday morning in suits,” the official “Tao of IETF” warns, “to discover that everybody else is wearing T-shirts, jeans and sandals.”
