VOLKSWAGEN’S new boss, Matthias Müller, was no doubt hoping that his firm’s launches of new models at the Geneva motor show this week would help it move on from the scandal over its cheating in emissions tests. A British prankster had other ideas. As VW’s sales chief, Jürgen Stackmann, unveiled a new version of the Up city car, Simon Brodkin, a comic whose past targets include FIFA’s former boss, Sepp Blatter, gatecrashed the presentation in overalls, with a spanner and a “cheat box” which he tried to fit to the car (see picture), before being led off by security men. Mr Müller can afford to see the funny side of the stunt: he owes his job to the scandal. He was brought in to replace Martin Winterkorn, who was forced out when it emerged last September that 11m of the company’s diesel cars had been fitted with software to cheat tests for nitrogen-oxide emissions. This week VW admitted that Mr Winterkorn had been sent a memo in May 2014 about irregularities in the cars’ emissions, but said he may not have read it. Speaking to The Economist in Geneva, Mr Müller promised “monumental change”. But whatever VW does to make amends, the more far-reaching overhaul that it needs seems unlikely to happen. The emissions scandal was a symptom of a corporate culture focused on ramping up output to 10m vehicles a year and toppling Toyota as the world’s biggest carmaker. In the quest for scale, profitability suffered. Operating profits have hovered around €12 billion ($13 billion) for years despite a big expansion in output, with the group’s huge returns from China disguising poor performance in Europe and losses in America and emerging markets. Mr Müller says he is determined that VW not be “paralysed” by the emissions affair. Its sales fell in Europe and America in January even as their overall demand for new cars rose. But Mr Müller says 2016 has started well and that he expects little lingering impact from the scandal. He may be right. General Motors’ faulty ignition switches and Toyota’s “unintended accelerations” forced both firms to make huge recalls and generated plenty of bad press. Yet sales recovered within a few months. Uncertainty about financial penalties will hang over VW for some time. It has delayed its annual report for 2015 until April, when the picture should be clearer. America’s Department of Justice could in theory levy a fine of €60 billion but it is unlikely to go that far. Some analysts reckon that the cost of settling with the authorities and private litigants, worldwide, and fixing the affected cars or compensating their owners, might come to a grand total of as much as €30 billion—roughly the amount by which VW’s stockmarket value has fallen since the scandal broke. Others think it could be far less: both GM and Toyota escaped with fines of around €1 billion. If paying for its perfidy proves painful but not life-threatening, the impetus to overhaul VW will lose some of its force. Change is needed. VW is a sprawl of brands of varying fortunes. Almost two-thirds of its profits come from its premium-car brand, Audi, and performance-car division, Porsche (see chart 1). The main VW brand is a drag on the group: Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, reckons that in 2014 the brand’s profits essentially came from parts sales and royalties (paid by its joint ventures) in China, and that it made no money in its core European market. Mr Müller is making a start by attempting to revamp the culture of a company in which hitherto a strict hierarchy sent decisions, big and small, to the German engineers that ran VW from its headquarters in Wolfsburg. Mr Müller has replaced seven out of ten senior executives. Some are outsiders, though many of the “new” faces are, like Mr Müller, VW insiders ingrained in the firm’s ways. He is, however, trying to speed up sclerotic decision-making by giving the heads of the group’s profusion of brands more responsibility. A comprehensive restructuring plan is promised for later in the year, but the firm has said it will concentrate harder on profits. As a start, it will make €1 billion of cost cuts at the VW brand next year. But analysts reckon the company, which alone among big carmakers failed to reduce costs during the financial crisis, has plenty more fat to cut. For no good reason, its administrative expenses have trebled since 2007. The firm will also cut the extravagant number of model variations it offers—more than 300 at last count—and its absurdly long lists of options. The choice of steering wheels on the VW Golf is set to fall from 117 to a mere 43. VW will “reconsider all costs”, says Mr Müller, including even its hallowed research-and-development budget. In 2014 it was €13 billion, €5 billion more than Toyota’s. But it is unclear what VW’s huge outlays have yielded. It missed the craze for SUVs, it is lagging its main rivals in electric-car technology and it lacks a cheap platform for budget cars in emerging markets. A project to standardise the underpinnings of many VW group models with a platform called the MQB seems not to be producing the expected cost savings. Mr Müller is resistant, however, to disposing of any part of the firm, even a unit that makes marine diesel engines. A gruff “No” is his response when asked if he would consider selling it, though it is unclear that this division, or another that builds lorries, or Ducati, a maker of exotic motorbikes, is a core part of VW. The most intractable problem is low productivity, especially at the mass-market VW brand. The group’s labour costs have risen from around 13% of sales in 2007 to almost 17%. Outside China (where it makes cars in joint ventures with local firms), the group’s 520,000 workers made 6.7m vehicles in 2014, or about 13 each. That is about the same productivity as at Daimler’s Mercedes division, which makes only high-margin premium models (see chart 2). As other carmakers have shifted production to low-wage countries, VW has remained largely stuck in Germany. Some 45% of its employees are based there, many enjoying a four-day work week. The VW brand’s German factories are “among the highest-cost plants in the industry”, says Patrick Hummel of UBS, a bank. But VW’s commitment to Germany is absolute. “We are a German company”, says Mr Müller, and will “preserve German jobs”. Powerful unions would be sure to resist job cuts. Mr Müller says that they agree on the need for reform but admits to disagreement over how it might happen. Unions could also prevent a wider rethink that might shift investment from the VW brand to others that are more profitable. The supervisory board, made up largely of union representatives and nominees of the state of Lower Saxony, which holds a 20% stake in VW, has the power to resist most changes of strategy. Maybe an outsider with a mandate for change, if backed by the Porsche-Piëch family, which controls the voting shares, could have achieved more. But Mr Müller’s hands seem tied. The good bits of the VW group will continue to prop up the underperforming bits. That burden may get heavier: premium and low-cost carmakers are thriving while the mass market, the core of VW’s business, becomes more competitive. Odd as it sounds, VW could have done with a bigger crisis.“To hell with OPEC” IT WAS a tragic end to a life that epitomised the winner-takes-all spirit of American capitalism. On March 2nd, the day after he was indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of rigging bids for oil-drilling rights, Aubrey McClendon, a founder of Chesapeake Energy and one of the pioneers of America’s natural-gas revolution, died after driving his car at high speed into a wall. Mr McClendon, 56, was one of the high-rollers of the shale boom—and of its bust. He turned a $50,000 investment in 1989 in Chesapeake, based in Oklahoma City, into what became one of the two biggest natural-gas producers in the United States, with an acreage of leaseholds almost the size of West Virginia. He was also one of the champions of natural gas as a relatively clean fuel compared with coal, and an advocate for freeing America from dependence on Middle Eastern oil. “To hell with OPEC”, he was fond of saying. Yet his ride was a white-knuckled one even by the standards of America’s oil industry. He quickly seized on the potential of two emerging technologies, horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing (fracking), to unlock vast new sources of natural gas and change the face of American energy. But it was his zeal in amassing land by borrowing heavily that gave him his edge—and ultimately brought him down. “To be able to borrow money for ten years and ride out boom-and-bust cycles was almost as important an insight as horizontal drilling,” he was quoted as saying in Rolling Stone magazine, in 2012. That was four years after he had lost most of his personal fortune on margin calls during the global financial crisis. A year later he was ousted from Chesapeake for mixing reckless personal bets with those of his publicly traded company. Mr McClendon, the great-nephew of a former Oklahoma governor, was not a typical wildcatter. He had preppy, Richard Gere looks. His first career choice was to be an accountant. But with Chesapeake’s other founder, Tom Ward, he was adept at leasing land quickly and quietly to secure the shale resources beneath before others realised their potential, and he was as keen to flip it for a higher price as he was to frack it. “Geologists and engineers were the important guys—but it dawned on me pretty early that all their fancy ideas aren’t worth very much if we don’t have a lease. If you’ve got the lease and I don’t, you win,” he once said. He became an Oklahoman hero, particularly after bringing a professional basketball team, the Oklahoma City Thunder, in from Seattle. He had a wife and three children, and regularly treated friends to his collection of fine wines. But his brash business tactics also brought him a number of lawsuits. His leasing methods eventually attracted the attention of America’s Department of Justice. On March 1st it accused him and an unnamed co-conspirator of lowering the price of leases to drill for oil and gas on land in Oklahoma between December 2007 and March 2012, charges which carry stiff jail penalties if they lead to a conviction. It said “various corporations and individuals” were not charged but were also involved. Chesapeake said it did not expect to face prosecution. Mr McClendon swiftly described the charge as “wrong and unprecedented”, saying he was the first person in the oil-and-gas industry in 110 years to face antitrust prosecution under the Sherman Act for joint bidding on leaseholds. His lawyers argued that the “business practices” in question were well-known in the Oklahoman and American energy industries. “Starting today, Aubrey gets his day in court,” they said. He died the next morning. As The Economist went to press, police in Oklahoma City were still unable to say whether the crash, in which he was the only victim, and which involved no other vehicle, was intentional or not.IT IS still common to see headlines announcing the first woman to occupy some important post or other. Asako Suzuki has just been appointed the first female board member at Honda, a Japanese carmaker. In January the Irish central bank appointed its first female deputy governor. And of course Hillary Clinton could become America’s first female president. But such milestones may not be much of a guide to the opportunities women have to make progress in the workplace. So, in 2013, we created a “glass-ceiling index”, ranking countries by how good it is to be a working woman in each of them, to be published each year to mark International Women’s Day (March 8th). Our index now covers 29 countries; our website has a full, interactive version of the adjacent chart. Besides taking into account such things as women’s access to higher education, their labour-force participation, pay, business-school applications, representation in senior management and the cost of child care, this year we have added a new indicator: as well as measuring maternity-leave rights, we now include paternity leave. Studies show that where new fathers take parental leave, mothers tend to return to the labour market, female employment is higher and the earnings gap between men and women is lower. Among countries in the OECD, a group mostly of rich countries, paid leave for new daddies generally remains short, averaging just eight weeks. Nine countries, America included, offer them none. Although they fare poorly on a number of other indicators, Japan and South Korea now offer the longest paternity leave in the OECD. In those two countries, fathers (and mothers) are entitled to more than 50 weeks’ paid leave. Under Japan’s latest change to the law, in 2010, new mothers and fathers have 14 months from the birth in which to take up to a year’s paid leave, as long as they both take it. The idea is that men have the same career gap as women, and the career slippage among women of childbearing age is reduced. But cultures are hard to change, and so far the uptake has been low. Depending on nationality, new parents take home very different proportions of their usual pay while on leave. Turkey and Spain, for example, both offer 16 weeks’ maternity leave, but in Spain new mothers receive 100% of salary whereas in Turkey it is just 66%. Our index takes this into account: it includes a “full-rate equivalent” leave entitlement for Turkey of 10.6 weeks, to reflect the pay difference. Unsurprisingly, the Nordic countries—Iceland (a newcomer to our index), Norway, Sweden and Finland—come out top overall. In these countries, women are present in the labour force at similar rates to men. Finland has the largest share of women who have gone through higher education compared with men (49% of women have a tertiary degree, and 35% of men). Norway’s gender wage-gap (6.3%) is less than half the OECD average (15.5%). Women have 44% of seats on listed-company boards in Iceland; strong representation in Scandinavian boardrooms is common thanks to quotas. Norway and Iceland also have voluntary political-party quotas, as does Sweden where 44% of parliamentary seats are occupied by women, one of the highest rates in the world. Hungary ranks fifth, having the lowest gender wage gap, of 3.8%. Despite having few women on boards (11%) and in parliament (10%), Hungary has generous paid leave for mothers (71 weeks at 100% of recent pay) and low child-care costs. INTERACTIVE: Adjust the weightings and create your own “Glass-Ceiling Index” At the bottom of the ranking are Japan, Turkey and South Korea, where men are more likely than women to have degrees, to be in the workplace and to hold senior positions. Their pay gap is also wide. In Japan and South Korea the favourable parental-leave system is mainly a response to their ageing populations and shrinking labour forces; but in other respects they are far behind the Nordic countries, whose commitment to sexual equality goes back a long way. Even among better-ranked countries though, there is room for improvement. On average, across the OECD women are more likely to have a degree than men, but they are still less likely to be in the labour force and are paid significantly less. This is partly because of career choices (boys tend to choose things like engineering and computing; girls go for education, health care and welfare). But much of the difference also comes from child-bearing. Although the share of women on listed-company boards has increased since last year by 2.5 percentage points to 18.5%, women still hold less than a third of positions in senior management (a pipeline for board membership). Those that are in the higher echelons of management, according to the UN’s International Labour Organisation, are clustered in specific areas: human resources, public relations and communications management, and finance and administration. Although American firms have fewer women on boards than European ones, according to MSCI, a financial-data firm, they are more likely to have a female CEO or chief financial officer—the top jobs that bring headlines. But MSCI also found that of the rich-world listed companies where the CEO is a woman, 58% had at least three others on their board. This suggests that once one woman breaks through the glass ceiling, others find it easier to follow.The next job is just one click away MENTION “logistics” and it may bring to mind shiny FedEx or UPS vans with their neatly uniformed drivers. However, the business of shifting cargo by road, especially larger loads, is far more fragmented and inefficient than the image of its best-known brands would suggest. Even the world-famous names in parcel delivery compete with many lesser firms. Likewise, “third-party logistics”—the outsourcing of a business’s transport needs, including running fleets of lorries and vans on its behalf—also has some big firms but lots of smaller ones. There is even more fragmentation in what Americans call the “truckload” part of the industry—one-off deliveries of entire lorry trailers—and in the “less-than-truckload” business—the carriage of a pallet or two of goods. Whereas America’s top five airlines earn around 90% of their industry’s domestic revenues, the equivalent figure for the top five logistics firms is just 20%, reckons Armstrong & Associates, a consulting firm. Official figures show that one in nine American truckers is an independent owner-operator rather than an employee. The entire industry is a juicy target, ripe for disruption. Together, road haulage of all kinds is worth around $700 billion a year in America and more than €310 billion ($335 billion) in Europe. The rise of internet shopping and other factors will help the industry to keep growing, by around 3% a year worldwide for the next decade, according to Deloitte, another consulting firm. But it is a wasteful business. Every year American lorries travel empty for 50 billion miles (80 billion km)—28% of their total mileage. In Europe, a quarter of the containers on the road are empty, reckons InlandLinks, a container-tracking service. Some moves have been made towards consolidation. Low fuel prices, cheap finance and recovering rich-world economies have given larger companies the means and the motive to buy rivals. Last year FedEx bought TNT, a European parcel-delivery counterpart, for $4.8 billion. XPO Logistics of America, a broker in the truckload and less-than-truckload businesses, bought a French firm, Norbert Dentressangle, for $3.5 billion; and then a domestic rival, Con-way, for $3 billion. European firms have joined in too: SNCF Geodis, a French state-owned logistics outfit, recently bought OHL for $800m, to establish a foothold in America. However, there seems little prospect so far of consolidating the multitude of freelance truckers into employees of a handful of big firms. This is because of the comparatively low barriers to entry in their business, says Jack Semple of the Road Haulage Association, a British trade body. The average cost of a lorry-driving course in Britain is less than £1,000 ($1,400). In California it can be as little as $1,100. Lorries can be leased, or bought on cheap credit provided by their makers. Britain nationalised and merged its biggest hauliers in the 1940s, but a state behemoth was outrun by one-man outfits and the business was privatised again in the 1980s. The best prospects for efficiency and rationalisation, then, are in improving the creaky system by which large numbers of freight-brokers haggle with even larger numbers of truckers. Deals can take days of telephone calls to organise. And for their efforts, brokers charge hefty commissions—of as much as 45% of the delivery cost per load for short-haul trips. Brokers have an incentive to choose the priciest options for their clients to extract as high a fee as possible. Inevitably, a bunch of startups are now seeking to make the business cheaper, quicker and more transparent by replacing the brokers with mobile-app platforms that match shippers’ loads with available trucks and truckers. Cargomatic, based in Los Angeles, lets shippers list local jobs on its app, which are pinged to the smartphones of nearby drivers. When one of them takes on a job, the shipper can track his journey in real time. Trucker Path, already a popular social app that helps around 450,000 registered American drivers find rest-stops and poker partners, is currently testing its Truckloads app, which does something similar to Cargomatic for the long-haul market. Other systems automatically match drivers to loads, much as Uber does for taxis and passengers. Transfix, developed by a New York startup, not only scans for nearby lorries, but also rates each driver based on how many miles he would have to drive his lorry empty, how soon he will be available and his past performance. The best match is offered the job first. The whole process takes minutes, says Drew McElroy, a founder of Transfix. And the commission is just 10%, a fraction of what some brokers charge. Other apps are attempting to do the same for containers whose journeys do not just involve the roads. Kontainers, based in Britain, aims to be a one-stop-shop for businesses that want their goods moved across the oceans. Now, to shift a load from a shipper in Britain to a customer in Australia typically requires two days, 20 phone calls and 40 e-mails to reach an agreement, says Graham Parker, one of Kontainers’ founders. He wants to make booking a container shipment as easy as buying a plane ticket. Its website does this by dealing directly with truckers and shipping lines, which provide real-time tracking throughout the journey. Mr Parker says one of his clients discovered though Kontainers that shipping from Britain to Australia could be done in 38 days rather than the 55 his broker had always told him. Previously Nam Nguyen, of Skyline Steel in Seattle, would call five or six haulage companies whenever he needed to move a load from the company’s yard to a customer. For local jobs he says he now uses the Convoy app, created by another firm in Seattle, which went live in September. The main gains, he says, have been the “huge time savings” and reliability of delivery. Although it was at first assumed that only small businesses would be interested in such apps, big companies have also started to use them too. Barnes & Noble, an American bookshop chain, was one of Transfix’s first clients; Bosch, a German industrial giant, is now one of Kontainers’ best. Road to riches Drivers’ hours are restricted by law, so anything that helps them cut the time spent behind the wheel with no load (and thus no pay) is a bonus. Apps can help with this, and in generally helping them find more jobs. Mr McElroy says some of his drivers now average five weekly one-way trips between Indianapolis, where several publishers are based, and Barnes & Noble’s warehouse in New Jersey, instead of four. So they earn 25% more, with less waiting around. The apps also arrange payments much more quickly than brokers typically do, another important benefit for drivers. Some platforms, such as Transfix, guarantee payment within 24 hours of a delivery. Others, such as Truckloads, allow drivers to filter for shippers’ credit ratings and thus the likelihood of getting paid. Investors have concluded that such platforms have proved their worth, and are ready to take off. Last year $63m was raised for seven of these companies, including $12m for Transfix and $20m for Truckloads. Such sums are small change compared with the huge sums that taxi-app firms like Uber and Didi Kuaidi are raising, but it is in the haulage apps’ favour that they can achieve scale with such relatively modest sums. And they do not need to attract millions of users to turn profitable. Kontainers says it already has more than 100 businesses as customers in Britain, a number which many offline brokers would be more than happy with. So far, the big names of road logistics have largely stood back and left the business of “Uberising” the haulage business to the startups. Dan Lewis of Convoy argues that newcomers such as his have an edge, because incumbents would need to integrate new technology into their legacy systems, and “retrofit solutions rarely outperform something built from the ground up.” As for the established brokers, they have an incentive to maintain the status quo and keep the market offline, argues Mr Parker of Kontainers. This will change if the apps begin to eat into brokers’ business and divert a significant share of work from the big parcels and haulage firms towards freelance drivers. Brett Parker, a founder of Cargomatic, sees large, asset-heavy logistics firms like UPS and FedEx not as competitors but as future partners, and says many such incumbents are seeking alliances with on-demand-economy firms like his. Others think the incumbents will eventually buy the most successful haulage-broker apps. Two other, deep-pocketed names are also casting an eye over the delivery business. Uber itself is testing a service in some cities in which its freelance taxi drivers also collect and drop off parcels; and Amazon is developing an app, “On My Way”, which allows any member of the public to get paid for delivering packages. If these two giants eventually adapted their services to cover larger loads—not much of a technological challenge—then the scale of their resources and expertise would be hard to compete with. By then, another wave of upheaval may be in prospect—including for today’s app-based disrupters—as driverless lorries begin taking to the roads. It seems likely that they will be phased in over a number of years, starting perhaps with bigger, longer-distance loads. An industry that has less need for drivers ought to tip the scales away from freelancers and towards large fleet owners. But the advantages of being able to book a shipment quickly and cheaply by app will remain.Seeking a caffeine boost CAFÉ culture may be quintessentially Italian, but it took an American firm to make it global. Howard Schultz says visiting Milan and its cafés in the 1980s inspired him to develop Starbucks into what it is today. More than three decades later, the Seattle coffee giant is poised to enter the Italian market itself. On February 26th Mr Schultz announced a deal with Percassi, a retail developer, to open the chain’s first location in the country next year, in Milan. Starbucks is not the only firm to have stolen a march. An Italian developed the first espresso machine, but a Swiss firm, Nestlé, conquered the market for personal espresso-makers with its Nespresso system. The world’s second- and third-largest coffee groups, which merged in 2015 to create Jacobs Douwe Egberts, were American and Dutch, respectively. Italy’s coffee firms are trying to grab more of the global industry for themselves. Italy’s re-exports of beans, mostly roasted, have more than doubled over the past decade, to the equivalent of 3.2m standard 60kg sacks, increasing their share of global trade from 6.7% to 8.9%. Last year Lavazza, Italy’s biggest coffee firm, bought Douwe Egberts’ Carte Noire premium brand for €800m ($870m), making it the market leader in France. That followed an initial public offering of 40% of Massimo Zanetti, to raise capital for expansion. Zanetti owns a score of brands, including Boncafé, an Asian roaster; and it is buying a stake in Club Coffee, a Canadian firm with which it has developed compostable capsules. Besides continuing to develop its business-to-business side, Illycaffé is expanding its younger direct-to-consumer arm. It has opened flagship coffee shops in big cities, from Seoul to San Francisco, and plans to open more. Jeffrey Young of Allegra World Coffee Portal, a consulting firm, doubts if all this is enough in what has become a highly competitive and consolidated market. Many Italian firms have rested on their laurels, he says, believing their product to be superior. That was once true, but the emergence of coffee-shop chains, and then of craft coffee brands, has changed that. Quality is now a given; branding and the ambience of coffee shops are ever more important. The industry is now in the grip of a fad for the “science” of coffee-making—improved grinding methods, better monitoring of water quality, and so on. Illycaffé was an early innovator, having pioneered the use of pressurised cans when most others were still selling coffee in paper bags. More recently it has created an app that lets coffee-lovers design and buy their ideal blend—it will be rolled out in some of the firm’s shops later this year. But if innovation and product development continue to be important routes to growth, even Italy’s biggest firms may be outgunned by global giants with much deeper pockets.IN 1984 Ronald Reagan ran a re-election ad on the theme of “It’s Morning Again in America”. Today’s presidential hopefuls ought to run a follow-up called “It’s Almost Midnight”. Donald Trump laments the loss of America’s greatness. Bernie Sanders says the country is being wrecked by greedy businesspeople. America’s leading intellectuals are equally gloomy. Charles Murray, a conservative, says that America is “coming apart”; and George Packer, a liberal, agrees that it is “unwinding”. Mercifully, not everyone is a doom-monger. In his annual letter to shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway, on February 26th, Warren Buffett noted that “for 240 years it’s been a terrible mistake to bet against America, and now is no time to start.” The March issue of the Atlantic magazine has a cover story by James Fallows on “How America is putting itself back together”. The author undertook a three-year journey across the country in a single-engine plane and saw signs of reinvention and renewal wherever he went—and not just in trendy tech hubs. A new book by Antoine van Agtmael, who coined the phrase “emerging markets”, and Fred Bakker, a Dutch journalist, called “The Smartest Places on Earth”, argues that the rust belts of the rich world, especially in America, are becoming hotspots of innovation. Boosterism is as American as apple pie. But this time the boosters can point to some hard data. The Kauffman Index of Startup Activity, which measures business creation, had its biggest increase in 2015 for two decades. Bruce Katz of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, reckons that America’s 50 most research- and technology-intensive industries have added nearly 1m jobs since 2010. These industries are disproportionately based in cities and, since they pay high wages, have a galvanising effect on local economies. Three powerful forces are breathing life into bits of America that had looked as if they were permanently left behind. First, old industrial skills are acquiring new relevance thanks to such things as advances in materials science. As Messrs Van Agtmael and Bakker note, Akron, in Ohio, has capitalised on its heritage as home to America’s four biggest tyremakers by turning itself into America’s capital city of polymers. The University of Akron’s Polymer Training Centre houses 120 academics and 700 graduate students. Companies such as Akron Polymer Systems and Akron Surface Technologies are inventing new ways to commercialise synthetic materials. North Carolina has done the same for textiles. Its state university is home to the Nonwovens Institute, which does research on textiles that can resist heat and chemicals, including ones used in weapons. Second, old industrial towns are realising that they have a vital asset: cheap property. Disused mills and warehouses, with their high ceilings and exposed bricks and beams, can make attractive homes and workspaces for knowledge workers. In Watervliet, New York, firms such as Cleveland Polymer Technologies occupy space in an old US Army arsenal. In Manchester, New Hampshire, the old and once-crumbling riverside mill district now buzzes with knowledge businesses and fancy restaurants. The hunt for Lebensraum is driving young entrepreneurs to explore the neglected peripheries of big cities, such as Boston’s South Side (“Southie”), Seattle’s South Lake Union Area and San Francisco’s twin city of Oakland. Some entrepreneurs are cutting the cord completely and swapping broom-cupboard-sized premises by the Bay for mansions in flyover territory. Mr Fallows also found older industries reviving in out-of-the-way places, such as in north-eastern Mississippi, where a steel mini-mill was expanding and a $300m new tyre factory was opening. The third trend combines elements of the first two: the rise of manufacturing entrepreneurs. Startups are beginning to transform manufacturing just as they transformed service industries like taxi-hailing and short-term room lets. New techniques such as 3D printing, combined with a rapid decline in the cost of computing power, are making it easier for small firms to compete with big ones. Crowdfunding sources such as Kickstarter are making it easier for them to raise capital. And big companies such as GE are trying to crowdsource innovation by providing small manufacturing firms with space and seed-money. Exponents of this “hardware renaissance” frequently locate themselves in old industrial towns such as Pittsburgh and Detroit, in part because there is lots of cheap space available and in part because they can draw on established manufacturing skills. Formidable problems, formidable resources There are plenty of reasons to be sceptical about rust-belt revivalism. The overall number of jobs in manufacturing has been declining for decades, and is set to continue falling as automation keeps advancing. Brain-intensive manufacturing will not provide many jobs for high-school dropouts. Such rebirths have been heralded in the past, only to come to nothing. The rate of business creation is still 50% lower than it was in the 1980s. Still, America’s old industrial cities have formidable resources as well as formidable problems. Akron and North Carolina point to one of the country’s strengths: it has first-rate universities almost everywhere. GE built a factory for jet-engine parts in out-of-the-way Batesville, Mississippi, largely because Mississippi State University is a centre of expertise in the new materials needed for them. America’s success in software also gives it a huge advantage in a world in which ever more software is being embedded into hardware, be it cars or smart watches. American firms also enjoy much cheaper energy than their European and Asian rivals, thanks in large part to an American innovation, fracking. It is too early to remake Reagan’s “It’s Morning Again” ad. But it is time for Americans to recognise that, for all its troubles, their country has not lost the ability to remake and revitalise itself. As Hillary Clinton put it, “America has never stopped being great.” Messrs Trump, Sanders et al should take note.OIL PRICES have perked up a bit, but producers are still reeling from the slump in crude prices last year. The boss of Pemex, Mexico’s state-owned oil firm, said this week that the company faced a “liquidity crunch”. Malaysia’s state oil firm is laying off workers. Petrobras, Brazil’s troubled oil giant, recently secured a $10 billion loan from the China Development Bank to help it to pay off maturing bonds. The trouble at these firms underlines broader concerns about the burden of corporate debt in emerging markets. A particular worry for resources firms is the rising cost of servicing dollar debts taken out when the greenback was much weaker than it is now. Short-term dollar loans to be repaid with earnings in falling currencies featured prominently in past emerging-market crises. But the concern about the role of dollar lending in the current cycle is different. The numbers are startling. Corporate debt in 12 biggish emerging markets rose from around 60% of GDP in 2008 to more than 100% in 2015, according to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Places that experience a rapid run-up in debt often subsequently endure a sharp slowdown in GDP (see article). An extra twist is that big emerging-market firms were for a while able to borrow freely in dollars. By the middle of last year, the stock of dollar loans to non-bank borrowers in emerging markets, including companies and government, had reached $3.3 trillion. Indeed until recently, dollar credit to borrowers outside America was growing much more quickly than to borrowers within it. The fastest increase of all was in corporate bonds issued by emerging-market firms. Jaime Caruana, the head of the BIS, argues that a global liquidity cycle—the waxing and waning of dollar borrowing outside America—helps to explain the slowdown in emerging-market economies, the rise in the dollar’s value, and the sudden oil glut. When the dollar was weak and global liquidity was ample thanks to the purchase of Treasuries by the Federal Reserve (so-called “quantitative easing”, or QE), companies outside America were happy to borrow in dollars, because that was cheaper than borrowing in local currency. Capital inflows pushed up local asset prices, including currencies, making dollar debt seem even more affordable. As long as the dollar remained weak, the feedback loop of cheap credit, rising asset prices and strong GDP growth could continue. But when the dollar started to strengthen, the loop reversed. The dollar’s ascent is tied to a change in America’s monetary policy which began in May 2013, when the Fed first hinted that it would phase out QE. When the Fed’s bond-buying ended in October 2014, it paved the way for an interest-rate increase 14 months later. The tightening of monetary policy in America has reduced the appetite for financial risk-taking beyond its shores. The impact of this minor shift on the value of the dollar has been remarkable, particularly against emerging-market currencies (see chart 1). Wherever there has been lots of borrowing in foreign currency, the exchange rate becomes a financial amplifier, notes Mr Caruana. As companies scramble to pay down their dollar debts, asset prices in emerging markets fall. Firms cut back on investment and shed employees. GDP falters. This drives emerging-market currencies down even further in a vicious cycle that mirrors the virtuous cycle during the boom. Since much of the credit went to oil firms, the result has been a supply glut, as producers pump crude at full tilt to earn dollars to pay down their debts. Mr Caruana’s reading of events has dollar borrowing at its centre. Yet the sell-off in emerging-market currencies has more to it. Rich countries that export raw materials, including Australia, Canada and Norway, have also seen their currencies plummet against the dollar. Falling export income as a consequence of much lower oil and commodity prices is likely to have played a similar role in the slump in other currencies. Some analysts think the problem of dollar debt is blown out of proportion. There are countries, such as Chile and Turkey, where dollar debts loom large (see chart 2). But the average dollar share of corporate debt in emerging markets is just 10%. Chinese firms account for more than a quarter of the $3.3 trillion of dollar loans to emerging markets—and since August, when fears surged that the yuan would be devalued, they have been swapping dollar loans into yuan, notes Jan Dehn of Ashmore Group, a fund manager. Much of the foreign-currency debt taken out by companies elsewhere was long-term: the average maturity of bonds issued last year was more than ten years, for instance. That pushes refinancing, and the associated risk of default, far into the future. In many cases, dollar debt is matched by dollar income—even if, as in the case of oil exporters, it is much diminished by low prices. And there are pots of dollars in emerging-market banks to which indebted companies may have recourse. In any event, the dollar’s ascent has stalled because of concerns about America’s faltering economy and doubts that the Fed can raise interest rates again. Yet the cycle of dollar lending nevertheless has implications that may not be fully appreciated. A recent study of firm-level finances by Valentino Bruno and Hyun Song Shin of the BIS found that emerging-market firms with strong cash balances are more likely to issue dollar bonds. That goes against a tenet of corporate finance, that firms only borrow to invest once they have exhausted internal sources of funds. It suggests that financial risk-taking was the motivation for borrowing. On average, 17-22 cents of every dollar borrowed by an emerging-market company ends up as cash on the firm’s balance-sheet. Such liquid funds could go into bank deposits, or be used to buy other firms’ commercial paper or even to lend to them directly. In other words, the authors say, companies seem to be acting as surrogate financial firms. As a result, dollar borrowing spills over into easier credit conditions in domestic markets. This is one of the ways the dollar-credit cycle exerts a strong influence over overall lending in emerging markets. The credit cycle took an apparently decisive turn last year. The stock of dollar credit to emerging markets stopped rising in the third quarter, says the BIS, the first stalling since 2009. Dollar credit is much harder to come by than it was. So are local-currency loans. Bank-lending conditions in emerging markets tightened further in the fourth quarter, according to the Institute for International Finance. The dollar may have peaked but, for emerging markets, tight financial conditions are likely to endure.FOR as long as there have been organised economies, people have been employed to look after the wealth of others. More than 4,000 years ago landowners in Akkad, an early Mesopotamian civilisation, hired local managers to look after their farms. In their new book, “Investment: A History”, Norton Reamer and Jesse Downing explain how the industry has changed over time. Their fundamental idea is that investment has become “democratised”, available to a wider range of individuals. Early investment was conducted on behalf of the wealthy, often by individuals with low status—current or former slaves in the Roman Republic, for example. In the Biblical parable of the talents, a master entrusts his wealth to a range of servants. Two of the servants doubled the master’s money but the third buried it in the ground, rather than “investing it with the bankers”. For this failure, the poor performer was “cast into the outer darkness” where “there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth”. Today’s clients might welcome the ability to add this penalty clause to their contracts. Looking after the assets of the rich—or high-net-worth individuals, as they are known in the jargon—is still big business. But the fund-management industry’s growth has been turbocharged by the evolution of a much wider client base. In the rich world, most people have some money available for savings after they have paid for the necessities of food, clothing and shelter. With a retirement age of, in effect, around 65, they have two decades or so of old age to provide for. In America, retirement savings grew from $368 billion in 1974 to more than $22 trillion by 2014—a fivefold increase in assets relative to income. This has transformed the industry. Investment management was once a dull business, consisting mainly of helping trust funds stock up on government bonds. The standard joke was: “Why don’t fund managers look out of the window in the mornings? Because then they’d have nothing to do in the afternoons.” Nowadays fund management is a much more glamorous profession—more masters of the universe than keepers of the paper clips. Another key to the change in the industry’s fortunes is its reward system. Fees are linked to the value of the assets, even though the cost of managing $10 billion is little more than the cost of looking after a measly $1 billion. So fund managers have benefited twice over: first, from the expansion of pension and other savings and, second, from the huge rise in asset prices since the 1980s. The latter has been driven by falls in inflation and interest rates which have reduced the yield (and thus increased the price) of financial assets. When markets faltered in the financial crisis, central banks stepped in to buy assets through quantitative easing (QE)—in effect, an indirect subsidy of fund managers’ profits. As Messrs Reamer and Downing point out, some fund managers have become very wealthy by looking after other people’s money. A quarter of all American billionaires work in finance and investments, an industry that employs less than 1% of all workers. In ancient times, the poor looked after the assets of the rich; in modern times, it is the other way round. Successful managers deserve decent rewards, but a lot of mediocre managers have prospered too. Just because they are rich does not mean they are clever. Their position is slowly being eroded by the emergence of index-trackers and exchange-traded funds, which charge much lower fees. But the transformation is not occurring fast enough. A world of low inflation and low nominal returns should prompt clients to pay a lot more attention to fees. Instead, many pension funds and endowments are moving into higher-charging “alternative asset” categories like hedge funds and private equity, a “Hail Mary” strategy that cannot work in aggregate. There may be market inefficiencies that are profitable to exploit, but none large enough to give a big, across-the-board boost to the returns of a $22 trillion industry. The authors are right that the democratisation of investment is, on the whole, good news. Millions of people have access to diversified savings vehicles that will deliver, on average, returns that are better than those available from a savings account. But, these days, technology means that such funds can be provided for a fraction of a percentage point a year. This is becoming a utility business, and you don’t get rich by running a utility. Fred Schwed’s question to a pre-war Wall Street mogul—“Where are the customers’ yachts?”—remains as relevant as ever.
