SCIENCE works for two reasons. First, its results are based on experiments: extracting Mother Nature’s secrets by asking her directly, rather than by armchair philosophising. And a culture of openness and replication means that scientists are policed by their peers. Scientific papers include sections on methods so that others can repeat the experiments and check that they reach the same conclusions. That, at least, is the theory. In practice, checking old results is much less good for a scientist’s career than publishing exciting new ones. Without such checks, dodgy results sneak into the literature. In recent years medicine, psychology and genetics have all been put under the microscope and found wanting. One analysis of 100 psychology papers, published last year, for instance, was able to replicate only 36% of their findings. And a study conducted in 2012 by Amgen, an American pharmaceutical company, could replicate only 11% of the 53 papers it reviewed. Now it is the turn of economics. Although that august discipline was founded in the 18th century by Adam Smith (pictured above) and his contemporaries, it is only over the past few decades that its practitioners (some of them, anyway) have come to the conclusions that the natural sciences reached centuries ago: that experiments might be the best way to test their theories about how the world works. A rash of results in “microeconomics”—which studies the behaviour of individuals—has suggested that Homo sapiens is not always Homo economicus, the paragon of cold-blooded rationality assumed by many formal economic models. But as economics adopts the experimental procedures of the natural sciences, it might also suffer from their drawbacks. In a paper just published in Science, Colin Camerer of the California Institute of Technology and a group of colleagues from universities around the world decided to check. They repeated 18 laboratory experiments in economics whose results had been published in the American Economic Review and the Quarterly Journal of Economics between 2011 and 2014. For 11 of the 18 papers (ie, 61% of them) Dr Camerer and his colleagues found a broadly similar effect to whatever the original authors had reported. That is below the 92% replication rate they would have expected had all the original studies been as statistically robust as the authors claimed—but by the standards of medicine, psychology and genetics it is still impressive. One theory put forward by Dr Camerer and his colleagues to explain this superior hit rate is that economics may still benefit from the zeal of the newly converted. They point out that, when the field was in its infancy, experimental economists were keen that others should adopt their methods. To that end, they persuaded economics journals to devote far more space to printing information about methods, including explicit instructions and raw data sets, than sciences journals normally would. This, the researchers reckon, may have helped establish a culture of unusual rigour and openness. Whatever the cause, it does suggest one thing. Natural scientists may have to stop sneering at their economist brethren, and recognise that the dismal science is, indeed, a science after all.I won’t tell if you don’t TO SOME, Facebook, Twitter and similar social-media platforms are the acme of communication—better, even, than face-to-face conversations, since more people can be involved. Others think of them more as acne, a rash that fosters narcissism, threatens privacy and reduces intelligent discourse to the exchange of flippant memes. They might even, these kinds of arguments go, be creating a generation of electronic addicts who are incapable of reflective, individual, original thought. A topic ripe for anthropological study, then. And such a study, the “Why We Post” project, has just been published by nine anthropologists, led by Daniel Miller of University College, London. The participants in “Why We Post” worked independently for 15 months at locations in Brazil, Britain, Chile, China (one rural and one industrial site), India, Italy, Trinidad and Tobago, and Turkey. They embedded themselves within families and their surrounding communities. That, the team believes, let them form a nuanced view of the roles of social media in their study sites which could not be gained by analysing participants’ public postings. These fly-on-the-wall perspectives refute much received wisdom. One of the sceptics’ biggest bêtes noires is the “selfie”—which is often blamed for fostering self-regard and an undue focus on attractiveness. “Why We Post”, however, reveals that the selfie itself has many faces. In Italy girls were indeed seen to take dozens of pictures of themselves before settling on one to post. In Brazil many selfies posted by men were taken at the gym. But at the British site, Dr Miller found, schoolchildren posted five times as many “groupies” (images of the picture-taker with friends) as they did selfies. Britons have also created a category called “uglies”, wherein the purpose is to take as unflattering a self-portrait as possible. And in Chile another unique genre has developed: the “footie”. This is a shot taken of the user’s propped-up feet, a sign of relaxation. The often-humorous, marked-up images known as memes have also come in for criticism. They debase traditional forms of public debate, lament some, spreading far and wide with little context. But memes serve different purposes in different cultures. In India they tend to focus on serious and religious issues; Trinidadian memes are more often send-ups of politicians. Yet in all cases Dr Miller sees meme-passing not as limiting what social-media users think and say, but as enabling discourse. Many users happily forward memes laced with strong ideological messages about which they would not dare to comment individually. Critics also often view the online personae people create for their social-media postings as false fronts designed for the medium at hand. Trinidadians, however, disagree. They see online profiles as more representative of a person’s true self even than what is seen in real life. And, though the perceived loss through social media of the anonymity that once characterised online life causes much hand-wringing in the West, young boys and girls in Turkey see things differently. Social media permit them to be in constant contact with one another, in full view of their parents, but to keep their conversations and photos to themselves. In rural China and Turkey social media were viewed as a distraction from education. But in industrial China and Brazil they were seen to be an educational resource. Such a divide was evident in India, too. There, high-income families regarded them with suspicion but low-income families advocated them as a supplementary source of schooling. In Britain, meanwhile, they were valued not directly as a means of education, but as a way for pupils, parents and teachers to communicate. “Why We Post” thus challenges the idea that the adoption of social media follows a single and predictable trajectory. Indeed, the Chinese sites show that the use of such media can vary from place to place within a single country. The study also refutes the idea that social media are making humans any less human. Users are, in Dr Miller’s words, “merely attaining something that was latent in human beings”. The sceptics’ reaction to new technology seems equally deep-rooted. New means of communication from railways and the telegraph onwards have always attracted critics. Sooner or later, the doubters either convert, or die. The adopters, meanwhile, chatter on until the next wave of disruption happens, an advance that some of them will reject as unnecessary and possibly dangerous flummery.OF ALL the theories to explain the unexpected success of Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, this, surely, is the most novel. Forget about a disaffected working class buffeted by globalisation and automation, pent-up racial resentments finding an outlet or the advent of the 24-hour news cycle. No: in the assessment of Daniel Drezner, a professor of international politics at Tufts University, it’s the political scientists who are to blame. Although clearly tongue-in-cheek, this hypothesis sounds less absurd now than it would have done before 2008, the year that four American academics brought out a book called “The Party Decides: Presidential Nominations Before and After Reform” (TPD). The book’s main thesis is that political parties have formidable power to influence voters in presidential primaries. TPD was never a bestseller. Nonetheless, it has gained more attention from journalists than any political-science book in recent memory. According to Google News, 763 articles have cited TPD’s title since the start of 2011. Just over 500 more contain its catchphrase “invisible primary”, which describes how candidates compete for support from party grandees before the first votes are cast. Such coverage is comparable only to that received by bestsellers like “Dreams From My Father” by Barack Obama (758) or Michael Lewis’s “Moneyball” (784). During Mr Obama’s presidency, a new generation of young journalists has emerged who are focused on Washington, DC. They eschew the sources, leaks and scoops that are pursued by their more traditionally minded colleagues in favour of the sage counsel of academic political science. Many of these whizz-kids have treated TPD with awed reverence. For much of 2015 they dismissed Mr Trump’s chances in the Republican primaries by relying on the book’s claim that parties usually guide voters towards “acceptable” nominees. But it was precisely by making such overconfident pronouncements, Mr Drezner argued recently in the Washington Post, that the authors sowed the seeds of their own demise. Scientists are well acquainted with the “observer effect”, which, in physics, for example, stipulates that the characteristics of a subatomic particle can never be fully known because they are changed by the act of measuring them. Similarly, wrote Mr Drezner, “The Party Decides” has been “the primary theory driving how political analysts have thought about presidential campaigns. It seemed to explain nomination fights of the recent past quite well.” However, in previous elections, there were no crowds of journalists citing TPD. This time, says Mr Drezner, Republican decision-makers “read smart take after smart take telling them that Trump didn’t have a chance…so GOP party leaders didn’t take any action. Except that the reason smart analysts believed Trump had no chance was because they thought GOP leaders would eventually take action.” The 2016 primaries are putting political science—as exemplified by TPD—to a very public test. Republicans in Congress have already sought to cut off public funding for research in the discipline. Now, if it is seen to have failed, it will slow down the steady advance into the mainstream media that the field has made over the past eight years—and could possibly bring it to a halt. When journalists write about gravitational waves, they talk to scientists. When they write about interest rates, they talk to economists. But until recently, when they wrote about elections, they often pretended that academic expertise did not exist. “In 2005, when I came to Washington,” writes Ezra Klein, a founder of Vox, an “explanatory-journalism” site, “knowing political science wasn’t a legitimate form of knowing about politics, or at least it wasn’t presented as one to young journalists like me.” The numbers bear him out: since 2006 there have been 7.5 references to “economist” in the New York Times for every mention of a “political scientist”. A political (journalism) revolution Theories abound to explain this imbalance. One hypothesis is self-segregation: journalists with a penchant for numbers are likely to gravitate towards covering obviously quantitative fields, whereas those with a more narrative bent may prefer politics. Another is the availability of sources. There is no one person who can speak for, say, consumers or debtors as a whole, so economic journalists must resort to experts who study aggregate behaviour. In contrast, politics is conducted by a small number of individuals who are usually keen to talk to reporters, making outsiders’ analysis seem redundant. Arthur Lupia of the University of Michigan argues that, whereas fields like economics can seem “objective” and technical, political issues are visceral, emotional and tribal. People hold immovable beliefs about politics, he concludes, and have no inclination to defer to “impartial experts” on such topics. And Mr Drezner thinks that there is little appetite among either reporters or readers for the dispiriting structural analyses that are professors’ stock in trade. Throughout George W. Bush’s presidency, most American political reporters were allergic to any numbers more advanced than a cherry-picked poll result. The tide did not start to shift until 2008, when Nate Silver, a baseball writer who developed statistical expertise by predicting how players would perform, began posting forecasts for that year’s topsy-turvy primary elections online as an anonymous blogger. Mr Silver used techniques that any political scientist would find familiar. Thanks to rigorous analysis and a sterling track record—he was bullish on Mr Obama’s chances long before the Iowa caucuses, and correctly called 49 of 50 states in the general election—Mr Silver developed a devoted following. Eager to test the audience for what would soon be called “data journalism”, in 2010 the New York Times began hosting his blog, which he called “FiveThirtyEight” for the number of votes in America’s electoral college. Even Mr Silver, who by that point was a well-known forecasting whizz, could not have predicted how big the market for his cleverer-than-thou takes would become: on the eve of the 2012 election 20% of the visitors to the paper’s website read “FiveThirtyEight”. Mr Silver’s success set off a modest paradigm shift in political journalism. Perhaps his biggest draw was his thinly veiled disdain for the innumerate punditry that ruled the airwaves. Mr Silver delighted in savaging commentators who relied on vapid clichés like “momentum shifts” and “game-changers”. And unlike any other commentator in Washington, he was willing to put his money where his mouth was. In October 2012 Joe Scarborough, a television presenter and former congressman, took aim at Mr Silver, writing: “Anybody that thinks that this race is anything but a toss-up right now is such an ideologue, they should be kept away from typewriters, computers, laptops and microphones for the next ten days, because they’re jokes.” Mr Silver promptly tweeted him an offer of a $2,000 bet that Mr Obama would win, which Mr Scarborough wisely passed up. Mr Silver had brought the rules of political science to Beltway journalism: no longer were all opinions equally valid. Some interpretations were right, some were wrong, and every election provided a new opportunity to put them to the test. Like all good businesses, “FiveThirtyEight”—which was acquired by ESPN in 2013—quickly attracted imitators and competitors. Mr Klein started Vox, the New York Times established a new quantitatively minded section, called “The Upshot”, and the Washington Post annexed a blog, called “The Monkey Cage”, dedicated to political science. What was once Mr Silver’s lonely crusade soon became an echo chamber. And although these sites occasionally conducted their own statistical studies, they mostly relied on existing academic work, giving political scientists an audience of unprecedented scale. At the same time a movement was developing within political science to expand its reach beyond the ivory tower. In 2013 the American Political Science Association devised a plan to increase the field’s impact. Mr Drezner began advocating loudly for political scientists to publish papers on subjects where a consensus existed among the media and policymakers that was strongly refuted by academic literature. “We got tired of hearing people say things like ‘Values voters determine the outcome of this election’,” says Lynn Vavreck of UCLA. “We got tired of hearing things written into the history books that weren’t true.” One group of professors who heard this message were the authors of TPD. Although their writing style does not quite qualify the book as a page-turner, TPD is essentially organised as a chronological narrative that is free of jargon and is sometimes outright funny. For example, it calls the share of delegates a candidate has won when a nomination is decided the “fat lady share”, in homage to the saying “It ain’t over ‘til the fat lady sings.” The book’s argument is simple, convincing and provocative. Following the debacle of the Democratic convention in 1968, when police and street protesters clashed violently for days while delegates chose a pro-Vietnam-war candidate against the electorate’s wishes, America’s two major political parties introduced binding primary elections to let the public select nominees. But in the very first election cycle under the new system, Democratic voters made the disastrous choice of an anti-war insurgent, George McGovern, who went on to lose 49 of the 50 states to Richard Nixon. As a result, TPD claims, the parties soon set about undermining their own reforms. After a brief period of trial and error, they succeeded, maintaining a veneer of democratic legitimacy while all-but-inevitably guiding voters towards the preferred choice of party heavyweights and interest groups. “The reformers of the 1970s tried to wrest the presidential nomination away from insiders and to bestow it on rank-and-file partisans,” the authors write. “But the people who are regularly active in party politics have regained much of the control that was lost…Insider control is not unshakable, but it has usually been sufficient to the task at hand for some two decades.” The arrow of causality TPD backs up this claim with resounding evidence. For every contested primary between 1980, when the authors believe parties recovered their power over the process, and 2004 they measure the relative effect of polls, endorsements, fund-raising and media coverage on candidates’ delegate shares. Although successful candidates tend to fare well on all these indicators, the authors find that endorsements—their preferred measure of party support—are the best single predictor of delegate-winning. More important, early endorsements tend to yield cash, news coverage and popularity later on. In contrast, an early fund-raising push, media bubble or poll surge does not usually produce a flurry of endorsements. They conclude that parties tell the electorate how to vote, rather than voters telling the party whom to support. When TPD was first published on the eve of Mr Obama’s election, it had virtually no impact on American politics. It was not until 2011, after Mr Silver cited the book in an article in the New York Times Magazine and the Republicans’ “invisible primary” to challenge Mr Obama was in full swing, that the public began to take notice: a look at Google searches reveals no significant interest for the phrase “invisible primary” before Mr Silver’s article. By May 2012 “invisible primary” had caught up with a well-known term like “efficient markets hypothesis” by search volume. And just when awareness of TPD was growing, its thesis was bolstered by an extraordinary performance. From the summer of 2011 until the Republicans’ South Carolina primary in January 2012, a parade of candidates with no support from the political elite (Michele Bachmann, Herman Cain and Newt Gingrich) took turns leading the polls. In the end it was Mitt Romney—whom many non-quantitative journalists dismissed as too moderate and establishment-friendly for an angry Republican electorate, even though he led the race for endorsements early on—who waltzed to the nomination. So three years later, when a clownish insurgent called Donald Trump leapt to the top of the Republican polls, data journalists had their ammunition ready. In a story last July entitled “Here’s Why He Won’t Win”, Andrew Prokop of Vox predicted it would be hard “for candidates like [Mr Trump] to appeal to party elites”. “Dear Media, Stop Freaking Out About Donald Trump’s Polls” was the title of a piece in November by Mr Silver. “Donald Trump…will most likely follow the classic pattern of a party-backed decline,” concurred Nate Cohn of “The Upshot” in July. And we wrote in late September that “Outsiders don’t win presidential nominations any more…barring a stunning reversal of precedent, [Mr Trump’s] failure to impress GOP elders…all but precludes [him] from becoming the party’s flag-bearer.” In a daily reminder to readers that Mr Trump’s bubble was sure to pop, “FiveThirtyEight” has paid homage to TPD by maintaining an “endorsement primary” tracker, which is updated each time a senior elected official announces support for a candidate. After Mr Trump’s poor showing in Iowa, such observers had reason to feel smug. One month later, however, it seems clear that Mr Trump is no Herman Cain. The first panic bells went off after his dominating performance in the New Hampshire primaries, which occurred in tandem with Bernie Sanders’s trouncing of Hillary Clinton, the establishment favourite. (“Bad Night for ‘The Party Decides’,” Ryan Lizza of the New Yorker tweeted as the polls were closing.) Mr Trump’s thumping win in South Carolina forced Jeb Bush, the original leader in the Republican “endorsement primary”, out of the race, setting off a new wave of sober predictions that the party would now clear the field for Marco Rubio to eviscerate Mr Trump one-on-one. Then came Mr Trump’s 22-percentage-point win in Nevada, his victories in seven of the 11 Super Tuesday states and the continuing division of his opposition. Since late February the very Republican governors and senators who previously swore he had to be stopped have begun to offer him their endorsements. There isn’t much time left for TPD to be proved right. What good is political science if it flubs the biggest development in American politics in generations? The authors of TPD themselves are responding cautiously to what might look like humiliation. Martin Cohen, of James Madison University, plaintively maintains that the book’s statistical model has actually held up rather well. TPD did include a crucial caveat in its argument: “The party and not individually powerful candidates decide nominations—but only if the party can make up its collective mind.” TPD found that a high share of early endorsements usually leads to the nomination. Although Hillary Clinton was widely considered the insider favourite in 2008, her endorsement totals on the eve of the Iowa caucuses lagged far behind her husband’s at the same stage in 1992 or Al Gore’s in 2000. Meanwhile, TPD’s authors noted that Mr Obama, the eventual victor, had already amassed a healthy share of endorsements from low-level party insiders. This year, Mrs Clinton really has been the overwhelming endorsement leader, and looks set to cruise to victory. In contrast, among the Republicans in 2016, no candidate received significant endorsement support by historical standards. Mr Bush, the endorsement leader, had 30% less backing from the party ahead of the Iowa caucuses than the lowest previous total on that date by an eventual Republican nominee. “The party really didn’t decide,” Mr Cohen says, “and as a result it was left to the voters.” Yet Mr Cohen is not hiding behind this technicality. “We think that it’s in the party’s interest to decide, and that they should be deciding,” he says. “The fact that they failed to is a lack of foresight on their part.” Even if TPD’s statistical model is sound, its central claim—that American political parties have successfully “beaten” the reforms intended to entrust nominations to the electorate—is hard to reconcile with Mr Trump’s winning streak. For political scientists, The Donald’s success paves the way for a host of new questions. What determines which are the elections where a “party can make up its collective mind”? How far can a party stretch the preferences of its voters before they revolt? Within the academy, no one will suggest that the authors of TPD should be muzzled or ignored just because they failed to foresee Mr Trump’s ascent. For data journalists, however, the stakes are higher. Mainstream audiences will not be satisfied with excuses or technicalities: the best and the brightest said that Mr Trump could never win, and it looks as if they were wrong. One crucial corrective would be to actually read the original versions of academic political-science texts rather than relying on caveat-free summaries: a close reading of TPD applied to the 2016 Republican race might have been entitled “The Party Hasn’t Decided, So Anything Goes”. Another would be to take a nibble of humble pie and recall that there is a reason “political science” sounds like an oxymoron: there are no iron laws in politics. There is only so much a study of ten primary campaigns between 1980 and 2004 can tell people about a new set of circumstances and candidates in 2016. Ultimately, however, popular evangelists for political science need to stand their ground. For years, sceptics cited the failure of baseball teams assembled by Billy Beane (the protagonist of Mr Lewis’s book, “Moneyball”) to win a championship as proof that statistics had no place in baseball. Today, virtually all these flat-earthers have been forced into early retirement. Every statistical model has its flaws, but presidential elections are still far easier to predict months in advance than, say, economic growth or the weather. Just like Mr Beane’s Oakland Athletics, Mr Silver’s disciples need to keep offering wagers to the Joe Scarboroughs of the world. In the long run, they—and therefore the voters who depend on them for information and analysis—will win more often than they lose.IN OCTOBER 2010 a wealthy South African, bidding at Bonhams in London, bought a portrait of a doe-eyed Indian girl from the island of Zanzibar that had been painted in 1945. The artist was Irma Stern, who was born in the Transvaal, the daughter of German-Jewish émigrés. Sentimental in style, it was not a fashionable work of art. Nevertheless, the bidder paid a record £2.37m ($3.3m) for the picture, more than twice the top estimate. Much has changed since that moment, when homesick white South Africans, grown rich on rising commodity prices, would spend millions on the work of artists who reminded them of their parents and grandparents and the white world they grew up in. Half a decade on, the global art world has discovered a quite different Africa—and in a big way. In the course of the 20th century African tribal art was praised by many outsiders, including Henri Matisse and Pablo Picasso, who absorbed what they saw as its “primitive” imagery into their own work. But few collectors on the continent or beyond were interested in Africa’s contemporary art, still less in its artists. One exception was Jean Pigozzi, heir to the Simca motoring fortune, who, starting in the 1980s, amassed a huge collection of contemporary African art, though never by going to the continent himself; instead, he sent a curator with cash, canvasses and paint for encouragement. Since then other collectors, both on the continent and beyond, have begun buying. First among them is Sindika Dokolo, a Congolese businessman who is married to Africa’s wealthiest woman, Isabel dos Santos, daughter of Angola’s president. Mr Dokolo owns more than 5,000 pieces of mostly contemporary art, and his foundation plans to build an exhibition space and, later, a museum in Portugal. In recent years galleries have been popping up all over the continent. Regional events like Dak’Art Biennale and LagosPhoto Festival are growing bigger. Last year the Venice Biennale appointed its first artistic director from Africa, Okwui Enwezor, a Nigerian curator who lives in New York and Munich. In the latest development, on March 3rd the historic Armory Show (on Piers 92 and 94) in New York unveiled its first show focusing on Sub-Saharan Africa. In 2017 Jochen Zeitz, a German art collector and conservationist, plans to open Zeitz Museum of Contemporary Art in Cape Town to show his art from Africa and the African diaspora. Four of the most prominent contemporary artists of African origin move with ease between Africa and the rest of the world. Julie Mehretu was born in Ethiopia and lives in New York, as does Kenyan-born Wangechi Mutu; El Anatsui (whose beer-bottle-top “fabrics”—pictured—are instantly recognisable) was born in Ghana, has worked for much of his career in Nigeria, and has been exhibited all over the world, as has William Kentridge, a white South African. Only the work of Ms Mutu and Mr Kentridge can be said to deal with the African experience directly, though both also address larger themes. Ms Mutu does so through an Afrofuturist exploration of gender and identity. Mr Kentridge is concerned with South African politics. The art world zeros in on a new region for two reasons. The first is that young people in fast-growing economies often begin buying art, as well as luxury goods, when they start becoming rich. The second is that local collectors favour local artists, and these are often undervalued. Buying and representing these artists is attractive to international dealers and collectors because, if a home-grown collecting culture does emerge, then prices for art from that region can only go up. Africa’s recent economic growth is a factor in its expanding art market. In the past decade the GDP of the 11 largest sub-Saharan countries has increased by roughly half, twice the rate in the rest of the world. “We have ten times as many collectors from South Africa as we did ten years ago,” says Joost Bosland, director of the Stevenson Gallery, which has showrooms in Cape Town and Johannesburg. The leader among the international auction houses, Bonhams, has seen average lot prices for African art increase fivefold, to $50,000, since it decided to hold stand-alone sales of African artists. Half its bidders now originate from within the continent. Bonhams has been so successful that both Sotheby’s and Phillips are thinking of copying their African sales. Only eight of the 14 artists featured in the special exhibition at the Armory, “African Perspectives”, are from galleries in Africa. The rest are based in Paris, London, Berlin and Seattle. To Julia Grosse and Yvette Mutumba, the curators of “African Perspectives”, this was a more accurate way of reflecting the world that many contemporary African artists now inhabit. How to classify someone who is born in Lagos, splits their time between there and Brussels, and does residencies in Hong Kong and New York? Everyone lives more globally now; artists are no exception. Another element is that growing interest in colonialism, slavery and the diaspora has expanded the story of Africa into the story of the world. Art with African or African-American origins is quickly gaining wider audiences across America. There are now museums of the African diaspora in both San Francisco and New York. In 2014 Harvard University opened the Ethelbert Cooper Gallery of African & African-American Art and the long delayed Africa Centre is being built just north of “Museum Mile” in New York, at Fifth Avenue and 110th Street. Barack Obama, America’s first president with an African father, will step down in 2017, but global interest in Africa’s artists is certainly not about to disappear.AT 17, Eric Brown had flown only once before: on his father’s lap in a one-seater Gloster biplane, when he was eight. This time the biplane was a Bücker Jungmann two-seater, and the pilot strapped him in with particular care. Nice of him, he thought. Minutes later, the aircraft was somersaulting like a performing flea: for the pilot was Ernst Udet, a German flying ace of the first world war. He clapped Eric heartily on the shoulder as he stumbled out and roared “Hals und Beinbruch!” Broken neck, broken legs, but you’re alive! The old fighter pilots’ motto summed up Captain Brown’s career. In the course of it he flew 487 different types of aircraft, most of them prototypes. He changed planes so often that he kept a loose-leaf folder, meticulously handwritten, of all the different cockpit layouts, hydraulics and emergency drills, to try to keep on top of things. Many of these craft he operated on aircraft-carriers; he clocked up 2,407 carrier landings and 2,721 take-offs, both world records. He tested the earliest helicopters, jets and rocket-powered machines. His working life took him from the wood-and-canvas craft in which he started with the Fleet Air Arm, to overseeing training on the nuclear strike force at Lossiemouth in the 1960s. The rising arc of power and accuracy was so steep that it astonished him. He faced his own demise on a regular basis. His de Havilland 108 once started oscillating so fast that he was blacking out, and just saved himself by pulling both sticks in time. His jet-powered flying-boat crashed into debris off Cowes and trapped him under water; others got him out. In a Tempest V his propeller froze in mid-flight and the engine caught fire. As a Scot, short on words but not confidence, he tended to react with a calm joke or two: “Let’s sort this out,” he would say to himself. This time, with his feet slow-roasting, he jumped. The slipstream was so strong that he had to catapult himself clear, landing in a duckpond. In short, accidents were ten a penny. He survived for two reasons: he was careful, and he was small. Small enough to curl up in a cockpit, rather than get his legs sheared off. Hence “Winkle”. In a glamorous trade he cut a neat, practical figure, but there was no lack of dash. He flew Spitfires into the black heart of cumulonimbus clouds to discover why aircraft often emerged from them in bits. He crash-landed aircraft without undercarriages, to see if that was a good idea. On aircraft-carriers he had to contend with too-short flight decks, pitching seas, failing to hook on the arrester wires or crashing into the barrier. He was such a dab hand, though, that he sometimes came in sideways, crab-wise, without a batsman, to glide to a perfect stop. And then he would wander off grinning. When he made the first-ever jet-aircraft landing on the carrier Ocean, screaming down in his favourite Vampire in December 1945, it was just such touch-down perfection, though the sea was so high that he had been ordered not to attempt it. Well, he wasn’t going to let the Americans do it first. A bump on landing All through the war the Germans kept one step ahead with aviation technology. As each new threat appeared, he had to work out how to counter it. On the aircraft-carrier Audacity in the north Atlantic in 1941 he was pitting fiery, beautiful little Martlets against Focke-Wulf Kurier bombers; he found the only way to dispatch them was to go for them head-on, shattering the windscreen to kill the pilots. When V1 flying bombs appeared he discovered that, by overtaking very close in a Tempest V, he could clip their wings with his own and send them plunging into the Channel. It struck him as strange that his life’s obsession had become to beat the Germans. That jaunt with Udet had sealed his passion for flying (though he already loved speed, and was the only boy at Edinburgh Royal High to ride a Norton 500cc motorbike). Udet had also inspired him to learn German and to teach there for a while. He admired the Germans for their industry and ingenuity. A colossal amount of both had been poured into fighter aviation. At the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough after the war he studied and flew many of these experimental machines. German experts helped him. In France he worked with them to fix and fly the Dornier 335, the fastest piston-engine aircraft. He searched for, and found, the top-secret Me 262, the world’s first operational jet fighter, so swift and with such a punch that he felt untouchable. He also test-flew the suicidally dangerous Me 163B, powered with rocket fuel so volatile that a bump on landing could explode the plane; its design became the basis of craft that could attempt supersonic flight. Having tried all these, and survived, he was the natural choice to train a new generation of German test pilots in the late 1950s. In those years he came across Luftwaffe aces whom, as a boy, he would have idolised. Having seen the walking dead of Bergen-Belsen, he was not about to repeat that mistake. But his job could be summed up as “Know the enemy” and in a way he had indeed come to know them, in that fellowship of death-defying souls. So when in 1945 he went to interrogate Hermann Goering, and at the end the ex-Reichsmarschall made to shake hands, Winkle cried instead “Hals und Beinbruch!” And they both tentatively smiled.Super Tuesday in America saw a dozen state primary elections in the presidential nominating process. Hillary Clinton reinforced her position as the front-runner in the Democratic race, winning Texas, Georgia, Virginia and Massachusetts. Bernie Sanders took Colorado, Minnesota and two other states, but he remains far behind Mrs Clinton in the delegate count. Donald Trump lengthened his lead in the Republican contest by winning most states on offer. Ted Cruz won his home state of Texas and Marco Rubio chalked up his first win, in Minnesota. But it looks increasingly unlikely that the party establishment will be able to trip Mr Trump. See here, here and here.  David Duke, a former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, backed Mr Trump for president. Never normally lost for words, Mr Trump stopped short of denouncing Mr Duke in a TV interview, prompting another volley of criticisms from Republicans and Democrats. Mr Trump deflected these by saying he hadn’t understood the question. See article.  Clarence Thomas, a Supreme Court justice, broke his decade-long silence on the bench (thought to be a record) and asked questions in a case on gun rights. The audience gasped. Many theories have been proffered for his failure to speak, but the death last month of the loquacious Antonin Scalia, a close ally, may have left Justice Thomas thinking that the time has come for him to stick up for strict constructionism. More than a slap on the wrist The UN Security Council adopted tougher-than-expected sanctions on North Korea following its nuclear test and rocket launch earlier this year. They include mandatory inspections of all shipments to the country, a ban on sales of aviation fuel and a halt to exports from the North of iron and coal. But China will need to be the chief enforcer of the sanctions if they are to work. See article.  Chinese internet companies shut down the microblogs of Ren Zhiqiang, a property tycoon. He had used an account with 38m followers to criticise President Xi Jinping’s efforts to tighten Communist Party control over the media. China’s internet regulator accused Mr Ren of publishing “illegal” messages. A court in the coastal Chinese province of Zhejiang sentenced a Christian pastor, Bao Guohua, to 14 years in prison for corruption and inciting people to disturb social order. His wife was jailed for 12 years. Mr Bao’s refusal to remove a cross from his church’s roof had angered the authorities. A Christian lawyer who had supported churches that erect illegal crosses was shown on local TV apparently confessing to having colluded with foreigners to stir up trouble. Help is on the way The European Union announced that it will provide €700m ($760m) in aid to accommodate migrants in countries overwhelmed by the refugee crisis. Most of the money is expected to go to Greece. Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, scolded Austria and other countries for clamping down on refugee arrivals, and vowed not to abandon Greece. The leader of Spain’s Socialist Party, Pedro Sánchez, failed in his first attempt to form a minority government with the upstart centrist Ciudadanos party. Both the centre-right Popular Party and the far-left Podemos party voted against the proposed coalition in parliament. If Mr Sánchez fails again in a second vote planned for March 4th, the caretaker government will probably call new elections. Ireland’s governing coalition of the Fine Gael and Labour parties suffered a stinging electoral defeat, dropping from a combined 113 seats to 57. The opposition Fianna Fáil party, which came second with 44 seats, vowed not to join a coalition with Fine Gael, leaving no clear direction for forming a new government. See article.  The EU and America revealed details of their proposed deal for companies to share digital information, which replaces the Safe Harbour agreement that was thrown out by Europe’s courts. Officials said the deal contains measures to protect stricter European privacy guarantees. Better than nothing Argentina reached an agreement in principle to pay four of the largest creditors whose refusal to accept earlier debt-restructuring offers precipitated a default by the country in 2014. Argentina is to pay Elliott Management, a hedge fund, and three other holdouts $4.7 billion, 25% less than they are claiming. If the deal goes through, Argentina will be able to resume borrowing on international credit markets. See article.  Police in Colombia arrested Santiago Uribe, the brother of Álvaro Uribe, a former president, for allegedly leading a paramilitary group suspected of murdering criminals and anti-government guerrillas in the 1990s. Santiago Uribe denies the charges; his supporters say his arrest is motivated by politics. Álvaro Uribe, who is now a senator, opposes the government’s plan to end the conflict with the FARC rebels. The Jamaica Labour Party won the country’s election, defeating the governing People’s National Party. Andrew Holness, Jamaica’s new prime minister, campaigned against the PNP government’s austerity programme and promised to exempt from income tax 72% of the Jamaicans who pay it. Fingers crossed A ceasefire in Syria went into effect on February 27th. Despite numerous small violations, it appeared to be holding, allowing a smoother delivery of aid. See article.  In Iran moderates did well in elections to the parliament, inflicting defeats on hardliners despite their attempts to stop the moderates from standing. The parliament has only limited powers, but reformists were nonetheless cheered. See here and here.  Jihadists from al-Shabab killed at least 30 people when they detonated two bombs in the Somali town of Baidoa. Concerns increased that civil war may break out in Burundi after protests and violence over a decision by Pierre Nkurunziza to run for a third term as president. In the latest escalation of troubles, the government ordered all foreign nationals to give their details to the police. Robert Mugabe, the president of Zimbabwe and the world’s oldest head of state, celebrated his 92nd birthday with a lavish party and a 92kg cake. Zimbabwe, which is suffering its worst drought in decades, is near economic collapse and unable to pay civil servants.Volkswagen acknowledged that its former boss, Martin Winterkorn, had been handed a memo in May 2014 that mentioned inconsistencies in emissions from its diesel cars. That was more than a year before the German carmaker admitted to cheating on emissions tests in the United States, though VW says it is not known whether Mr Winterkorn read the memo, as it was included in a batch of “extensive weekend mail”. See article.  Aubrey McClendon, one of the pioneers of America’s shale-gas revolution, died after his car hit a concrete wall in Oklahoma City. A day earlier he had been charged by the Department of Justice with conspiring to fix the price of oil and gas leases between 2007 and 2012, when he was CEO of Chesapeake Energy. He had denied the allegations, insisting he was being “singled out” as the only person in the energy industry to face criminal charges for bidding jointly on leaseholds in the 110 years of the Sherman Act. Every little step The People’s Bank of China cut its reserve requirement ratio—the amount, relative to deposits, that banks must keep with the central bank—by half a percentage point. It is the fifth reduction in just over a year. By freeing money for lending, the PBoC hopes to stimulate the slowing economy. Manufacturing activity in China fell in February to its lowest level in years. The euro zone slipped back into deflation for the first time since September. Consumer prices fell by an annual 0.2% in February; economists had expected the figure to be flat. The European Central Bank will meet on March 10th to weigh more stimulus in order to tackle persistently low inflation. Sweden’s economy grew by a respectable 1.3% in the fourth quarter of last year compared with the previous three months, and by 4.1% for all of 2015. Consumer spending, investment and exports all rose faster than expected. Sweden has a negative interest rate of -0.5%; a robust economy makes it unlikely that the central bank will cut it further. A potential bidding war for the London Stock Exchange loomed when ICE, which owns the New York Stock Exchange, said it was considering making an offer. The LSE is already in advanced talks with Deutsche Börse about a merger. One of the LSE’s most attractive assets is its profitable clearing-house business in swaps, bonds and other financial instruments. Out of Africa After a century of doing business on the continent, Barclays said it would leave Africa and focus on its core banking activities in Britain and America. The bank is selling assets in part to boost its capital. It also cut its dividend by half to help shore up its balance-sheet. See article.  Apple and the FBI took their tussle over accessing the iPhone of a terrorist to Congress. The hearing produced more heat than light, with Apple defending its decision not to help the agency unlock the device on privacy grounds, and the FBI asking “Are we comfortable with technical design decisions that result in barriers to obtaining evidence of a crime?” Facebook confronted two legal challenges. Police in Brazil arrested an executive at Facebook because it failed to comply with a court order to turn over messages sent by suspected drug-traffickers through WhatsApp, which is owned by the tech giant. Facebook says it can’t comply as it can’t retain or intercept user messages on the messaging service. In Germany antitrust regulators started an inquiry into whether it abuses its dominance in social networks to collect personal data. Amazon made its first proper foray into Britain’s supermarket industry when it teamed up with Morrisons to deliver its produce. Britain, with its densely populated towns, has a vibrant online- shopping market; 27% of Britons buy groceries online at least once a month. Another week, another woeful annual earnings release from a mining company, as Glencore reported a net loss for 2015 of $5 billion. Its debt pile remained high, at $26 billion at the end of the year. But Ivan Glasenberg, Glencore’s chief executive, said that the company had “learnt lessons” from the past and was on track to reduce its debt to $15 billion by 2017. The parent trap Disney introduced variable pricing for tickets to its American theme parks. The new system has three pricing bands, with the peak ticket costing about a fifth more than previously. New “value days” will be priced about 5% lower than the old flat rate. Parents with school-age children will feel the market is again working against them, but the changes are similar to those already implemented by other theme parks.More KAL's cartoons
