HILLARY CLINTON will be the Democratic nominee; the man most likely to face her in November on the Republican ticket is Donald Trump. Those are the battle lines after the primaries on Super Tuesday. In many ways this is profoundly gloomy. Mr Trump has said ever more repellent things about immigrants, women and Muslims and declined to condemn white supremacists. But he changes his sales pitch as easily as his socks: in a speech after winning seven out of 11 states, he stopped snarling and tried to sound presidential. It would be unwise to underestimate his ability to feign gravitas and transform himself into an apparent centrist. The only obstacle between Mr Trump and the Oval Office would be Mrs Clinton. She is a formidable and in some ways admirable candidate, but flawed. She is unloved by bits of her party’s base and subject to an investigation into whether she mishandled classified information. Small wonder that so many who contemplate American politics today sink into despair. But with a large dose of optimism and continued faith in the good sense of American voters, it is just possible to see November’s election in a more positive light. The vote for the presidency could yet yield the reshaping of the two main parties and a political realignment that leads to a less stagnant and gridlocked government. Be nice now This optimistic scenario depends on converting today’s antagonism into a force for change. The primaries have made clear that a large share of American voters are angry: angry with their own side’s representatives, angry with their opponents and angry with the world. So far, that anger has been channelled into divisiveness. On the right, Mr Trump has exploited the discontent by insulting his way to the front of the pack, stirring up racial resentment as he goes, delighting crowds with a list of proposals that run from the unethical to the unworkable. On parts of the left, the rage is more polite but, particularly where it is aimed at Wall Street, no less deeply felt. In recent elections partisan fissures have been reinforced by the brutal maths of voter turnout. Polling shows that a majority of Republicans and Democrats believe that the other lot are so depraved as to pose a threat to the nation itself. Because it is hard to persuade people who think like this to switch sides, electoral strategists argue that chasing swing voters is pointless. The easiest extra votes come from the 40% of the electorate who typically stay at home in a presidential poll. Each side therefore concentrates on stirring up people who support it but might not vote. That raises the anger to a new pitch. If this desperate logic is repeated in a Clinton v Trump race, the contest could have consequences both ugly and far-reaching, particularly for the Republicans. After winning a race fuelled by anger and led by Mr Trump, the party would almost certainly ditch its attachment to free trade and a muscular foreign policy and retreat into isolationism, xenophobia and economic populism. If it survived that shift (a big if), it would by the middle of the century be a white-nationalist party in a country that will be majority non-white. More likely, it would fracture, parts of the Republican coalition spinning off to find a new home elsewhere (see article). For Mrs Clinton, going down the angry route might not split the party, but would almost certainly result in defeat. Democrats tend to fare poorly when their anguish overflows and begins to sound like contempt for America. It is hard to imagine Mrs Clinton credibly playing the political insurgent. She has decades of experience when the angriest voters want a novice. Nobody can out-hate Mr Trump. So it is encouraging that Mrs Clinton celebrated her victories on Super Tuesday by calling for more “love and kindness” in politics. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar The opportunity for a better outcome lies in the asymmetry of the risks. Mrs Clinton has the opportunity to put together a coalition of anti-Trump voters broader than the one that carried Barack Obama to victory in 2008 and 2012. Despair over Mr Trump has reached such an intensity among some Republicans that the usual rules about there being no swing voters may no longer apply. If Mrs Clinton were to combine a high turnout on her own side with a sizeable number of Republican abstentions and spoilt ballots and some voters who are prepared to switch from red to blue, then Democrats could not just win the presidency with a landslide, but also wrest back control of the Senate. To form this coalition for stopping the blond Berlusconi, Mrs Clinton would have to woo moderate, business-minded Republicans, and such folk would in turn have to put the national interest ahead of their tribe’s victory in November. Republicans like to talk about the importance of character (see Lexington); Mr Trump offers a chance to show that means something. Mr Trump often insults other Republicans; they owe him no loyalty. Some prominent Republicans have already begun to attack him, including Mitt Romney, the party’s nominee in 2012. More will have to make that move. Don’t throw it away After the election a broad coalition could melt away as fast as it had formed. Democrats could use their advantage to force through what they can without the support of their opponents while they have the chance. They would then be punished in subsequent elections and the federal government would return to its familiar divided self: unable to pass budgets, trim spending on entitlements or find money to repair roads. Or a President Hillary Clinton might argue for the virtues of democratic compromise, and not claim that she can magically give her core voters everything they want all of the time. If she were able to pursue a different kind of politics, one that seeks to deal with some Republican concerns as well as Democratic ones, she might just hold the new consensus together for longer, reshaping the parties, making the country more governable and burying Mr Trump’s offer of an America turned against itself. This is the distant promise that 2016 holds. As the battle lines are drawn, try to bear it in mind.EVERY second three more Indians experience the internet for the first time. By 2030 more than 1 billion of them will be online. In June last year one in four mobiles used in India was a smartphone, up from one in five just six months earlier. Add in two more facts—India boasts the world’s fastest-growing large economy, and the planet’s biggest population of millennials—and you can see why the likes of Facebook, Uber and Google are falling over themselves to establish footholds there. No battle for the online future of India is more intense than the one now being waged in e-commerce (see article). Sales are still tiny, at $16 billion last year, but the country is the world’s fastest-growing e-commerce market and is prized by America’s and China’s internet titans. India has become the biggest test of Amazon’s international ambitions. Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder, wants it to be his second-largest market, after America, and has backed his plans with billions of dollars of investment. His opponents are platforms like Flipkart and Snapdeal, founded by locals and funded by some of the biggest names in tech, among them Alibaba, China’s e-commerce champion. As these companies jostle for market share, they are spending feverishly on logistics and discounts to lure consumers online. Capital may dry up for some; in February a Morgan Stanley mutual fund sharply lowered the valuation of its stake in Flipkart. But whoever wins or loses in this frenzied contest, the importance of e-commerce stretches beyond individual firms and into the wider economy. In the West e-commerce companies piggybacked on an existing infrastructure of shops, banks and logistics firms. In India the game being played by the e-commerce pioneers is leapfrog. It could become a model for emerging markets around the world. Pay as you grow Indian e-commerce has such potential because it can bring three changes more profound than convenience and keen prices. The first is faster financial development. China already provides one example. Alipay, an arm of Alibaba, overcomes mistrust between buyers and sellers by holding on to customers’ money until they have safely received their goods. Now run by an affiliate called Ant Financial, Alipay has more than 400m accounts that let consumers buy products, pay bills and transfer money. The torrent of information that Alibaba gathered on merchants and consumers was the basis for a lending business. Something similar is under way in India. Paytm, which provides digital wallets and is itself backed by Ant Financial, has 120m accounts, nearly six times the number of credit cards in India. E-commerce companies are also helping small businesses obtain loans that they would otherwise have struggled to raise. Amazon India rolled out such a programme for its sellers last month. In January Snapdeal announced a partnership to streamline loans from the State Bank of India. Second, e-commerce firms could help overcome India’s ropy infrastructure and vast geography. Where roads are clogged and infrastructure is decrepit, the rival firms are melding warehouses and local outposts into idiosyncratic distribution networks. About half of Flipkart’s and Snapdeal’s customers are outside India’s biggest cities. Some are still farther afield: Amazon claims to be helping more than 6,000 Indian businesses sell abroad. China again shows what can be done. Alibaba is connecting remote rural areas to the online economy; there are now 780 “Taobao villages”, rural communities in which at least 10% of households are shopping or selling over the internet. The third big impact of e-commerce in India is on retailing itself. Shopping malls and chain stores account for only about one-tenth of total retail sales. Already, the combined sales of India’s top three e-commerce sites, Flipkart, Snapdeal and Amazon, surpass those of the ten largest offline retailers. Two-thirds of Indians are below the age of 35. For these young people, armed with smartphones, shopping is likely to be very different from what it was for their parents. Malls and chains will not disappear, but they may never be as prevalent as they are in the West. That in turn will stimulate the rise of other digital firms. India’s tech scene is thriving. Tiger Global, a Flipkart investor, also backs an Indian online classified business and a messenger app that helps users avoid data costs. SoftBank, which backs Snapdeal, funds a mobile-advertising platform. In 2014 only America, Britain and Israel saw more new tech startups. Platform boost Simply to assume that e-commerce will conjure up growth—particularly of the labour-intensive sort that India needs—would be a mistake. The market in China had a very different starting-point, for instance. When the likes of Alibaba got going, it helped that China was already home to many manufacturers looking for new ways to sell excess inventory. India’s manufacturing base is much smaller, especially for electronics, e-commerce’s best-selling category. India is also poorer. A smaller share of its population is online—32% last year, compared with 52% in China. Indians speak more than 20 languages, which complicates marketing. The budget unveiled by Narendra Modi’s government this week includes plans to upgrade 50,000km (30,000 miles) of roads, but India is not about to possess a gleaming motorway network to rival China’s. Mr Modi’s continued failure to install a harmonised goods and services tax blunts the benefits of e-commerce. Yet in its heft, governance and manufacturing clout, China is also an outlier. India is a better template for the e-commerce battle in other emerging markets. Its logistical woes provide a test of firms’ ingenuity. If they find a way to deliver goods profitably there, they may succeed elsewhere. If they falter, their stumbles will provide lessons. That is all the more likely because India’s e-commerce is so international. Naspers, a Flipkart investor, backs ventures in Nigeria, South Africa and Egypt, among other places. E-commerce in India is a local battle for customers, but it is also a battle for the future.THE conservatives did everything they could to prevent it, abusing the power of the state to disqualify thousands of candidates they judged too prominent, too moderate or both. But the election on February 26th of Iran’s parliament, the Majlis, was a slap in the face to them nonetheless. Though complete results are not yet in, moderates and centrists look likely to control the new chamber (see article). The hardliners, who won handily in 2012, before Western nuclear sanctions began to bite, were pushed back. They call themselves “principlists” because of their stern promotion of premodern values. Iranian voters, it seems, reject their principles. The election is good news for Iran’s reform-minded president, Hassan Rohani. It demonstrates just how solidly the nation’s voters support the deal he negotiated with world powers to roll back the country’s nuclear-enrichment programme in return for relief from sanctions. The principlists in the old parliament had tried, but failed, to block it. The poll will also make it easier for Mr Rohani to continue with his economic reforms, which involve opening Iran to more foreign investment and freeing the private sector to compete against inefficient state firms that serve largely to enrich religious and military bigwigs. And it is surely a good omen for his chances of re-election as president next year. Still, one should not overstate the significance of the vote. The new parliament is a weaker, less reliable ally than Mr Rohani might have hoped. Due to all the disqualifications, the new moderate list is less impressive and less reformist than it could have been. The parliament itself, though not irrelevant, is not a very powerful body. Its decisions have to be vetted by the Council of Guardians—the reactionary grandees who disqualified so many moderates. And over the whole political edifice—parliament, president and all—stands the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who wields vast powers, especially over foreign and security policy. Even if he wanted to, Mr Rohani could not act as an Iranian Mikhail Gorbachev. Mr Khamenei insists that the nuclear deal has no implications for any other forms of co-operation with the West; and he has set his face against any relaxation of the country’s strict Islamic legal code. Besides, it is not at all clear that Mr Rohani, a member of the old revolutionary elite, is setting out to be anything more than an economic reformer. Still stirring up trouble Iranians have lived through this before. The election in 1997 of President Muhammad Khatami, who genuinely sought political reform, was followed by the election of a supportive Majlis. But the mullahs’ stifling grip loosened not at all. So do not expect Iran’s dismal record on human rights to improve. (In one village last year, every adult male was reportedly executed on drugs charges.) Nor should the West count on a more pliant partner in the Middle East. At the moment, Iran is standing tall in the region. Its support for Bashar al-Assad’s homicidal regime in Syria has been reinforced by Russian bombers. It is the dominant force in Iraq, its mostly Shia neighbour. And it is giving its old Sunni rival, Saudi Arabia, a bloody nose in Yemen. Having asked them to dismantle Iran’s nuclear programme, Mr Khamenei will need to placate Iran’s hardliners in other ways. Funding for the Revolutionary Guards, including its Quds Force, which operates in several countries, is likely to go up, not down. Iran’s support for Hizbullah, its battle-hardened proxy in Syria and on Israel’s borders, will probably grow. Free from sanctions, Iran is likely to remain prickly, no matter how moderate its parliament appears.ONE of South-East Asia’s richest and hitherto most stable countries, Malaysia ought to be a beacon. Its constitution is liberal, and its brand of Islam generally tolerant. Its diverse, English-speaking population, combining ethnic Malays, Chinese and Indians, gives it zest and vim. Yet under the prime minister, Najib Razak, the country is regressing at alarming speed. Its politics stinks (see article), its economy is in trouble, and there are worrying signs that the government is not above stirring up ethnic and religious divisions. For the past year allegations of corruption have swirled around Mr Najib. They centre around hundreds of millions of dollars that made their way into his bank accounts before the most recent general election, in 2013 (see article). Investigators are looking into whether the money is linked to a troubled state investment firm, 1MDB, whose advisory board Mr Najib chairs. He denies wrongdoing. His attorney-general has ruled that the money was a legal donation from an unnamed Saudi royal, and that much of it has been returned. For Malaysians, the precise nature of what happened is not the main point. Mr Najib presented himself as a liberal out to remake the sleazy system of money politics by which the ruling United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) has held power since independence. He was to open up a crony economy. And he was to do away with repressive colonial-era laws, such as that for sedition. Now Mr Najib’s credibility is in tatters. Facing inquiries around 1MDB, he has engineered the retirement of a pesky police chief, replaced an attorney-general and promoted members of an inquisitive parliamentary committee into the cabinet, where they can do less harm. Far from loosening colonial laws, the government is wielding the sedition law with new zeal. It is blocking news websites and hounding opponents (the opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, is in prison on charges of sodomy). Even yellow T-shirts have been outlawed since citizens protesting against corruption took to wearing them. The more Mr Najib cracks down, the more he alienates those who were once inclined to support him. Foreign investors and others should be worried. The government is floundering in its responses to a sharp slowdown in the economy and to a falling currency. Cheap oil has hurt Malaysia, but its wretched politics will hold it back more in the long run. The government is now using dog-whistle politics to appeal to its ethnic-Malay, Muslim base, and is refusing to distance itself sufficiently from Islamists seeking the introduction of harsh sharia punishments. Pro-government bigots in the street have told ethnic-Chinese Malaysians to “go back to China”. This is dangerous. Malaysia has seen race riots before, and could see them again. Nearby Singapore, with its different mix of the same ethnic groups, should also be alarmed. 1 Massive Development Balls-up Malaysia’s problems run deep. UMNO is out of ideas and seems incapable of rejuvenating itself. The fractured, rudderless opposition does not have the winning combination to overcome UMNO’s gerrymandering and harassment. And the next election is anyway still two years away. Restoring confidence will be tricky. But for as long as Malaysia is governed in the style of Mr Najib, ordinary Malaysians will suffer and their country will be deprived of the standing that it surely deserves in the world.IMAGINE being asked to take part in an activity that gives you somewhere between a 1-in-5 and 1-in-20 chance of a serious head injury over a four-month period. That could lead to weeks of impaired mental performance and headaches, and, especially if the blows are repeated, the danger of longer-term mental-health problems. Now imagine that your child is the one taking that risk. Such are the dangers associated with playing American football. The risks of concussion are higher still in rugby, one of the world’s fastest-growing sports. These concerns have already prompted some changes. Rugby has introduced “head-injury assessment” rules, enabling players who have suspected concussions to be substituted temporarily so that they can be checked by medical staff. All 50 of America’s states have adopted “return to play” laws that require medical clearance before younger athletes who have sustained a concussion can take to the field again. Such measures are welcome, but they sidestep the real issue: is it safe to play a game whose rules require people to slam into each other? As understanding grows of what happens in the brain when collisions take place (see article), the answer seems certain to be “no”. Adults are able to consent to taking risks of this sort, even if they are not yet fully understood. That does not relieve sports authorities of their duty of care to players—one reason why American-football coaches at Ivy League universities have just agreed to get rid of “full contact” training sessions during the playing season. But liberal principles argue against the most drastic interventions. Boxing; barbarically dangerous though it is, should not be banned, nor should other sports. Children are a different case, not simply because they cannot give informed consent but also because their brains are more susceptible to long-term damage. Researchers at the University of Illinois found that children who had sustained a single sports-related concussion still had impaired brain function two years later. Some measures to protect children from harm are already in place. Some states in America have introduced rules for American football to restrict full-contact sessions in high schools: incidents of concussion have fallen as a result. Although the risks of brain injury in association football are lower, US Soccer, the governing body for the sport in America, has banned headers for children aged ten and under, and restricted them for 11- to 13-year-olds. More should be done. No child should be obliged to play full-contact American football, rugby or ice hockey in schools. And for those who do take to the field or rink, schools should do more to reduce the risks—from recording and monitoring injuries systematically and requiring that children train with players their own size rather than their age, to insisting on non-contact forms of play. Rugby has most to do, particularly given plans to raise the number of child players. This week doctors and academics rightly called for a ban on tackling in rugby games played in British and Irish schools. Not tackling it head-on None of this is popular. Critics contend that all sports are dangerous. They argue for the benefits of exercise and say that the nanny state is out of control. But other sports do not involve deliberate impact and are just as energetic. And ensuring the safety of children hardly counts as excessive intervention. Critics raise another, cultural, objection: that the spirit of games like rugby and American football is in danger of being lost. There is something to that. But an activity that rests on exposing children to long-term neurological damage needs a better defence.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] High ho silver lining I was disappointed by “The right way to do drugs” (February 13th). It didn’t go far enough in calling for cannabis to be legalised. There is no lethal dose of cannabis, though there are lethal doses of the government-approved alternatives to cannabis. Getting users off deadly alcohol, say, and towards cannabis will save lives. Marijuana should be as cheap and as accessible as possible. Taxing and restricting it will not fix the problem. There is a functional black market and it is not going to end just because the government “sort of” legalised pot. DAN KING In my experience a cost calculation drives the preference among occasional users for higher THC content in cannabis. Only one or two tokes are required to give occasional users the desired high, so a little weed goes a lot further. It follows that, to the extent there is price sensitivity, higher prices and taxes would have the perverse effect of pushing your 80% of occasional users towards inhaling more smoke. The calculus for the 20% who are heavy users is different. There is an intensity factor. Even though heavy users may be high for longer, they are not nearly as high as the occasional user. They do indeed prefer higher THC content, just to achieve any effect at all. So in their case higher prices and taxes would encourage the continuation of a black market. PETER CONROY Japanese television “Anchors away” (February 20th) submitted that “it is no coincidence” that the three anchors who left their TV programmes in Japan “are robust critics of the government”, implying the government had intervened in their leaving. However, Yoshihide Suga, the chief cabinet secretary, clearly stated at a press conference on February 9th that “freedom of the press and editorial rights must be guaranteed.” The government of Japan has been and will remain fully committed to freedom of expression and freedom of the press. The descriptions in your article have no ground. YASUHISA KAWAMURA Small but mighty Lexington noted that if no presidential candidate gets 270 electoral-college votes, the contest is decided by the House of Representatives, which will be Republican-held (February 20th). However, in such a circumstance each state gets only one vote in the House, regardless of how many representatives are elected from that state. Presumably, Texas would vote Republican and California would vote Democrat. But numerous smaller states would have an equal weight with the more populous ones. RYAN SCHAAP Mix it up It is true: diversity undermines trust (Schumpeter, February 13th). But this may be its greatest gift. When ethnically different others are present, people tend to remain cautious, scrutinise information and reach better decisions. Our research, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, showed that ethnically diverse markets are significantly less likely to bubble compared with homogenous ones. The results held for North America and South-East Asia, notwithstanding the differences in culture, history and ethnic composition. In homogenous markets, we reason, trust in other people’s reasonableness can cause erroneous beliefs to spread more readily. Diversity makes you better precisely because it makes you less trusting. PROFESSOR SHEEN LEVINE Divide and choose? I read Bagehot’s fascinating article on the divergent views of the European Union from people in Cambridge and Peterborough (February 20th). This divergence has little to do with nativism or nationalism or even class. It is a pertinent fact that because of its role as a centre for agriculture, food processing, packaging and logistics, Peterborough has borne a heavy burden in respect of unskilled immigration from the EU: more than 30,000 new migrants from 2004 to 2011. This puts huge pressure on public services, and has arguably kept wages low and entrenched welfare dependency among many indigenous and low-skilled workers. Business, and the Treasury, have reaped the economic benefit of this large-scale migration, but local taxpayers have footed the bill and seen the pressures consequent in this unprecedented demographic change. Local people can’t have helped noticing, and are canny enough to understand the role of the EU Free Movement Directive. People in Peterborough have seen the cost of unrestricted immigration and, as a result, are more conscious than most of the benefits or otherwise of Britain’s membership of the EU. Is it any wonder that they are more sceptical? STEWART JACKSON I am not sure about Bagehot’s “educational-cultural divide” over Europe. The Brexit referendum has not come about because of an outcry across the land by ordinary folk or because public opinion has been consistently against EU membership, or because people are calling for an immediate exit. We are having a referendum because of a battle within the educational and political elite. It is symptomatic of the division within the Tory Party, not within the country, yet at least. However, with “in” campaigners like Jeremy Corbyn ranting something along the lines of “Workers of the EU, unite!”, the divisions could get very real, very soon. LUKE CARR Double entendres Johnson, ruminating on the secret meaning of “feisty” (February 13th) would have done well to have provided a whiff, as it were, of etymology. In Mark Forsyth’s marvellous book, “The Etymologicon”, and largely corroborated by the Oxford English Dictionary, feisty, in the sense of “spirited”, is derived from “fist” or “feist”, meaning a small dog. This in turn comes from the phrase “a fisting hound”, where “to fist” means to fart. VENKAT ANANTHARAM Catching the wave As a resident of next-door Devon I read your article about Cornwall’s post-industrial economy with great interest (“Winter sun”, February 20th). In addition to the demographic, political and infrastructural factors which you identify, advances in affordable wetsuit technology have also played an important role in tourism. As a result, anyone can spend as much time in the sea as they want the whole year round. The effect has been revolutionary, as local surfers know only too well. ANTHONY KINGIT IS a quiet morning on the outskirts of Mumbai, the air still mild. Dusty streets are dappled with sunlight, a stray dog rummages through some rubbish, the shutters are lifted on a few tiny shops. A man pushes a cart bearing a pyramid of oranges. And a delivery boy named Anil is already racing along his route on a motor bike borrowed from his uncle, his delivery backpack as large as he is. He has been up for hours, planning his route and carefully filling his bag with the packages to be dropped off first stacked near the top. Anil enters a block of flats, squeezes his backpack into a narrow lift and delivers a shirt to a 21-year-old taxi driver. In a neighbouring tower he hands a smartphone case to a 16-year-old who uses several apps to do the shopping for his family. A short ride away, a 78-year-old grandmother is a particularly pleased customer—with help from her grandson, she has bought some clay pickling jars that she couldn’t find elsewhere and some high-quality saris at a knock-down price. For Anil, it is gruelling work. But he is betting that e-commerce in India has nowhere to go but up, and he wants to ride up with it. In the next 15 years India will see more people come online than any other country. Last year e-commerce sales were about $16 billion; by 2020, according to Morgan Stanley, a bank, the online retail market could be more than seven times larger. Such sales are expected to grow faster in India than in any other market. This has attracted a flood of investment in e-commerce firms, the impact of which may go far beyond just displacing offline retail. India’s small businesses have limited access to loans; most of its consumers do not have credit cards, or for that matter credit. The e-commerce companies are investing in logistics, helping merchants borrow and giving consumers new tools to pay for goods. Amit Agarwal, who runs Amazon.in, holds out the hope that “We could actually be a catalyst to transform India: how India buys, how India sells, and even transform lives.” The jewel in the crown Amazon wants to make India its second-biggest market, after America. For the time being, though, with just 12% of the market, it lags behind the home-grown successes, Flipkart (45%) and Snapdeal (26%). All three, as well as some smaller competitors, are spending at a blistering rate. As global markets dip and Silicon Valley unicorns stumble, the international funding that makes this possible may dry up. Doubts about the sustainability of the companies’ present plans were underlined when, on February 26th, one of Morgan Stanley’s mutual funds marked down the value of its stake in Flipkart by 27%. If the prospect of changing India a billion deliveries at a time is a beguiling one, it is not for the faint-hearted. India’s visionaries keep their spirits up by remembering the example of China. Chinese e-commerce grew by nearly 600% between 2010 and 2014, making the country the biggest e-commerce market in the world today. It managed this largely through the growth of indigenous companies: mighty Amazon merely nips at the heels of home-grown giants Alibaba and JD.com; eBay has all but left the stage. And in the process China’s top e-commerce firms came to offer an astonishing range of services. Alibaba, founded by Jack Ma in 1999 and now valued at $184 billion, provides the best illustration. To calm anxieties about buying online Alibaba created Alipay, which holds a shopper’s payment in escrow until he receives his order. The tool has evolved into a financial-services company, Ant Financial, which last year serviced more than 400m Alipay accounts and made over 2m loans to small businesses and entrepreneurs. To provide Chinese consumers with access to foreign goods the firm’s services include not just online listings but marketing, shipping and help with customs. Alibaba is now building service centres in remote areas where shoppers can order, pick up and sell goods, as well as pay their bills. It is a further step in its attempts not merely to benefit from the growth in Chinese consumption, but to shape and accelerate it. The degree to which it has succeeded suggests that the earlier an e-commerce company arrives in a country’s development, the wider its role might be. India is in many ways a tougher market for e-commerce than China. Its population is poorer and its infrastructure worse. But its prospects look remarkable. Income per person, which in 2014 was $1,570, could be twice that by 2025. Two-thirds of Indians are younger than 35, and their phones give a huge number of them access to the internet. In December 2014 smartphones accounted for one in five Indian mobiles, according to Goldman Sachs. Just six months later, they accounted for one in four (see chart 1). Morgan Stanley expects internet penetration to rise from 32% in 2015 to 59% in 2020. By 2030, India is projected to be a one-billion-person digital market. The prospect of a second market growing to a near-Chinese size attracts those who made a packet the first time round. Bob van Dijk, the chief executive of Naspers, a South African firm that backed JD.com and Tencent, China’s largest social-media company, says he looks for countries with big populations, rising smartphone use and few retail chains. India, where malls, supermarkets and branded chains, or what analysts call “organised retail”, account for just 10% or so of the total market, fits the bill perfectly. The middlemen Naspers owns a 17% stake in Flipkart; other JD.com investors, including Tiger Global Management, in New York, and DST Global, a Russian fund, have also backed the company. Japan’s SoftBank, a big investor in Alibaba, has backed Snapdeal since 2013, and Alibaba itself followed suit last August. Meanwhile Alibaba’s Ant Financial owns a 20% stake in India’s Paytm, which began as a mobile-wallet company and now competes with Snapdeal and Flipkart as an online marketplace. The three firms have a combined valuation of almost $25 billion. In contrast to those investors trying to recapitulate their Chinese success, Amazon is seeking to make up for its failure. Reduced last year to the ignominy of having to open a shop on Alibaba’s Tmall site, Jeff Bezos is determined that this time, with more experience and in a more open market, things will be different. When Flipkart was founded, in 2007, Amazon was obviously its model. The company began as a bookseller; the two engineers who started it, Sachin Bansal and Binny Bansal (not related), had worked for Amazon. Mr Bezos, though, is of the opinion that if anyone if going to be the Amazon of India, it should be Amazon. In 2014, shortly after Flipkart announced a $1 billion round of funding, Mr Bezos donned Indian clothes in Bangalore, hopped aboard a rainbow-coloured truck and handed Mr Agarwal a $2 billion cheque. A firm which earned over $100 billion in 2015 and has shareholders content to see more or less nothing by way of profits can afford such largesse. Neither Flipkart, Amazon, nor any of the other big competitors are following the retail strategy that led to Amazon’s success in the West. Indian regulations bar foreign-backed e-commerce firms from owning inventory, and so acting as a straightforward retailer is not an option. As a result India’s top e-commerce companies look much more like Alibaba. Flipkart has become a marketplace where sellers offer everything from mobile phones to washing machines to handbags. Snapdeal, Amazon and Paytm run marketplaces too. The firms compete feverishly on price, offering discounts that chomp away their own margins. In the long term, they must differentiate themselves by honing services for sellers and shoppers alike, and offering a better, broader range of products to more Indians than would have them otherwise. The first step to that goal is to boost the number of sellers on the company’s platform—it is the sellers, after all, who pay commissions and shipping fees. So companies offer a range of services to lure businesses to their sites. Flipkart’s programmes range from teaching sellers how to manage peak sales during diwali to advising fashion brands on trends and production. In February Amazon announced a travelling studio-on-wheels, offering training, photography and other services to help shop-owners come online. But the most important help they offer is in easing access to credit. Small businesses, given their scarce financial statements and limited credit history, have long had trouble obtaining loans from India’s banks. They often rely on expensive loans from neighbours or family. The e-commerce companies have strong incentives to make them better offers—and because they have access to online-sales data they are in a privileged position from which to help lenders judge credit risk. Take Sumit Agarwal (no relation to Amazon’s Mr Agarwal), a young entrepreneur who started an online shoe business in 2011. In his warehouse in New Delhi workers pack and scan shipments among towers of shoeboxes. The early days were uncertain; his family’s reaction when the firm started, he says, was “What the hell is this guy doing?” Now it is easier for such entrepreneurs to find the capital with which to grow. When Mr Agarwal logs into his seller’s account on Amazon.in his screen offers a column of short-term loans, their rates calculated using data from his transactions. Other e-commerce firms have similar schemes. In January Snapdeal announced that the State Bank of India would approve loans of up to $37,000 instantly if it liked the look of the data that Snapdeal provided on the borrower. Once a site has sellers, the second challenge is to help consumers buy their wares. Anil carries a clunky credit-card reader with him on his rounds, but most people pay cash. The e-commerce sites want to change that. Paytm lets customers add money to a digital wallet that can then be used to shop online, top up a mobile phone, lend money to a friend, pay a bill or use a service such as an Uber taxi. It has 120m digital-wallet accounts, nearly six times India’s number of credit cards. Snapdeal bought its own mobile payments company in April. Amazon purchased an online-payments service in February. A fine balance If a consumer does buy a product, the next task is delivering it. Delivery itself is nothing new. Indians have long been able to have a delivery boy from the local kirana—the cornershops that dominate Indian retail—bring them a stick of butter. But being able to deliver on a larger scale is a challenge. The country’s mail service, India Post, is ill-equipped to wait while a shopper tries on a kurta and ponders returning it. So newcomers are building networks. But India’s traffic is hellish and its addresses vague. A startup named Delhivery has hired more than 15,000 staff, from developers to executives poached from Facebook and posh consultancies. Its headquarters in Gurgaon are so packed that engineers spill onto an outdoor porch, tapping their keyboards furiously. Delhivery, which works with a number of e-commerce firms, is using machine learning to subdivide India’s postcodes, the better to map idiosyncratic descriptions. “We’ll know the house with the yellow door next to the temple,” says Sandeep Barasia, the managing director. The company moves goods to 700 or so small distribution centres overnight to avoid congested main roads during business hours. Thousands of delivery boys then dash to and from the distribution centres throughout the day, bearing more than 20 kilos on their bikes. E-commerce companies are devising their own solutions, too. Some investments, such as warehouses, are straightforward. Others are less so. Flipkart last year began using Mumbai’s famous network of dabbawallas, or lunch-delivery men, to drop off packages when they picked up customers’ lunch tins. Amazon has a pilot programme that lets customers order groceries online and have them delivered from the nearest kirana. Together, e-commerce firms say, these experiments could create a new truly national marketplace. Neelkanth Mishra of Credit Suisse, a bank, points out that road construction, electrification and mobile phones have stoked big increases in rural wages, and thus demand for goods (see chart 2). Flipkart says that about half its sales come from outside India’s big cities. Snapdeal claims more than 60%. It recently launched seven regional-language versions of its website. As they build out their markets the firms trumpet their assistance to small businesses. “Some of the big sellers on Amazon only had a shop in a corner of Bangalore; they were happy selling to five kilometres around each shop,” declares Amazon’s Mr Agarwal. “Now they are shipping orders to Kashmir and eastern India.” Amazon is helping more than 6,000 Indian businesses export, as well. Snapdeal’s Kunal Bahl is equally expansive: “Our ambition is to be a great social, economic and geographic equaliser for the small businesses of India as they scale up.” All these bold plans are clouded by two obstinate facts. First, spending on discounts, marketing campaigns and new hires means none of the companies has yet made money. Visit any firm’s lobby and you will meet herds of job applicants. Delivery boys like Anil are in hot demand—a top performer in his branch, he earns about 14,000 rupees ($200) each month. Amazon is, predictably, outspending its competitors. Last year its sales were two-thirds the size of its losses. Mr Agarwal is not bothered by a lack of profit. “The priority is growth,” he explains. Ankit Nagori, Flipkart’s chief business officer, says that the most important metrics for his company are not margins but the number of new customers, how often they shop, how much they buy and the speed of delivery. “If you solve for these four things,” he contends, “then the top line and bottom line will fall in place.” A billion deliveries more The second problem is regulatory. Forbidding foreign-backed firms from owning inventory has costs. Companies have limited control over the quality of products on their sites, points out Morgan Stanley’s Parag Gupta, and they can do little to streamline the country’s fragmented supply chain. Flipkart has become a tangle of interlinked entities, including a holding company in Singapore, in an attempt to obey India’s rules while maximising profits. India’s government may nonetheless come under protectionist pressure. Traditional retailers allege that the online marketplaces flout rules against foreign direct investment. Facebook’s recently scuttled plan to offer Indians free internet services, including its own, sparked a furore over the risks of “digital colonialism”. Offline retailers are watching all this intently. Kiranas are relatively protected, thanks to meagre tax bills and limited carrying costs (they store little). Big shops and malls are another story (see chart 3). “What is remarkable for me is that in a very short time, e-commerce has become half of what the organised market is,” says Abheek Singhi of the Boston Consulting Group. “Two years down the line, three years down the line, the e-commerce market could be larger.” Big foreign retailers—such as Ikea, a Swedish furniture company, which after years of kerfuffle may finally be opening an Indian store—cannot sell directly online. Matters are simpler for Indian retailers, but their course remains cloudy. Reliance Industries, a conglomerate with over 1m square metres of shop floor, is planning its own e-commerce venture. Future Group, which pioneered hypermarkets in the country, is outfitting small shop-owners and entrepreneurs with digital catalogues so that consumers can order Future Group products in places where there will never be a store. However the firm has scaled back some of its more ambitious plans for e-commerce. “The more sales you do, the more money you lose,” muses Kishore Biyani, Future Group’s founder. “You need to have continuous funding and someone to back you.” For the time being, the big companies in the sector are having those needs met. “You have at least three, potentially four large players with deep enough pockets,” says Mr Singhi. “It’s going to play out at a very high cost.” Companies like Alibaba and Amazon see that cost as worth paying in part because, just as they applied what they learned in China to India, so they will use their Indian experience in the next markets they move into. Alibaba, not content to back Paytm and Snapdeal, is also courting Indian businesses directly. In December it said it would help Indian firms with financing and logistics so they might use Alibaba’s platforms to export to China and beyond. Eventually, Mr Ma likes to say, any consumer should be able to buy from any seller, anywhere in the world. The more of those purchases go through one of his firms, the better. And everywhere these giants go, home-grown entrepreneurs will be hoping that their local acumen will give them an edge and looking for overseas investors to back them. Many of them will fail: India does not yet offer an example of how to make a profit, and it may be a long time before it does. But as long as some of these efforts survive, they will serve to speed progress, and innovation, in developing markets. As Amazon’s Mr Agarwal says, “If millions of small, medium enterprises out there, manufacturers and retailers, can...sell their product anywhere in the world—that’s transformational.”The unifier TWO of the most loathed politicians in America won big on March 1st in the electoral smorgasbord that is Super Tuesday. Hillary Clinton won seven of the eleven states holding Democratic primaries or caucuses, including Massachusetts, Virginia and a clutch of other Southern states, such as Arkansas, Georgia and Tennessee. Donald Trump also won seven of eleven, carving a trail from Vermont to Arkansas that has caused yet more apoplexy among the Republican top brass. Though it is not yet certain that Mrs Clinton and Mr Trump will fight it out for the presidency in November, it is probable. The symmetry between the despised front-runners is alarming. Mrs Clinton is mistrusted by 60% of Americans, a legacy of years of scandals and Republican slander. It is possible, though unlikely, that the Democratic front-runner could yet be indicted by the FBI over her allegedly slapdash handling of classified information while secretary of state. Mr Trump, more extremely, is disliked by 60% of Americans, especially non-whites, a contempt he has earned by pandering to white Americans’ ugliest prejudices. When announcing his candidacy last year, he described Mexican immigrants as rapists. In the run-up to Super Tuesday, American media were dominated by a furore over his initial refusal to condemn the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), whose former Grand Wizard, David Duke, supports him. A Trump rally in Virginia on February 29th was mobbed by a line of hand-holding black activists, who were herded out by Secret-Service officers and a jeering white crowd. One of the officers manhandled a photographer for Time magazine. With Mrs Clinton and Mr Trump as the nominees, America, which is as repulsed by political mudslinging as it is ghoulishly drawn to it, can expect an extraordinarily ill-tempered and divisive election in November. Mrs Clinton’s dominance on Super Tuesday, despite four victories for her rival, Bernie Sanders, in his own state of Vermont, in Oklahoma, Colorado and Minnesota, was based on her crushing lead among non-whites. This had been expected. Mrs Clinton trounced Mr Sanders in South Carolina on February 27th by winning over 85% of the black voters who make up over half the state’s Democratic electorate. That was a bigger share than Barack Obama had won in 2008, when campaigning to become America’s first black president. It indicated that Mrs Clinton’s vaunted “Southern firewall” against Mr Sanders was intact. It is the berm that has stopped the Bern. Across the Super Tuesday states, Mrs Clinton won 83% of blacks and 67% of Hispanics. She also did better than previously with white women, winning 57% of their votes. “I’m very emotional because today I’m going to vote for a woman, which I find empowering,” said one, Laney Parrot, a teacher entering a polling station in Fredericksburg, Virginia. Mr Sanders’s victories, though impressive for a candidate who launched his campaign last year in front of a few friends, were in smaller states and mostly by smaller margins. They were also exclusively in states where blacks, who deliver around a quarter of the Democratic vote, represent less than 10% of the population. That is a guarantee of failure, as Mr Sanders tacitly acknowledged in a speech delivered on friendly Vermont soil. Effecting a political revolution had always been his main aim, the septuagenarian senator said; winning the nomination was a lesser concern. Absent an unlikely collapse, Mrs Clinton has the Democratic nomination in the bag. She leads Mr Sanders by around 200 delegates, excluding her massive lead among super-delegates, the Democratic officers whose votes will count at the party’s convention in July. Given that the Democratic delegates are shared out in proportion to the votes won in primaries and caucuses, this leaves Mr Sanders’s needing an improbable run of thumping majorities to catch up. Mr Trump’s wins were based on a now-familiar double whammy: a crowded Republican field, in which his more conventional rivals took bites out of each other’s vote, combined with his knack of tapping the anti-establishment rage evident across the Republican coalition. This looks likely to produce one of the most disliked and unpropitious candidacies in American political history. At polling stations in northern and western Virginia, conservative country, your correspondent was told by many that they had voted “for the lesser evil”, “not for you know who,” that they “knew who they hadn’t voted for.” Yet about one in three said they had voted for Mr Trump: “Because politicians are liars”, and he isn’t one; “because he’s a businessman,” and that’s what the country needs to get straightened out; “because he’s funding his own campaign”, and his rivals are on the take. “Because there’s no political mumbo jumbo with him and he’s going to stop everybody, Syria, Iraq, you name it, treating us like a doormat,” said Eileen, a teacher, working herself into a fury on a sunny afternoon in Culpeper County, one of the prettiest, most law-abiding, luckiest places on Earth. She also reckoned Mr Trump was the best man to beat the Democrats, of whom she said she’d never met one she liked; though her daughter, Melissa, standing smiling besides her, had just voted for Mr Sanders. Mr Trump won Virginia, an important swing state in general elections, with 35% of the vote. Exit polls suggested a staggering 54% of Republican voters in the state were unhappy with the prospect of having him as their nominee—a pattern repeated in every state he won. Altogether he won about 40% of the available 595 delegates, who were also divvied up on a proportional basis. This gives him 319 delegates in all, which represents a less decisive lead than Mrs Clinton’s, but a strong one. It is above the level Nate Silver, a revered pundit, had predicted Mr Trump would need to be on track to win an outright majority of Republican delegates ahead of the party’s convention. His main rivals, the senators Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, are well below their comparable benchmarks, with 226 and 110 delegates. Yet both did just well enough on Super Tuesday to justify staying in the contest—which should ensure that both Mr Trump’s big advantages endure through a run of delegate-rich primaries, including in Florida, Illinois and Ohio on March 15th, where the winner will take all. Mr Cruz won his state of Texas and neighbouring Oklahoma, which was probably better than he had expected. But it was much less than the Southern sweep his strategy of appealing to evangelicals and the very conservative was designed to deliver. In his victory speech, delivered at the Redneck Country Club (where else?) in Houston, Mr Cruz derided Mr Trump as a “Washington dealmaker, profane and vulgar,” and appealed to his party’s patricians, who mostly despise both men, to back him as the likeliest anti-Trump candidate. There are signs that some see sense in that. Lindsey Graham, a veteran senator and failed presidential candidate who had previously described a choice between Mr Cruz and Mr Trump as akin to one between being poisoned or shot, suggested it might be time to choose poison. Mr Cruz received another fillip on March 2nd, when Ben Carson, a former neurosurgeon with a Christian following, who has long been cluttering the Republican field, suggested he was about to quit. Yet with the Bible-belt having largely voted, the going could get tougher for Mr Cruz. That is why, for those Republicans who do not wish to gift their party to a protectionist rabble-rouser, Mr Rubio’s Super Tuesday results were so shattering. Mr Rubio’s advisers had suggested he could win four states. He won only Minnesota, whose experience of Jesse Ventura, a professional wrestler who was the state’s governor for four years until 2003, was cited by many as a reason not to pick Mr Trump, a former WrestleMania star himself. In the days beforehand, the senator from Florida took Mr Trump apart in a televised debate, then ridiculed him on the campaign as a con artist, who quite possibly wet his trousers and whose fondness for fake tan promised to “make America orange again”. It made Mr Rubio look talented and immature, which are the two things unenthusiatic Republicans thought they knew about him already. Mr Trump countered by pulling in a couple of heavyweight endorsements—including from Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey and former Republican candidate—which made Mr Rubio look even more juvenile. “He could be a good president one day, but now he’s copying Trump,” said Chuck Mullens, a plumber in Culpeper County, as he left the polling station without voting, having disliked everyone on the ballot. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar Mr Rubio’s path to the nomination now looks vanishingly tight. If he fails to win Florida, where he is trailing Mr Trump by 20 percentage points, he is toast. Much the same is true for John Kasich, the governor of Ohio and fourth somewhat-serious Republican candidate. He has not won a state, though he ran Mr Trump close in Vermont; he must win Ohio, where he is also trailing Mr Trump, to survive. He is meanwhile damaging Mr Rubio’s dwindling prospects. Had he stepped down before Super Tuesday and his votes gone to Mr Rubio, as most would have, the Floridian would have won Virginia and Vermont. That would have made him look more credible. It would not have prevented Mr Trump being the big winner on a day in which his appeal stretched from hard-upSoutherners to well-heeled New England moderates, via the Washington D.C. commuter belt of northern Virginia—another place Mr Rubio had hoped to flourish. That is why a belated effort by members of the Republican elite, who will now launch a flurry of attack ads against Mr Trump, appears so pathetic. They are trying to save their party from a man who is having great success by identifying them as its biggest problem. In a victory speech delivered in the opulent setting of his seaside pile in Florida (advertised on its website as “the greatest mansion ever built”), Mr Trump tried slightly to allay his party’s concerns. Describing himself as a “unifier”, he said he expected to get along famously with Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives, who had criticised his soft-peddling on the KKK. “And if I don’t,” Mr Trump added, “He’s going to have to pay a big price.”Roe’s foes IN THEIR four-decade fight against Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court ruling of 1973 that recognised a right to abortion, pro-lifers have taken several tacks. One is to curtail the period during which women may end their pregnancies. Another is to ban particularly grisly-sounding techniques like “partial-birth” abortion. Recently, opponents of Roe have been waging a regulatory war of attrition that makes abortion harder and harder to obtain. On March 2nd, a Supreme Court diminished by the loss of Antonin Scalia, the conservative justice who died in February, asked whether a law of 2013 that, in effect, shuts down more than three-quarters of the 40-odd abortion clinics in Texas runs foul of a 1992 precedent prohibiting states from unduly imposing on a woman’s right to choose. Under the law, abortion providers in Texas must have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital and clinics must be expensively fitted out as “ambulatory surgical centres”. Legislators pitch the requirements as a boon to maternal health; detractors decry them as onerous, unwarranted changes that often leave women with nowhere to turn. Scott Keller, the Texas solicitor-general, insisted that legislators had women’s best interests at heart. But he faced a barrage of resistance from the court’s energised liberal jurists. The first salvo came from Ruth Bader Ginsburg, 83 this month. She jumped on Mr Keller’s suggestion that the new law left 25% of Texas women more than 100 miles from the nearest abortion clinic, “not including El Paso, where the Santa Teresa, New Mexico facility” is just a few minutes’ drive away. Justice Ginsburg noted that New Mexico law does not require surgical standards or admitting privileges. Doesn’t Texas say that “we need these things […] to protect our women”? Mr Keller repeated that women in El Paso often use the facility to obtain abortions. Justice Stephen Breyer probed the law’s justification. “Go back in time to the period before the new law was passed,” he said. “Where in the record will I find evidence of women who had complications” stemming from their abortions and “could not get to a hospital” under the previous regime but would have made it to a hospital under the new law? Mr Keller looked defeated. He grew meeker still when pressed by the three female justices to explain why Texas fretted so about abortion, one of the safest medical procedures, while failing to insist on surgical facilities for far riskier ones, like colonoscopies. Despite the fun the liberal justices had with Mr Keller, Texas may not lose Whole Woman’s Health v Hellerstedt when a ruling arrives in June. It would take five justices to overturn the decision upholding the Texas law, and Anthony Kennedy did not seem keen to be the decisive vote. Though he noted that the law served to “increase the number of surgical procedures as opposed to medical procedures, and that this may not be medically wise”, he wondered whether the plaintiffs had presented enough evidence that fewer clinics led to a crisis of abortion supply. A 4-4 split would let the Texas law stand, and allow other states in the Fifth Circuit to swipe at abortion access in similar ways (as Louisiana is already doing). But it would not bind the rest of the country. As the US solicitor-general, Donald Verrilli, neatly summed it up before the justices, the question boils down to whether the right to abortion “really only exists in theory” or “in fact, going forward”.Dark ages“Hope and change, not so much. More like hate and castrate.” Love, actually“Boyfriend prefers Trump. I’m single now.” Lest we forget“Can somebody attack me, please?” True Grit“Ted Cruz is not my favourite by any means…But we may be in a position where we have to rally around Ted Cruz as the only way to stop Donald Trump. And I’m not so sure that would work.” Potty humour“Then he asked for a full length mirror. I don’t know why, because the podium only comes up to here…maybe to make sure his pants weren’t wet.” Bored already“Get on the plane and go home. It’s over there.” How to make friends“[The party] ain’t promising him shit! Trust me on that one.” Upside of a downside“He is the only man…that stood in front of [the] Jewish community and told them, ‘I don’t want your money’.” Humpty Dumpty...“I’m not going to pay for that fucking wall.” …had a great fall...“Things are negotiable...I’ll make the wall two feet shorter, or something.” and couldn’t be put together again“Funny enough, he is bringing us business.”
