POLITICAL parties are never monoliths. As those inside them are ceaselessly aware, they are fractious and fractured. And yet, especially in two-party democracies, they endure. A mixture of delivering the goods their voters desire, dividing spoils between internal factions and adapting to external change allows them to overcome their centrifugal pressures. They even manage, much of the time, to look more or less coherent while doing so. For most of the 20th century most Americans knew, more or less, what their two parties stood for. These times, though, are out of step. Though political scientists proved slow to pick up on it (see article), America’s parties are more fragmented than usual. The state of the Republicans is particularly parlous. But the contradictions among Democrats, though less obvious, also run deep. Donald Trump’s run for the presidency has prospered despite lacking all the things parties usually provide for a front-runner: not least strategists and policies, money. It is hardly surprising that the Republican Party failed to see Mr Trump coming. What is odder, and much more culpable, is its failure to address the mismatch between its grassroots supporters and its policy agenda into which Mr Trump has tapped so effectively. In its subsequent disarray, the party has come to resemble a newspaper that has just discovered that its readers no longer need it to mediate between themselves and the world. The Republican Party arrived in the 21st century as an alliance of small-state, low-tax, pro-business voters with religiously inspired social conservatives and national-security hawks. It enjoyed a disproportionate popularity among white voters, the result of its successful recruitment of southern whites who disliked the innovations of the civil-rights era and, under Ronald Reagan, of blue-collar workers across the country. This mixture of interest groups had proved pretty successful: it held the White House for 28 of the 40 years from 1969 to 2008. During this time the pro-business lot were the senior partners in the arrangement, not least because they paid for the party’s election campaigns. This is the first primary season in 50 years where that has not held true. The Koch brothers, who have built the wealthiest network of political donors in America with the aim of electing Republicans who will cut regulation and taxes, disapprove of Mr Trump. They have said they will not fund his campaign; and yet he thrives. Faultlines exposed Mr Trump’s ascendancy cannot merely be ascribed to his wealth—though that certainly helps, by allowing him to appeal directly to the concerns of the base rather than those of his donors. He has exposed faultlines within the different camps, as well as between them. Even before his rise, some pro-business Republicans were beginning to despair of the party, the congressional wing of which seemed to enjoy nothing more than shutting down the federal government and playing chicken with the debt ceiling. After the financial crisis, when a Republican-led administration bailed out several large financial institutions, denunciations of crony capitalism became a Republican theme as much as a Democratic one. Mr Trump has deepened the divide on the business wing. In December the head of the national chamber of commerce said he viewed Mr Trump’s candidacy as a form of entertainment. He has also spilt the social conservatives. A libertine history and the look of a roué gone to seed would not in themselves preclude the support of evangelical Christians, who are, after all, keen on repentance. But Mr Trump is not very religious and does not go out of his way to seem so; his adoption of pro-life positions seems insincere. Christian Post, the country’s most popular evangelical news website, recently ran an editorial with the headline, “Donald Trump is a scam. Evangelical voters should back away.” Hitherto powerful socially conservative organisations such as the Family Leader have endorsed Ted Cruz, a Texas senator, instead. But such exhortations have had little effect: Mr Trump has won comfortably with self-described evangelicals in most states. The reason evangelicals vote for Mr Trump has little to do with faith or specifics of policy. It is more a question of attitude. A study by the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, has found that the most reliable way to tell whether a Republican voter was going to support Mr Trump was whether he agreed with the statement: “People like me don’t have any say about what government does.” Trump voters feel voiceless, and whatever attributes Mr Trump lacks, he has a voice. He lends it to them, to express their grievances and their aspirations for greatness, and they love it. It is also a voice that says things which other politicians do not, such as that Mexican immigrants are likely to be drug-dealers and rapists. Such untruths fit into a broader, if largely tacit, racism that has made Mr Trump popular not only with the Ku Klux Klan, but also with the considerably larger number of whites who harbour some racial resentment. Geographically, his support correlates with the frequency of racial epithets in Google searches. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar The weakest of the three Republican factions, the defence hawks, might even prefer a President Hillary Clinton to a President Trump. Mr Trump’s constant refrain about American troops always losing, his tendency towards isolationism, his insulting of prominent veterans such as John McCain, his attacks on George W. Bush as commander-in-chief and, most of all, his apparent enthusiasm for soldiers committing acts that would have them court-martialled, are a recipe for these Republican voters to the Democratic camp. Again, though, part of Mr Trump’s appeal reflects what at least some Republicans like about hawkishness; its association with authority. The Republican Party has spent the past half-century opposing the might of the federal government in every arena other than foreign policy. It now faces the prospect of going into the election led by someone who, surveys suggest, draws his most ardent support from those who would like a more authoritarian president in the White House. At that point it would be hard to say what, if anything, the party stands for. A battle of generations Mr Trump’s ability to blow Republican cracks asunder is unprecedented. But it has been helped by a long-standing unwillingness to face and fix those contradictions. For years the party has concentrated instead on opposing Barack Obama’s policies and, indeed, his legitimacy. With Mr Obama on the way out, that is moot now. He has, however, helped Democrats to know what they must jointly do. As Republicans long to tear down achievements they associate with Mr Obama, Democrats want to protect and uphold them. This has tended to keep the members of the party’s own coalition in agreement. Yet the ties between the voting blocs that favour Democrats—Hispanics, blacks, those with postgraduate degrees, single women, the non-religious, union members and millennials—are subject to change. The primaries have also revealed a powerful urge among activists to move the party leftward. Democrats fare exceptionally well with non-whites: in 2012 one in four of those who voted for Mr Obama were in this category, compared with one in ten of those who voted for Mitt Romney. But the interests of blacks do not always align with those of Hispanics. Fearing more competition for low-wage jobs, the congressional black caucus, allied with the unions, was partly responsible for defeating a push for immigration reform under George W. Bush. The party has found ways round this clash, presenting immigration reform as a question of civil rights; when Mr Obama meets caucus members, immigration reform tends to be omitted in a mutual show of good manners. But the division remains. The current crop of primaries has also made it clear that Democrats are divided along generational lines. Bernie Sanders has thrashed Mrs Clinton in every contest among voters whose formative political experiences were the Iraq war (which she supported) and the financial crisis (blamed on her Wall Street supporters). For those born before the Reagan years, by contrast, the fact that Mr Sanders honeymooned in the Soviet Union disqualifies him from consideration. Older Democrats remember the party’s move to the centre in the 1990s as pragmatic, correct and fruitful; younger ones consider it a betrayal. When its members actually turn out to vote, the Democratic coalition is still formidable. Non-whites make up an ever-increasing share of the electorate. Polling by Gallup shows that the number of Americans who describe themselves as liberal has increased over the past 20 years, while those who call themselves conservative has held steady (see chart.) Self-declared moderates lean Democratic. But often—especially in non-presidential election years—the coalition can’t be bothered. This has led to a party unable to refresh itself. Were Mrs Clinton (68) to win the nomination and then fall under a bus or an indictment, the names often mentioned as possible replacements are John Kerry (72) and Joe Biden (73). During Mr Obama’s presidency Democrats have lost 900 seats in state legislatures, 11 governors, 69 seats in the House and 13 senators. This helps to explain why Mrs Clinton has had no young pretender to voice the opposition to her from within the party. Mr Obama relied on his own apparatus, separate from the party, in his two presidential campaigns. Mrs Clinton has vowed to rebuild the party if she wins. But that supposes that its constituent interest groups continue to see the Democratic Party as the best way to get what they want. Once the presidential election is over, they may find apathy more attractive again—not least because, now that it has acted on heath-care reform and (to an extent) on climate change, the party has been remarkably poor at setting out new worlds to conquer. There is nothing immutable about the way the two parties currently line up. Republicans used to be the big-government progressive party, formed in opposition to slavery and pushing to remodel the South after the civil war; they have also been the small-government party, not only now, but in opposition to the New Deal in the 1930s. Democrats were once the small-government party, opposing those who wanted a more powerful federal government and defending the interests of white southerners against Washington; now they are famous as the big-government party, pushing federal anti-poverty programmes in the 20th century and government involvement in health care in the 21st. Furniture-moving This election could see the furniture rearranged again. Some Republicans wonder if a Trump candidacy might redraw the electoral map, winning over blue-collar whites who don’t normally vote in rustbelt swing states like Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan or Wisconsin. If he loses, the party might still conclude that it needs to pay more attention to the economic anxieties of those who feel left behind. For their part Democrats are counting on Mr Trump to energise members of the coalition that voted twice for President Barack Obama, and to put in play moderate Republicans, notably women, who can expect to be bombarded with Democratic messages about the billionaire’s misogyny. If Mrs Clinton marshals a broad anti-Trump coalition that peels off some habitual Republican voters and combines it with high turnout among traditional Democratic supporters, she will have an opportunity to create a new centrist coalition that may long outlast her. Nobody yet knows whether what is happening in 2016 is an anomaly caused by the one-off political persona Mr Trump has created, or if it is tracing the outline of the future. Whatever the parties look like after November 8th, though, Mr Trump’s success to date has already changed the system, in part by proving that voters value ideological consistency (and rhetorical restraint) much less than the political classes assumed. That could be liberating, if it allows elected representatives to stray from the party line. It could be damaging if the only lines they can stray towards are brutally populist ones. Parties exist to distil a complex set of questions into a binary choice; it is impossible to imagine a big democracy staying healthy without them. Yet in 2020, with Mr Trump in mind, the strongest candidates may start from the assumption that they do not need their parties much at all.IN EUROPEAN politics a useful distinction is sometimes drawn between the “clean right”, a group which can include pretty flinty conservatives, and the “dirty right”, meaning those who cross the bounds of democratic decency, whether with race-baiting, threats of political violence or snarling challenges to the rule of law. That distinction has proved powerful in its day. In the French presidential elections of 2002, the main parties of left and right united behind an unprincipled machine politician, Jacques Chirac, to defeat his opponent, Jean-Marie Le Pen, a brutish demagogue. Parisians fondly remember the posters that popped up, urging: “Vote for the crook, not the fascist”. Donald Trump, front-runner for the Republican presidential nomination, is of the dirty right. He showed that when he called for a blanket ban on Muslims entering America, and advocated both the use of torture and the punitive killing of terrorists’ families, a war crime. He whips up crowds by lamenting that he cannot punch protesters in the face. He accuses the Mexican government of sending rapists to America, and promises to round up and deport 11m migrants who are in the country without papers (though, like Caesar weighing lives in the Coliseum, as president he would let “good ones” back in). In a television interview on February 28th he declined three times to disavow statements of support from a veteran leader of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), murmuring that he needed to “research” that white-supremacist group. Bringing history full-circle, the ageing Mr Le Pen sent word from France that, if American, he would vote Trump. After months of near-silence, many conservative grandees suggested that Mr Trump had crossed a line. Mitt Romney, the Republican presidential nominee in 2012, called his KKK response “disgusting” and “disqualifying”. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a rival presidential contender, offered a rebuke that blended principle with calculation: Mr Trump’s equivocation was not just “wrong”, he explained, “it makes him unelectable”. Yet nobody is reviving the spirit of France in 2002, when parties united to keep a bad man out of power. At the time of writing a single Republican senator, Ben Sasse of Nebraska, has declared that if Mr Trump is his party’s nominee, he will back an independent conservative. Many more Republicans have said, queasily, that they will back whoever the party nominates. Others are not even that squeamish. On February 26th Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey endorsed Mr Trump, calling him the strongest candidate against Hillary Clinton. During his own, ill-fated presidential run, Mr Christie called the tycoon’s proposed Muslim ban “ridiculous”. Now he is “proud” to back him. Members of Congress have begun to endorse Mr Trump, and their numbers will grow. There is a temptingly simple explanation for this embrace of Mr Trump: that the Republican Party is a consciously racist project, from top to bottom. The backlash against Mr Trump’s half-dalliance with the KKK suggests something more complicated. History matters, for one thing. Nothing scars modern Europe as deeply as memories of fascism, Nazism and collaboration with the Holocaust: many nerves jangle when strutting authoritarians question the loyalties of religious minorities or suggest that undesirable outsiders should be rounded up. In America, nothing casts a darker shadow than slavery and racial segregation, so that overt anti-black racism is uniquely taboo. When Mr Trump seemed to test that taboo, lots of Republicans were sincerely horrified. Even Mr Trump knows he went too far: he now says he misheard questions about the KKK and spurns their support. Dismayingly, attacks on Muslims and Mexicans do not set Republican nerves a-jangle to the same extent. In the 2015 American Values Survey, a large poll, 76% of Republicans said that Islam is at odds with American values. Many grassroots conservatives would call a Muslim entry ban an act of self-defence against terrorism, not bigotry. As for immigrants, 80% of Trump voters told the same survey that they are a “burden” rather than a source of strength for the country, by taking jobs, housing and health care. At the same time, an unhappy America is more divided than ever along partisan lines. Many Republican politicians think of Mrs Clinton as actively wicked. They see a patriotic duty to keep her out of the White House, not least because the next president will choose at least one Supreme Court justice, after the death of Antonin Scalia. Some hope that Mr Trump may prove malleable. Others suspect that his views will doom their party, but don’t know how to win without his voters. Pandering as contempt There is one more explanation for all the bigwigs and pundits rationalising Trump-support, while considering themselves good people who deplore racism. Mr Trump’s critics, they contend, show snobbish contempt for the tycoon’s voters—notably older, often less-educated whites who feel left behind by wrenching social and economic changes. One congressman backing Mr Trump, Tom Marino of Pennsylvania, uses a term much in vogue just now, calling Trump voters “the unprotected”. It comforts Trump-endorsers to think they are standing up for underdogs, but they are letting themselves off too easily. Other Republicans seeking the presidency endlessly promise to protect anxious Americans, with everything from air strikes on Islamic State to curbs on work visas. Mr Trump stands out for the savagery with which he vows to frighten, punish and hurt those who he says are doing America down. That’s not protection, but vengeance. Conservative grandees preparing to back Mr Trump are arguably the worst snobs of all. For they know that he is making promises to his supporters that are both nasty and impossible to keep. Like every tribune of the dirty right, Mr Trump thinks his voters are dupes: that is why he panders and lies to them without a qualm. If Republican bigwigs have shame or sense enough, there is still time—just—to disown him.FOR more than a decade Elliott Management, the hedge fund led by Paul Singer, was the pantomime villain in Argentina’s dispute with its bondholders. Rather than accepting a big write-down of debt on which the country had defaulted, as other creditors did in 2005 and 2010, Elliott, along with several other “holdouts”, pursued full payment through the New York courts. That led to a fresh default in 2014. Now the drama is entering its final act. On February 29th Daniel Pollack, the court-appointed mediator, announced that Argentina had reached an agreement in principle with four of the largest creditors, led by Elliott. Argentina’s payment of $4.65 billion will be 25% less than they were demanding. Even so, it is a big pay-off for investors who bought the debt at a fraction of its face value. With this agreement, Argentina has settled with creditors who hold 85% of the disputed debt. It is a coup for Mauricio Macri, Argentina’s recently elected president (pictured), and will help end the country’s long isolation from the international credit markets. Together with other steps Mr Macri has taken since assuming office in December, including relaxing exchange controls and removing taxes on some exports, the credit deal helps restore normality to an economy that had been distorted by populist controls during 12 years of rule by his two Peronist predecessors, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner. Addressing Congress, which began its new session on March 1st, Mr Macri blamed his predecessors for Argentina’s weak economy and high inflation. Isolation from credit markets, he declared, had cost the country $100 billion and 2m jobs. Argentina’s negotiators paved the way back by reaching deals with smaller groups of holdouts. On February 2nd Argentina agreed to pay a group of Italian bondholders $1.35 billion; two weeks later it settled for $1.1 billion with two of the six largest holdouts, Montreux Partners and EM Ltd. But Mr Singer’s Elliott Management led the most intransigent group; an agreement with them is the real prize. Thomas Griesa, the judge overseeing the case, had contributed greatly to Argentina’s predicament in 2012 when he ruled that the country could not pay bondholders who had agreed to a restructuring, or issue new debt, unless it settled with the holdouts. That precipitated Argentina’s default. On February 19th this year the judge in effect switched sides, saying that Mr Macri’s election had “changed everything”. He said he would lift the injunction barring Argentina from paying other creditors from March 1st under certain conditions. That was a severe blow to the holdouts, who had used the injunction to press Argentina for full payment. “The message to non-settling plaintiffs, many of whom have had no opportunity to negotiate with anyone, is unmistakable: settle by February 29th, or else,” wrote their lawyers. The deal is not quite sealed. The injunction will not be lifted until Argentina repeals two laws that block agreements with the holdouts. The Ley Cerrojo (Padlock Law), enacted in 2005 during the first round of debt restructuring, was intended to prevent Argentina from offering holdouts a better deal than that accepted by holders of restructured bonds. The Ley de Pago Soberano (Sovereign Payment Law) of 2014 was a failed attempt to circumvent Mr Griesa’s injunction by re-routing payments to bondholders who had accepted a deal through Argentina or France. Opening the lock The government is confident that it can secure the votes in Congress to repeal the laws. In early February, 13 deputies from the Front for Victory (FPV), Ms Fernández’s party, broke away to form a more moderate “Justicialist Bloc”. The move deprived the FPV of its position as the largest grouping in the lower house. The defectors have said they are willing to work with the new government to repeal the laws. In the upper house the government plans to enlist the support of Peronist governors, who are also keen to tap international credit markets. They are likely to persuade the senators over whom they have influence to support the repeal of the legislation. Once the laws have been scrapped, the government hopes to raise up to $15 billion through a bond issue, which it will use to pay the creditors. Some analysts doubt that the market can absorb such a large sum. But Argentina’s finance secretary, Luis Caputo, is bullish. “All the banks we’ve spoken with are confident that we can raise the money we need in the market,” he said. The government then plans to return to the market in an effort to finance its budget deficit, which was a daunting 5.8% of GDP last year. Under Ms Fernández’s administration the central bank financed the deficit by printing money, pushing up inflation. The bond issue will help the central bank to end that harmful practice, but the relief from high inflation will not come immediately. Propelled by the devaluation of the peso, the annual inflation rate, already high, has risen to around 30%; the government had hoped inflation this year would be 20-25%. It is trying to persuade trade unions not to demand excessive wage rises, which would drive inflation even higher. The unions are unwilling to make sacrifices, however. On February 25th teachers extracted an agreement from the government for a 30% salary increase; other unions are demanding pay rises at least as big. Mr Macri has so far taken a cautious approach to bringing down the budget deficit. Energy subsidies have been cut, but the president is reluctant to slash other spending, which would further rile Argentines already angry about inflation and, he fears, would weaken growth and employment. But until the government brings the deficit substantially down, the central bank will struggle to regain credibility. A return to the bond markets is not enough. Nevertheless, the debt deal should boost the government’s confidence. It has until April 14th to repeal the legislation and pay Elliott and its fellow litigators. It must also settle with the holders of the remaining 15% of the debt. But the exhausted negotiators are allowing themselves a moment of satisfaction. “It seemed like a thousand years to me,” Mr Pollack said of the seemingly interminable talks. Mr Macri hopes not to take up much more of his time.SINCE leading his Liberal Party back to power in Canada last October, Justin Trudeau has been profiled in such glossy magazines as Vanity Fair and Vogue; Hello’s photo spread featured his wife and children. On March 10th he will sit down with Barack Obama at a state dinner in the White House, the first for a Canadian leader in 19 years. “I can’t think of a Canadian politician who has attracted as much attention in the United States,” says Laura Dawson of the Canada Institute at the Woodrow Wilson Centre in Washington. Mr Trudeau owes his celebrity to more than glamour. He succeeds Stephen Harper, a prickly Conservative, who in ten years as prime minister conducted an ideologically charged foreign policy at odds with Canada’s multilateralist traditions. His relationship with the United States, by far Canada’s most important, was tense. Mr Trudeau replaces a scowl with a smile. He personally greeted some of the 25,000 Syrian refugees Canada agreed to admit. Such gestures have helped bring back to life the Trudeaumania inspired by the prime minister’s father, Pierre Trudeau, a dashing Canadian leader of the 1960s, 70s and 80s. “But how,” Ms Dawson wonders, “do we translate celebrity into influence?” Mr Trudeau’s answer: by returning to Canada’s diplomatic traditions. It is the world’s tenth-largest economy; as a military power, it counts for less. It has historically sought to increase its modest clout by working through international bodies such as the UN and the Commonwealth. Mr Harper spurned them as talking shops for despotic regimes. He refused to support a global accord on climate change (or introduce a credible policy in Canada).  Co-operation is back in, says Stéphane Dion, the new foreign minister. His “mandate letter” from Mr Trudeau directs him to resume working through the UN. Mr Trudeau signed the global climate agreement reached in Paris in December. He was due to meet Canada’s 13 provincial and territorial leaders on March 3rd to talk about a national climate strategy and may announce a climate initiative with Mr Obama. The prime minister intends to re-establish diplomatic relations with Iran and to revive Canada’s relationship with Mexico, its partner, along with the United States, in the North American Free-Trade Agreement. He promised to lift visa restrictions on Mexicans, imposed in 2009 to stem an influx of asylum-seekers and an irritant ever since. He is not rolling back all Mr Harper’s policies. Canada is likely to ratify the free-trade agreement with the European Union, which Mr Harper negotiated. It may also join the Trans-Pacific Partnership among a dozen Asian and American countries. “We should not change everything,” said Mr Dion in a recent speech. If Mr Trudeau just gets along with Mr Obama, that will be a significant change. The two sporty leaders have engaged in pre-prandial raillery about which country’s ice-hockey teams are better. Mr Obama has taken with equanimity Mr Trudeau’s decision to withdraw Canada’s six fighter planes from the United States-led fight against Islamic State; Canada is increasing humanitarian aid and the number of troops advising Iraqi Kurds instead. The Keystone XL pipeline to carry crude from Alberta to the southern United States, greatly desired by Mr Harper but vetoed by Mr Obama, is unlikely to figure much in the dinner-table conversation. That leaves trade and tax. The United States is the market for three-quarters of Canada’s goods exports and the source of two-thirds of its imports, but commerce could flow more freely than it does. The “beyond the border” agenda is supposed to accomplish that but has hit a snag: a disagreement over what law will apply to United States officials stationed in Canada to pre-clear goods for import. A row over Canadian softwood lumber, which the United States says is subsidised, could get worse. Canada objects to a United States law that obliges its banks to hand over information about accounts held by expatriates (see article). But the main threat to Canadian-American relations will not come from anything the two leaders feasting in the White House might do. It comes from the loud-mouthed property mogul who aspires to be the building’s next occupant.WHEN Barack Obama vowed in 2009 to pursue tax cheats abroad, he probably was not thinking of people like Ginny Hillis. Born in Detroit to Canadian parents, the retired lawyer has lived in Canada since she was six. Like many transplanted Americans, she ignored an American law that since 1913 has obliged citizens to file tax returns regardless of where they live. With the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), enacted in 2010, that became harder. It demanded that foreign banks report to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) details of accounts held by Americans abroad. Banks that fail to comply are subject to a 30% tax on payments they receive from the United States. Some 7m Americans outside the country (1m of them in Canada), along with an unknown number of “US persons”, are now caught in FATCA’s net. Unlike most, Ms Hillis is fighting back through the courts. She and Gwen Deegan, an artist who has lived in Canada since she was five, filed a suit claiming that the Canadian government’s co-operation with FATCA violates a tax treaty and constitutional protections against discrimination. In September a judge denied the first claim. The second, that Canada is discriminating against citizens on the basis of their place of birth, may rest on stronger arguments. Among the reluctant dual-taxpayers are Americans who dodged the draft during the Vietnam war, academics who went north in 1950-70 and border babies, born in the United States because that is where the nearest hospital was. Half a million “snowbirds”, pensioners who winter in the American South, risk liability for tax. Their biggest gripe: proceeds from the sale of a family home, untaxed in Canada, could be subject to capital-gains tax in the United States. A record 4,279 Americans worldwide renounced their United States citizenship last year. If Ms Hillis and Ms Deegan win in court, Canada’s government will face an awkward choice between complying with the decision and exposing Canadian banks to huge penalties. The Alliance for the Defence of Canadian Sovereignty, which is paying the women’s legal expenses, has harvested donations from China, Vatican City and beyond. If FATCA falls Ms Hillis would still owe American tax. The real problem is the extraterritorial demands of the IRS.BACK in 2009 when the Olympic games were awarded to Rio de Janeiro, the stars seemed to be aligned. Brazil was prospering, thanks to strong global demand for its oil, iron ore, soya beans and other commodities. Federal, state and city governments were working well together as close political allies. Now cariocas (as inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro are known) might well feel that fate has forsaken them. The country is suffering its worst recession since the 1930s. The federal government is paralysed by a corruption scandal. The unpopular president, Dilma Rousseff, faces possible impeachment for allegedly breaking budget rules. The collapse of the oil price has hit Rio de Janeiro state, the centre of the oil industry, especially hard, forcing it to slash its budgets. Yet the city of Rio resembles an oasis in Brazil’s political and economic desert. Thanks partly to the games and to booming revenue from tourism, the money is still flowing. Eduardo Paes, the city’s mayor since 2009, seized control of venue construction and many transport projects. While stadium-building for the 2014 football World Cup in Brazil was marked by scandal and last-minute rush, the Olympics are on track with five months to go. At the Olympic Park, the venues are all but ready. When Bello visited a fortnight ago a hose was filling the pool at the aquatic centre; at the multipurpose Arena Carioca, a taekwondo contest was about to start. There are three worries. The state government has failed to clean up the polluted waters of Guanabara Bay, the venue for yachting. Mr Paes retorts that races will be held at the bay’s mouth, where the water is clean, and that two dummy runs went well. Then there is the new metro line being built by the state government to link Ipanema and Barra de Tijuca, the site of the Olympic Park. A recent leaked memo from the mayor’s office fretted that it wouldn’t be ready in time. The state government insists it will be; it says 90% of the work is already done. School holidays have been moved back to coincide with the Olympics; traffic may be more of a problem for the Paralympics in September. The biggest concern is Zika. Since the disease was detected in 2015, 1.5m Brazilians may have caught it. Usually it just involves a few days of mild fever and aches. But it has been linked to microcephaly (brain damage) in the babies of a small minority of women who caught it while pregnant. And a tiny number of Zika sufferers develop Guillain-Barré syndrome, a creeping (though normally reversible) paralysis. Zika is hard to test for. Most of Brazil’s 641 confirmed cases of microcephaly are in the poor north-east. But Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that is the main vector, is also responsible for dengue, which Rio has suffered since 1977. The insects breed in stagnant water. Across the country, the government has stepped up efforts to control the mosquito. In Gardênia Azul, a favela near the Olympic Park, a team of health agents does house-to-house visits. Geraldo Marques, a mosquito-control specialist, checks that empty beer bottles are dry and covered; he drizzles insecticide into a drain. “The saucers under plants are the greatest villain,” he says. The problem, says Rubem César Fernandes of Viva Rio, a big NGO which, among other things, runs health clinics for the city government, is that many urban spaces are beyond public control. “The population knows what to do, but they don’t have the discipline to do it every week. It’s a cultural thing.” It doesn’t help that a third of dwellings in the Rio area lack a proper sewerage connection. Mr Paes stresses that the games will take place in the dry season; cases of dengue normally drop in August and September. Part of the worry about Zika is that so much about it is unknown, and therefore scary. Though pregnant women and their sexual partners will need to seek medical advice, for the mass of sports fans the virus should not be a worry. There is already much to celebrate about the Rio Olympics, though with their city turned into an obstacle course of road works for the new metro and bus lanes, cariocas may not yet feel like cheering. There has been no obvious waste or corruption. The city has used the games as a catalyst for a wider transformation. Mr Paes tore down an elevated motorway that scarred the old port, burying it in a tunnel. The port area now hosts new museums and public spaces; next month a tramway will open there. Apart from better public transport, the Olympics may bequeath an overdue revival of Rio’s decayed and crime-ridden historic centre. If urban renewal were a sport, that would win a gold medal.ONLY standing room is left at the civic hall in Petaling Jaya in the western suburbs of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia’s capital. Inside 1,000-odd middle-class Malaysians have gathered to consider the fallout from a corruption scandal that has buffeted the country since July. “The whole world is laughing at us,” says a retiree watching from the back rows. At the heart of the scandal are hundreds of millions of dollars that for unclear reasons entered bank accounts belonging to the prime minister, Najib Razak (see article). You might think such a revelation would unseat Mr Najib and spell ruin for his United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), which has held power since independence. Instead, Mr Najib appears to have strengthened his grip, by purging critics within the cabinet and police. On February 29th the grand old man of Malaysian politics, Mahathir Mohamad, stormed out of the party in disgust. Dr Mahathir was prime minister for 22 years until 2003 and was once a fan of Mr Najib. No more. Across the country, dissidents are feeling nervous. Last year at least 15 people, mostly dissenters in politics and civil society, were charged under a noxious colonial-era sedition law that Mr Najib had once promised to repeal. In late February authorities blocked one of Malaysia’s most popular news websites hours after it reported that not all Malaysia’s graft-busters are convinced that the prime minister has committed no crime. A new anti-terror law entitles the prime minister to nominate broad “security zones” in which police powers may be extended—a handy tool for crushing protests, critics say. The attorney-general is mulling stiffer sentences, including caning, for people who leak government secrets. It has all appalled many urban and professional Malaysians. It has also made stars of the government’s most vocal critics. At the forum in Petaling Jaya, fans seeking selfies crowd around Tony Pua, an opposition MP whom police have banned from leaving the country; at dinner afterwards people at neighbouring tables insist on paying for his meal. Malaysia is “essentially two countries”, says Ben Suffian, a pollster. Outrage is widespread in the cities, with growing numbers of young, liberal ethnic-Malays as well as most of the ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian minorities who make up about a third the population. It is rarer in UMNO’s rural heartlands, where apathy is rife and where the party is trusted to defend racial laws designed to give the ethnic-Malay majority a leg-up. Over the decades this rural voter base has helped keep UMNO in power. Indeed party leaders have been more concerned to protect themselves from challenges from within UMNO. Loyalty is prized over ability, while patronage and convoluted party rules discourage upstarts. Mr Najib has been playing the system more ruthlessly than many imagined. Recent sackings of subordinates have sent a signal about who is boss. It is surely a relief to UMNO that Malaysia’s opposition has mostly bungled its chance to make hay from the affair. It had formed a loose coalition of three parties, reliant on an unlikely peace between two of them, a secular ethnic-Chinese outfit and a devout Malay-Muslim one. The opposition won the popular vote in a general election in 2013 but fell short of the number of seats required to take power because of gerrymandered constituencies. Yet rather than regroup and build momentum for the election that is due by 2018, it has been consumed by bickering. When tens of thousands of Malaysians rallied last August to demand Mr Najib’s resignation, they did so not under the banner of any political party but at the request of Bersih, an unaligned group that has long campaigned for clean politics and electoral reform. Rock solid, or rocky? Some people assert that Mr Najib’s hold may be shakier than it appears. Even in the countryside, worries about the economy have made the prime minister unpopular. Low oil prices have damaged Petronas, the state oil firm, slashing the amount of money the government can pour into development projects. A new sales tax has increased prices for many everyday items, while a slump in Malaysia’s currency, the ringgit, which has fallen by more than a fifth in the past 18 months, has put many imports out of reach. It all helps make some poorer Malays more susceptible to populists painting ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian Malaysians as rent-seeking interlopers. But a new suspicion is growing among ordinary Malaysians that goings-on in Kuala Lumpur are affecting their own pocket books. As for the party, rivals whom Mr Najib has vanquished may yet bounce back. Dr Mahathir, who has long called for Mr Najib to step down, is scheduled to attend an unusual forum of grandees and politicos from across the political spectrum who are meeting in private later this month to discuss alternatives to Mr Najib. Wan Saiful Wan Jan, of the Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs in Kuala Lumpur, says that some UMNO bigwigs are backing the prime minister through gritted teeth. He says that a time may come when they say that enough is enough, especially when the party starts considering its strategy for the next election. Perhaps Mr Najib may risk calling a snap election before then, both to pre-empt conspiracy and to catch out the opposition before it can patch up its differences. For Malaysia’s rattled liberals, all this seems theoretical. Last year they watched plans evaporate for a parliamentary vote of no-confidence. They are doubtful that the current corruption scandal will ever unseat Mr Najib. Back at the civic hall in Petaling Jaya, the mood darkens as the evening wears on. Microphones passed around the floor reveal frustration and anger. One person insists that the opposition draw up a list of government officials who should face trial if the opposition takes power. A second, shaking with rage, frets that the opposition has “no chance” of winning the next poll. This is no time to give up hope, Ambiga Sreenevasan, a prominent lawyer, tells the crowd. Once the crisis is over, she says, “we must make sure this never happens to our country again.”IT WAS a striking move from a country better known for hiding iffy foreign wealth than for exposing it. Frustrated by a lack of co-operation from Malaysian counterparts, Switzerland’s attorney-general declared in late January that there were “serious indications” that $4 billion had gone astray from Malaysian state concerns, some of it into accounts held by current or former Malaysian and Middle Eastern officials. The announcement fuelled an already combustible scandal that has transfixed Malaysians, battered their prime minister, Najib Razak, and could yet ensnare banks around the world. The allegations of misappropriation centre on a Malaysian state investment fund, from which it is suspected that large sums were siphoned by businessmen and officials with links to Mr Najib. It is thought that some of this was used to help his party win an election in 2013; some was spent on buying assets at questionable prices; and some of the remainder was moved to offshore shell companies and bank accounts. All those suspected of involvement, including Mr Najib, deny wrongdoing. None has been charged with a crime. The affair spans the globe. Caught up in it are not only Malaysian officials and moneymen but also several big banks and perhaps Saudi royalty. The money trail leads from Malaysia to Singapore and elsewhere in Asia, Abu Dhabi, Switzerland, the Caribbean and New York. Authorities are investigating in Switzerland, America, Singapore, Hong Kong and the United Arab Emirates. They face a daunting challenge in piecing together such a complex case, a task made harder by operators’ widespread use of opaque offshore vehicles. The story’s institutional protagonist is 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB). It was originally a regional development fund for Terengganu, an oil-rich Malaysian state, but in 2009 the country’s finance ministry took it over and rebranded it. Mr Najib heads the ministry, as well as being prime minister. The plan was for the fund to suck in investment through tie-ups with foreign firms. Mr Najib chairs 1MDB’s board of advisers. 1MDB got most of its financing by raising debt. A series of bond issues pushed its borrowings up to $11 billion. By 2014 questions were multiplying about its financial health, spurred by the fact that it had had three audit firms in five years. A flurry of investigations in the media drew on leaked documents. 1MDB denies wrongdoing. Malaysian investigators concluded that deposits into a bank account held in Mr Najib’s name came through banks and companies linked to 1MDB. They found that a firm that was once part of 1MDB and is now controlled by the finance ministry, SRC International, paid $13m into the account in 2014-15. The attorney-general, Mohamed Apandi Ali, has said that there is no evidence that Mr Najib was aware of the payment. (We all overlook items on our bank statements.) More eye-catching was an earlier payment into Mr Najib’s account, of $681m, from a shell company. This was made only weeks before the general election in 2013, which Mr Najib won narrowly. Some say it was linked to 1MDB. The official explanation is that it was a legal donation from an unnamed member of the Saudi royal family. Mr Najib has denied ever taking public money for personal gain. 1MDB says it has not paid any funds into the prime minister’s personal accounts. On March 1st the Wall Street Journal reported that investigators in two countries, whom it didn’t identify, believe that more than $1 billion in total flowed into Mr Najib’s personal accounts, much of it originating from 1MDB. These investigators, it is alleged, reckon that the payments were, in part, routed through a company linked to—or made to look as if it was linked to—a venture involving 1MDB and Middle Eastern interests. 1MDB had various dealings with an Abu Dhabi-based sovereign fund called IPIC which guaranteed some of 1MDB’s bonds. The dealings included a tie-up with Aabar Investments PJS, an IPIC subsidiary. 1MDB transferred more than $1 billion to what appeared to be a division of Aabar. Yet investigations allegedly suggest the money in fact went to a firm based in the British Virgin Islands (BVI) with an almost identical name to the Abu Dhabi concern. This transaction seems not to have been recorded on the books of Aabar’s parent, IPIC. (1MDB says it stands by its own accounts, which show the payment.) The suspicion is that financial sleight-of-hand may have been used to pass off the transfers as legitimate payments between corporate partners. Investigators believe much of this money ended up in Mr Najib’s accounts after being routed through a second company in the BVI, according to sources cited by the Wall Street Journal. IPIC is reported to be looking into what happened to the money paid out by 1MDB but not booked as coming into the Abu Dhabi fund. Aabar denies wrongdoing. Also in the spotlight is a joint venture between 1MDB and PetroSaudi, an oil firm. 1MDB injected $1 billion into the venture. Two-thirds of this was moved to a Seychelles-based firm shortly afterwards, according to a draft report by Malaysia’s auditor-general. 1MDB later sold its interest in the venture, using some of the $2.3 billion raised to invest in a Cayman-based vehicle. 1MDB then reportedly sacked its auditor, KPMG, after the firm expressed concern over the identity and financial standing of the vehicle’s owners. 1MDB asserts that all the Cayman money is accounted for. PetroSaudi has denied doing anything wrong. Investigators are also looking into who drove 1MDB’s complex transactions. Assuming it is genuine, correspondence obtained by Sarawak Report, an investigative website, appears to show that a key figure in the fund’s dealings with PetroSaudi was a Malaysian financier, Low Taek Jho, a family friend of Mr Najib. Mr Low reportedly also helped direct some election spending for Mr Najib’s ruling coalition, Barisan Nasional. 1MDB and Mr Low have insisted he merely advised the fund, unpaid. He denies wrongdoing. Banks, too, face awkward questions. Several global banks handled large payments that are under scrutiny, among them arms of JPMorgan Chase and Royal Bank of Scotland. One question is whether there were grounds for the banks to suspect that any of the transactions were questionable—or whether especially rigorous checks on public officials and other “politically exposed persons”, or PEPs, were called for and carried out. The role played by Goldman Sachs is also notable. The investment bank led 1MDB’s main bond issues, earning unusually high fees on them (Goldman has said this is because it temporarily held the risk on its own balance-sheet). Goldman’s chairman for South-East Asia, Tim Leissner, grew close to Malaysia’s elite. Last year Goldman put him on leave and now says he has left the firm. Mr Najib’s response to the scandal has been to swipe at his critics. Muhyiddin Yassin, a deputy prime minister who wanted investigations stepped up, was sacked from the cabinet last year, and the attorney-general was replaced—supposedly on health grounds, though Sarawak Report has published documents appearing to show that charges were about to be brought against Mr Najib. On February 27th Mr Muhyiddin called for the prime minister to resign, saying the outgoing attorney-general had shown him “proof” that Mr Najib acted criminally in connection with 1MDB. The government said this was part of a “politically motivated conspiracy” to topple Mr Najib. The new attorney-general, Mr Apandi, has moved swiftly to exonerate Mr Najib, closing a probe into the $681m “donation” and asserting that it had nothing to do with 1MDB. The government says that most of the money was sent back to the donor after the election. Why, some ask, was so much of the payment returned if it was legal? Not all Malaysia’s institutions have been supine. Last year the central bank urged the attorney-general to begin a criminal prosecution of 1MDB managers after concluding that the fund had moved $1.8 billion overseas based on inaccurate disclosures. This money was supposed to go to the PetroSaudi joint venture and related loans. Instead, much of it went elsewhere and is unaccounted for, according to the auditor-general’s draft report. (The final report was supposed to be released last December, but has twice been delayed.) The central bank requested a review of the finding by Mr Apandi that 1MDB did not commit any offences. This was rejected. Malaysia’s anti-corruption commission, an independent agency, investigated the payments into Mr Najib’s account and handed its findings to Mr Apandi late last year. He returned them to the commission in January, requesting more information. The commission has denied reports, based on unauthorised briefings, that it recommended charging Mr Najib. It was the haste with which Mr Apandi ruled out criminality that prompted the sharper tone from the Swiss authorities, who are investigating suspected bribery, corruption, misconduct in public office and money-laundering linked to 1MDB. They appear to be unimpressed with the blanket exoneration, though they say Mr Najib is not a suspect. Through a brass plate, darkly Singapore is also investigating suspected money-laundering and says it has frozen a “large number” of bank accounts. The case is a test of the city-state’s resolve in dealing with financial crime. Like Hong Kong, it has seen big inflows of wealth in recent years, including money of dubious provenance from Switzerland. But the sleuths face many hurdles. The corporate secrecy offered by offshore centres makes the task of penetrating structures used to move money slow and difficult. The OECD and others have begun to try to lift this shroud, but transparency reforms are at an early stage. Then there is the complex and clunky international system of “mutual legal assistance”, or MLA, under which countries ask each other for help in investigations. Piecing together the jigsaw is all the harder if the country at the centre of the probe is unhelpful. Malaysia has said it will assist the Swiss, but that looks unlikely. Indeed, it is using blocking tactics, for instance by telling Switzerland to file its MLA request through Malaysia’s foreign ministry. That is unusual: such requests would more typically go through the justice ministry, which is viewed abroad as less political. Malaysian officials reacted angrily to Switzerland’s announcement about misappropriation, accusing it of spreading “misinformation”. When the Swiss and Malaysian attorneys-general met last year, the Malaysians are believed to have said they would arrange for those caught up in the affair to provide testimony in depositions, but this has not happened. Without Malaysian help, it will be hard for foreign sleuths to complete their probes. For now, though, they seem determined to keep digging, causing anxiety in the Malaysian capital, parts of the Middle East, and some of the world’s largest financial centres.ON MARCH 2nd the UN agreed to the most sweeping sanctions it has yet imposed on North Korea in response to the country’s nuclear and missile tests of the past decade. The measures include inspections of all goods going to or coming from the country; a total embargo on all arms sales to it; and a ban on exports from it of coal, iron and other minerals. They were approved by all 15 members of its Security Council including Russia, after it delayed a vote to negotiate small changes to the text, and China, which opposes its ally’s nuclear programme but has been reluctant to punish it seriously. Hopes have been raised before that consensus at the UN might force North Korea to abandon its efforts. “Swift and tough” was how America described a resolution passed by the UN after North Korea’s inaugural atomic test in 2006. Yet despite further such resolutions, the North’s bomb-building programme chugs along. Few expect it to give it up soon. But a toughening of China’s stance—assuming it implements the sanctions rigorously—may give North Korea pause. China is by far the country’s biggest trading partner. Most of the trade covered by the sanctions goes through China. The resolution was the product of nearly two months of delicate negotiation between America and China that began after North Korea’s fourth nuclear test on January 6th. That was followed on February 7th by a long-range missile test (in the guise of a rocket sending a satellite into space), after which South Korea and America agreed to begin formal talks about the possibility of installing an American missile-defence system in the South. That prospect may have helped to stiffen China’s resolve: it fears the kit might threaten its own nuclear arsenal. China may hope that America might now abandon its missile-defence ideas. But it has also made clear that UN sanctions are “not an end in themselves”. China recently called for peace talks between the Koreas. It will hope that the sanctions will encourage North Korea to resume discussions on dismantling its nuclear programme, and not simply choke the North Korean economy. Chinese enforcement of previous sanctions applied by the UN on North Korea has been poor. Those now being imposed would involve considerably more disruption for China. It receives most of North Korea’s exports of minerals, including coal, gold, titanium and iron ore; in 2014 they made up half of the North’s $2.8 billion worth of sales to the country, according to South Korean figures. Rüdiger Frank of the University of Vienna thinks inspections of goods crossing the border will scare away trading partners and increase transaction costs for all North Korean trade, even the legal sort. But Chinese officials may balk at having to examine every truck. It is possible that they may simply put on a show of doing so. John Delury of Yonsei University in Seoul says that if China thought economic pressure was useful, it would already be applying it unilaterally. The sanctions include a more explicit ban on the sale of luxury goods, with which the regime pampers its senior officials: no more snowmobiles or fancy watches. But perhaps the most potent provisions of the UN resolution are those that require, and no longer simply encourage, countries to sniff out suspicious North Korean activity. They must expel North Korean diplomats found to be engaging in criminality and shut down North Korean banks if there is evidence they are helping the nuclear programme. Money trees But the sanctions do not target China’s vital oil supplies to the North. And North Korea may find ways of mitigating their effects. It has been tapping new sources of cash, such as by sending more workers abroad to earn hard currency at logging camps in Russia and on construction sites in the Middle East—activities that are also not covered by the latest resolution. If the new sanctions deter some traders, others may fill the gap, especially Chinese middlemen attracted by high commissions for riskier dealings on behalf of North Korean state trading companies. North Korea has a thriving black market in everything from computers to fine cognac, oiled by corrupt Chinese customs officials along its 1,400km (870-mile) border with China. The sanctions regime is likely to increase that illegal trade, not crush it. North Korean coal shipments, by their size, should be easier to track. Yet a large loophole remains that allows exports for “livelihood purposes”. Kim Byung-yeon of Seoul National University says certifying end-use would be wholly impractical. Proceeds from coal exports and most other trading activities typically remain in China in the form of credit. These are pools of ready cash for North Korean elites to draw on for their trade. And North Korea has proven adept at skirting sanctions by setting up front companies and shuffling ownership—shifting control of a trading company from a blacklisted government agency to one that is not, for example. Recent reports by a UN panel have found that North Korea routinely renames firms hit by sanctions and registers its cargo ships under foreign flags (among them, Cambodia, Kiribati and Sierra Leone). States that neglect to enforce sanctions are not penalised. Since the previous resolution in 2013, more than 150 of the UN’s 193 member states have failed to submit required reports on their implementation of those sanctions; last year, four of them were members of the Security Council.Mumtaz Qadri was no saint PEOPLE from many walks of life poured onto the streets of Rawalpindi near Islambad, Pakistan’s capital, on March 1st to honour a convicted murderer. Among the 100,000 or so mourners who crammed into Liaquat Park and surrounding streets were lawyers wearing the black suits of their profession, labourers bused in from around the country and even the odd expatriate businessman who had flown in for the occasion. The crowd was full of fury, directed at the government of Nawaz Sharif, the prime minister, for the hanging the day before of Mumtaz Qadri. A former police bodyguard, he had assassinated his boss, Salman Taseer, the governor of Punjab province, in 2011. Taseer was a liberal-minded businessman turned politician who had earned the hatred of religious hardliners by lobbying for a presidential pardon for a poor Christian woman. She had been sentenced to death under Pakistan’s infamous blasphemy law that bans disrespect towards the Prophet and other “holy personages”. It was, Taseer said, a “black law”. It is often invoked against religious minorities on the flimsiest of grounds; evidence can rarely be challenged in court for fear of repeating the alleged blasphemy. For killing Taseer, clerics declared Mr Qadri a ghazi or warrior. A mosque in Islamabad was named after him. Support for him among the 500,000-strong armed forces was so strong that the army chief at the time told foreign ambassadors that he was unable to issue a condemnation. This week the government was careful to manage the backlash. It ordered broadcasters to downplay news of Mr Qadri’s execution and imposed a news blackout on his funeral. No leading politician dared comment. Given the strength of support for Mr Qadri, it was not obvious that the government would dare to execute him. His legal team had exhausted all options. In a bold ruling in October the Supreme Court not only roundly rejected the team’s arguments; it also asserted that the blasphemy law was not beyond criticism since it was man-made. Even so, Mr Sharif’s party, the Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz), or PML (N), could have sat indefinitely on Mr Qadri’s request for a presidential pardon, so ducking the risk of enraging its religiously conservative base. That it did not do so is evidence of a growing readiness to stand up to intolerance and extremism. It follows a firestorm of terror attacks from the late-2000s onwards, culminating in the Pakistani Taliban’s assault on a school in Peshawar in December 2014 that killed more than 130 children. That event galvanised public opinion like nothing before. Since then the army, which in the past has used rabble-rousing Islamists to bash domestic and foreign opponents, has also turned its efforts to curbing extremism. Politics no longer favours the hardliners, who tend to flourish during periods of military rule. Religious parties win few seats in a parliament dominated by the PML (N), while hardliners are divided over ideology. Mr Qadri’s sympathisers come from the usually non-violent Barelvi movement, Sunnis heavily influenced by Sufism. Barelvis are locked in competition for adherents with the Deobandi movement, to which the Taliban and most other militant groups belong. With their puritanical outlook and belief in going back to the basics of early Islam, Deobandis are deeply critical of Barelvi enthusiasm for such traditions as worshipping at the shrines of local Sufi saints. Barelvis have largely cheered the crackdown on militant groups, which has targeted Deobandi mullahs and seminaries. A leading Deobandi cleric, Mohammad Khan Sherani, backed the execution of Mr Qadri. Mr Sharif cuts a strikingly more liberal figure than during his last stint in power, in the 1990s. Then he attempted to introduce sharia (Islamic law) and have himself declared “commander of the faithful”. Recently his government has pushed for Hindus, who make up 2% of the country’s population of 182m, to be allowed legally to register their marriages for the first time. On February 24th Punjab, which is controlled by PML (N), passed a law to protect women from violence (a move which a constitutionally empowered body of mullahs quickly declared to be un-Islamic). Mr Sharif has also thrown his support behind an Oscar-winning documentary critical of the widespread sanctioning of “honour killings” of women. He has vowed to change the law. Much more remains to be done, including reining in a notorious mullah, Abdul Aziz, who has praised the Pakistani Taliban and promotes sectarian hatred from right under the government’s nose in Islamabad’s Red Mosque. And there are still no signs of a crackdown on army-backed jihadists who restrict their activities to Afghanistan and India. The blasphemy law also needs to be reformed or, even better, scrapped. But that is unlikely, given how many men may be ready to emulate Mr Qadri. Those who got close enough to Mr Qadri’s garlanded corpse this week reported a face with the beatific glow of a martyr.
