THE annual budget which India’s finance minister, Arun Jaitley, presented on February 29th would normally have been the big political event of the week. That is not how proceedings in Parliament in the ensuing days made it appear. Both chambers were disrupted by angry exchanges over issues close to the hearts of the more extreme Hindu-nationalist wing of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Yet again, an ugly strain of BJP politics is distracting attention from what was supposed to be the party’s central agenda in power: ensuring rapid economic growth. The party’s own members provoked some of the most heated spats. This week two MPs from the BJP, including a junior minister, Ram Shankar Katheria, attended a rally in Agra, near Delhi, to commemorate a Hindu activist allegedly killed by Muslims. Inflammatory speeches at the rally called Muslims “demons” and warned them of a “final battle”. The two BJP men also spoke, leading to opposition calls for the minister’s resignation. But he was unapologetic, saying that, although he had called on Hindus to unite for their own safety, and for the culprits to be executed, he himself had not named any community. The opposition has also been attacking the minister of human resources, Smriti Irani, over her response to two recent incidents at universities. One was the suicide of a scholar at the University of Hyderabad, Rohith Vemula, who left a note that prompted national soul-searching about the discrimination he had suffered because of the “fatal accident” of his birth as a Dalit or “untouchable”, a Hindu at the bottom of the caste hierarchy. The second is the arrest for sedition of students at Jawaharlal Nehru University in Delhi, including the head of the student union, Kanhaiya Kumar. Their alleged crime had been to shout “anti-national” slogans at a protest marking the anniversary of the execution of Afzal Guru, a terrorist from Indian-ruled Kashmir. The BJP has blown the incident up into one of national pride and patriotism—especially after opposition politicians came out in defence of the students. Demonstrations for and against the students have taken place in several cities. On February 27th Srinagar, the biggest city in the Kashmir valley, was paralysed by a strike in support of the students and of a Kashmiri professor also charged with sedition over an Afzal Guru commemoration. A BJP politician decried the scruffy looks and licentiousness of left-leaning students at JNU, claiming that 2,000 bottles of booze and 3,000 used condoms are found on the campus each day. Since it only has about 7,000 students, that represents quite a feat, and the claim was greeted with derision. But other features of the case prompted justifiable outrage. It emerged that two of the seven videos incriminating the students had been doctored. Mr Kumar was badly beaten up in court by “patriotic” lawyers, who have as yet faced no serious consequences. The damage to India’s image is painful. Faith in the police and other institutions has been undermined. Vigilante violence has seemed to win official backing. Street protests have proliferated; on March 2nd the police in Delhi used water cannon against protesters outside Parliament. This is not the outward-looking, investor-friendly image India hopes to project. And it threatens its liberal traditions of free speech. It is not just India-hating traitors who think that the trial of Afzal Guru was unfair and that his execution was used for political ends by the previous administration, led by the Congress party. The BJP’s definition of “sedition” precludes almost any debate on the future of Kashmir—a source of tension within India and with Pakistan since independence. All of this looks like bad news for India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi. Yet, beyond tweeting in support of a fiery speech by Ms Irani, his embattled human-resources minister, he has had little to say on the Rohith Vemula suicide and JNU furore. This follows a pattern: he rarely speaks out in ways that might alienate the BJP’s hardliners. He needs them, as his most loyal foot soldiers in looming state elections, including one in West Bengal in May; and Mr Modi is probably already thinking about the next general election, due by 2019. With that in mind, and following failure in an election in the big state of Bihar last November, he and his advisers may calculate that whipping up a chorus of angry Indian nationalism serves them better than talking about touchy issues such as caste—and better than promoting narrow “Hindu” causes such as protecting cows from beef-eating Muslims and Christians. It also suits Mr Modi’s style, cultivated in his years as chief minister of the state of Gujarat, to portray himself as an outsider. He complains of plots by the press, NGOs, foreign meddlers and political pundits to destabilise his government. Despite leading India’s first single-party majority government in many years, he still governs as if he is waging an opposition campaign, with big rallies, catchy slogans and a sense of victimhood. Hopes that Mr Modi would implement radical economic policies were clearly misplaced. He campaigned in 2014 less as a reformer than as a man who got things done. But ruling India has proved much harder than running Gujarat, and he is constrained by the lack of a majority in Parliament’s upper house. So the optimism of his election campaign, when he sought to represent the aspirational new urban middle classes, has been dented. Mother tricolour For all that India is the world’s fastest-growing big economy, to many Indians that is not how it feels. It is not creating enough jobs for its swelling workforce. The fresh spending in this week’s budget was aimed not at the middle classes but at the poor in the countryside, the voters whom Congress has long wooed. Last October Arun Shourie, a writer and minister in a former BJP administration, mocked Mr Modi’s government as “Congress plus a cow”. This week’s budget and political battles suggest things have moved on. It has become Congress plus a flag.WITH all the pomp, pageantry and protest-deterring security, which are traditional at such affairs, the annual session of China’s rubber-stamp legislature, the National People’s Congress (NPC), will open on March 5th. Its agenda includes an unusually weighty topic: the discussion (and inevitable approval) of a plan for the country’s economic development in the next five years—the Communist Party’s recipe, in effect, for ensuring that the world’s second-largest economy does not stall. But many of the officials at the meeting will be worrying about a more pressing matter: their jobs. The biggest reshuffle in five years of leadership posts at every level of the Communist Party is getting under way. Hundreds of thousands of party bosses and their colleagues will be replaced, in everything from township party committees to state-owned enterprises. These changes will affect a series of other appointments: party leaders at every level are sometimes given concurrent titles such as mayor, CEO, or, in the case of Xi Jinping, whose main job is as the party’s general secretary, the largely honorific role of president. The drawn-out process will culminate late in 2017 with sweeping changes at the very top of the party. This will involve the retirement of five of the seven current members of the Politburo’s Standing Committee. The only members of that body who are almost certain to keep their jobs are Mr Xi and the prime minister, Li Keqiang. Six out of the 18 ordinary members of the Politburo are also due to retire. For Mr Xi these changes both high and low will be vital to the success of his policies for the rest of the time he has in power. When he took over in 2012, Mr Xi inherited a party bureaucracy stuffed at the highest levels with appointees of his two immediate predecessors as party chief (Hu Jintao, and before him, Jiang Zemin), and at the lower levels by officials used to running their localities in a manner suited to Mr Hu’s priorities. With the upcoming reshuffle, Mr Xi has an opportunity to stack the party hierarchy with his own loyalists. No wonder, then, that foreign dignitaries find Chinese leaders distracted. As much as the five-year plan, the five-yearly cycle of job uncertainty and related tension has determined the working rhythm of China’s bureaucracy since the 1980s, when a two-term limit was imposed on most leadership positions. Da huanjie, or “big changeovers” of personnel, occur in the build-up to, and right after, each of the party’s five-yearly congresses, the next of which (the 19th) will take place late in 2017 (not to be confused with the NPC, which is not concerned with party affairs). Mr Xi took over immediately after the 18th congress. By party convention, he too is subject to a two-term limit. That makes the 19th congress crucial for the consolidation of his power. It was Mr Hu (with help from a retired but ever-solicitous Mr Jiang) who supervised preparations for the 18th congress. So the build-up to the 19th will be Mr Xi’s first opportunity to make his mark on the appointment of so many officials. It will also be his last such opportunity before he prepares to retire at the 20th congress in 2022, assuming that is his plan. Mr Xi will only concern himself with the most important job changes; it is the party’s all-powerful and highly secretive Organisation Department that will decide on most of them, based on his guidelines. These, it would appear, suggest that candidates must be unswervingly loyal to Mr Xi. In recent weeks, several provincial party chiefs have hailed Mr Xi as the “core” of the party leadership, a term that had long been abandoned in favour of language that suggested a more collective style of rule. Mr Xi, it appears, has no scruples about being seen as the pre-eminent strongman. Who’s up? During the NPC, which normally convenes for about ten days, foreign journalists will have a rare opportunity to see the provincial party bosses who are likely to get jobs in the Politburo after the 19th congress (media are given access to many of the meetings at which delegates, grouped by province, parrot the party line). But it is still far from clear which of them, if any, are being groomed by Mr Xi to replace him and Mr Li after the congress in 2022. At this point ten years ago, there was already speculation that Mr Xi and Mr Li—both then provincial chiefs—were front-runners. Today the field looks more open. The party boss of Guangdong province, Hu Chunhua, and that of Chongqing, Sun Zhengcai, are possibles. But they may be handicapped by their lack of strong connections with Mr Xi. Others include Chen Miner, the party chief of Guizhou province who once worked closely with Mr Xi, and various officials in the central leadership including Ding Xuexiang of the Central Committee’s General Office and Zhong Shaojun of the party’s Central Military Commission (which Mr Xi heads). Unlike a decade ago, there are rumours that Mr Xi may be thinking of flouting convention and staying on after 2022. If this is so, it has not resulted in any less scrambling for top positions. The confusion this contest has caused among subordinates, says Chongyi Feng of the University of Technology in Sydney, Australia, is slowing down implementation of the market-oriented reforms that Mr Xi has promised. So too is Mr Xi’s campaign against corruption; officials fearful of being accused of graft by rivals prefer to keep their heads down rather than get involved in projects involving large amounts of money. Minxin Pei of Claremont McKenna College in America describes a Chinese bureaucracy “paralysed by fear”. The Organisation Department is looking out for anyone who is at risk of daibing, or “carrying sickness”, meaning transferring a habit of corruption from one job to another. One attribute that may help candidates for promotion is being well-versed in the Communist canon. In recent days, official presses have been rolling out copies of an obscure Maoist text: “Work Method of Party Committees”, first published in 1949. Mr Xi has ordered officials to study the tract, which includes an instruction that party bosses must (metaphorically) “learn to play the piano”. This, Mao explains, means they should attend to everything just as a pianist uses all ten fingers. They should not “give all [their] attention to a few problems, to the exclusion of others”. Mr Xi himself, with pressing economic matters to attend to as well as the reshuffle, should perhaps take note.Hong Kong’s future will be excellent in parts “THE reason why Hong Kong does not have democracy is because no one has died yet,” says a student in the former British colony who thinks it worth shedding blood to win freedom. Fellow supporters of the territory’s independence from China rampage through the streets; a protester self-immolates outside the British consulate. The government in Beijing sends tanks to crush the revolt. Such a calamity is unlikely in 2016. But could it happen in Hong Kong within the next decade? That is the question posed by “Ten Years”, a popular local film that has infuriated mainland officials. When China took Hong Kong back from Britain in 1997, it agreed to give it a “high degree of autonomy” for 50 years. Each of the film’s five vignettes portrays a dystopia in which China, explicitly or covertly, has taken control much sooner. Released on December 17th in just one cinema, the film went on to play to packed theatres across the territory until its run ended in February. In some cinemas it outsold “Star Wars”, another film about a big, repressive state. On March 10th the film’s overseas premiere will take place in Japan. “Ten Years” has appealed to those concerned about China’s efforts to stifle the development of democracy in the territory and to restrict freedom of speech. Anxieties have been fuelled recently by the disappearance of five men who sold gossipy books about China’s leaders. At the end of February a Hong Kong-based television channel aired interviews with the men. It said four of them were in custody on the mainland for illegally selling books there. One of them, Lee Bo, said he was helping the mainland police as a witness. Mr Lee’s case has aroused particular interest because he disappeared from Hong Kong itself; the others were visiting the mainland or Thailand when they went missing. In the interview, Mr Lee denied he had been kidnapped by Chinese agents and said he remained “free” on the mainland. But suspicions persist that China has been putting pressure on him to stop publishing scurrilous works. Such worries have encouraged the recent rise of a “localist” movement, whose followers emphasise Hong Kong’s separateness from the mainland. On February 8th young localists clashed with police in the city’s worst violence since the 1960s. In a by-election for the legislature on February 28th, a localist candidate charged by police with taking part in the riot took 15% of the vote. “Ten Years” refers to the movement in its depiction of Sam (played by Liu Kai-Chi, pictured), a fictional shopkeeper who is attacked by pro-Communist fanatics for calling his eggs “local”. China has made its displeasure clear. A newspaper in Beijing called the film “ideological poison”. Mainland broadcasters have dropped plans to air the Hong Kong Film Awards on April 3rd, the territory’s equivalent of the Oscars (“Ten Years” has been nominated for best picture). Hong Kong’s financial secretary, John Tsang, has been trying a more conciliatory approach to localist sentiment. In his budget speech on February 24th, he described films made in the Cantonese dialect (“Ten Years” is one such, though he did not mention it) as a “key component of the local culture”. He announced a doubling to HK$500,000 ($64,300) of the government’s subsidy for each Cantonese film promoted on the mainland, where films use the Mandarin dialect. Not everyone was impressed. One of the directors of “Ten Years” said the government would support only films that could pass China’s strict censorship laws. “Ten Years” would stand no chance.THE clerics disqualified the candidates, but they could not disqualify the people. So long were the queues outside many polling stations that Iran’s election commission postponed closing five times. Secular Iranians with pink hairdos stood in line waiting to vote against the mullahs. When a self-important hardline politician tried to queue-jump, they booed him to the back of the line. In Jamaran, the Tehran district where Ayatollah Khomeini once berated western Satans, citizens cheered the architects of Iran’s overtures to the West as they came to vote. Muhammad Zarif, the foreign minister who negotiated the nuclear deal, got polite applause. A former president, Muhammad Khatami, who is perhaps Iran’s most popular politician despite being banned from state media, won a hero’s cheer. By contrast, the turnout in south Tehran, a poorer, more conservative place, seemed dismal. Voters queued for hours in the north, but registered their ballots in the south within minutes. Organisers in the mosques which doubled as polling stations tried to rally their flock. They pinned posters in their porticos mocking America’s president, Barack Obama, and played nationalist songs over loudspeakers. The Council of Guardians, a body packed with the Supreme Leader’s followers, had done its best to rig the results in advance. They had banned most reformist candidates for the Majlis, or parliament, and for a body of Shia clerics, the Assembly of Experts, who select the Supreme Leader. But the reformists outsmarted them. They compiled lists of those who remained, and when they had run out of their own candidates, filled them with the most innocuous of their rivals. They cut deals with pragmatic conservatives, like parliament’s speaker, Ali Larijani, whose deputy appeared on Tehran’s reformist list. The upshot was a “List of Hope”, that was reformist in parts. Sometimes voters had a choice only between hardline and moderate conservatives. Many candidates appeared on both the List of Hope and the hardliners’ list. “We didn’t know half the people on the list, and the half we did know we didn’t like,” said a Tehran businessman. “But if you want change in the Middle East, you have two choices—reform what you can, or follow Syria.” In the capital the List of Hope won all 30 parliamentary seats and all but one of the 16 Assembly of Experts seats. Ayatollah Hashemi Rafsanjani, who has openly questioned the system of a single Supreme Leader, came first; Hassan Rohani, the president, third. Eight of the 30 were women. The reformist list won majorities in other cities including Isfahan, which hardliners had swept in 2012. In the Assembly of Experts, out went harshly pious hardline icons including Ayatollah Muhammad Yazdi, the current head of the body, and Muhammad Taghi Mesbah Yazdi, the Revolution’s chief surviving theorist. It was, as President Rohani put it, a demonstration of people power. “They said in a loud voice: ‘We want interactions with the world, not confrontation.”’ Given the overlap between the lists, the results are not quite so clear-cut. On a rough assessment of the 216 seats that were decided (69 have been pushed to a run-off round in late spring and five are reserved for minorities), the conservatives won just under half, far worse than their tally at the previous election in 2012. The reformists got almost 40%, up from about 10%. So independents, including Mr Larijani, will hold the balance of power. That should give Mr Rohani more room for manoeuvre to push through the laws he needs to open Iran for foreign investment and claw back some of the assets Iran’s big conglomerates, controlled by clerics and Revolutionary Guards, amassed when Iran was cut off from the world. Most independents will depend on his budget if they want to bring roads and other goodies to their provinces. Democracy’s messy But parliament will also be a chaotic place. Having culled each other’s upper tiers, both parliamentary factions look rudderless. Mr Rohani, a consummate centrist, must decide whether to concentrate on the economy, as the Supreme Leader wants, or to pursue social change, as his supporters want. He has yet to keep his promise to release political dissidents incarcerated after the 2009 elections. The situation with the new Council of Experts is equally murky, but crucial. It will hold office until 2024. Since Mr Khamenei is 76, it may well have to choose his successor as Supreme Leader. It, too, has shifted in a more moderate direction, which could presage a battle of critical importance to Iran’s future if the time should come for it to perform its task. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal The conservative establishment is far more powerful than the president. The Supreme Leader can veto laws. Judges and Revolutionary Guards do his bidding. Isolation has served the hardliners well, allowing them to muscle into sectors, particularly oil, previously filled by foreigners. While Mr Zarif, Mr Rohani’s foreign minister, was meeting his American counterpart, the hardliners tested a ballistic missile to spoil the mood. Conservative goons have arrested western journalists and businessmen, presumably to undermine Mr Rohani’s diplomacy towards the West. The day Britain reopened its visa section in Tehran they put up a billboard of the Queen in a nearby square, showing her with the snout of a camel. But they are a little less rigid than they used to be. Nudged by the Supreme Leader, who prefers to hide behind his president, even some of the hardest-liners approved last summer’s nuclear deal, and many, like Mr Larijani, have tacked to the centre. Muatalifa, a conservative faction, holds senior posts in Mr Rohani’s own staff. The morality police have stopped barging into people’s homes and offices quite so often. The difference between the two electoral lists is muddier than it appears. Conservatives may denounce their opponents as western stooges; reformists may mutter that the conservatives are the Shia equivalent of Islamic State. But in reality hardline and softer clerics intermarry, shift positions, and hedge their bets to keep power, says an Ayatollah in Qom who was once Ayatollah Khomeini’s Guardian Councillor, and is now one of the Supreme Leader’s turbulent priests. The views of voters count for far less than they should in Iran, but they do count for something.IT WAS a brave attempt to generate diplomatic momentum. Four days into the American and Russian sponsored “cessation of hostilities” agreement that came into force on February 27th, Staffan de Mistura, the UN special envoy to Syria, said he was expecting the warring parties to return to the negotiating table in Geneva on March 9th. Mr de Mistura had pencilled in an earlier date for the resumption of peace talks, which were suspended before they could begin a month ago when the Syrian opposition walked out. But he hopes that by allowing a couple of extra days “for the ceasefire to better settle down”, the chances of success will be greater. Mr de Mistura’s use of the expression “ceasefire” is itself an indication of hopes likely to be dashed. A cessation of hostilities is more an orchestrated lull in the fighting than a formal ceasefire. Thus far, however, the agreement, although partial and fragile, is holding better than many expected. The intensity of the fighting has dwindled more than during previous attempts. America’s State Department said it had not heard of any “significant” violations of the agreement, though that depends on what is meant by significant. The Syrian Network for Human Rights, a British-based NGO, reported nearly 80 breaches (including the possible use of poison gas) in the first few days, resulting in 13 civilian deaths. On the same fairly positive note, Bashar al-Assad’s government has allowed deliveries of humanitarian aid to besieged communities, including some in rebel-controlled areas. The UN was aiming to have reached 150,000 people by the end of the first week. It reckons that there are at least 450,000 people trapped in towns and villages across the country. Mr Assad told a German television station on March 1st that his government would “do our part so that the whole thing works”. Some scepticism is warranted. The agreement excludes both Islamic State (IS) and Jabhat al-Nusra (JAN), al-Qaeda’s Syrian branch. It labels them terrorist groups. As such both can be targeted, either by the regime with its Russian and Iranian backers, or by the American-led anti-IS coalition. But JAN, in particular, operates alongside more mainstream rebel groups supported by America and its allies. There are thus many potential flashpoints where the regime can say it is attacking designated terrorists, but is actually going after groups supposedly protected by the agreement. In largely rebel-held Idlib province, the Western-backed Free Syrian Army (FSA), Ahrar-al-Sham (a powerful Salafi outfit) and JAN all share control. It is doubtful whether either Russian or Syrian aircraft, equipped only with “dumb” bombs, can target one group without hitting others. The regime also says that JAN and IS are operating in Ghouta and Daraya, suburbs of Damascus that it has long wanted to wrest back. Rebels say this is untrue. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts The biggest test case seems certain to be Aleppo. Russian air strikes in recent weeks have made it possible for regime forces, augmented by the Iranian Revolutionary Guards and various Iranian-backed proxy militias, to come close to a complete encirclement of pre-war Syria’s biggest city. The Russians insist that Aleppo’s defenders are dominated by JAN. FSA sources say that JAN has fewer than 1,000 fighters in Aleppo, a small fraction of the groups in the city that are affiliated to it. An all-out attack on Aleppo can probably be ruled out. The regime does not have enough troops to fight street by street against well-prepared locals—the kind of battle that causes heavy casualties. Nor is Russia able to deploy enough precision-guided munitions to make air power count for much in such a densely packed city. The Institute for the Study of War, a think-tank in Washington, DC predicts that the regime and its allies will instead pursue a slow “siege-and-starve” campaign to wear down the city’s defenders without getting so many of their own men killed. As part of the plan to isolate Aleppo, the regime is depending on Kurdish YPG fighters and Russian air strikes to cut off all the northern supply routes from Turkey. That is another reason to fear that the cessation of hostilities will be short-lived. The Kurds have said they will abide by that agreement unless attacked. But Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, says that it has no bearing on his country’s military campaign to prevent the Kurds from controlling Syria’s northern border, which he sees as a threat to Turkey’s own security. For now, a pause in the fighting, even if confined only to some areas, suits almost everyone. But the chances are slim that an agreement so rickety will last long enough to provide a platform for serious peace talks in Geneva.AS SAUDI ARABIA and Iran jostle for power in the Middle East, Lebanon has managed to maintain an uncomfortable balance between the two. Saudi Arabia has long been chummy with Lebanon’s Sunni politicians and some of its Christians. Iran supports the Lebanese Shia, not least through Hizbullah, a militia-cum-political party. It has also snuggled up to some Lebanese Christian groups. Nonetheless, an uneasy calm prevailed between Lebanon and the two regional powers. Apparently no longer. On February 19th Saudi Arabia said it had suspended $4 billion in funding for the French and Americans to train and equip the Lebanese army and security forces. Ostensibly the kingdom objects to Hizbullah, and therefore Iran’s influence, which they see as exemplified by Lebanon’s failure to condemn an attack in January on the Saudi embassy in Tehran. Saudi Arabia then warned its citizens against travelling to the tiny country, and accused Hizbullah of smuggling drugs into the kingdom and sending mercenaries to Yemen and Syria. On March 2nd the six-member Gulf Co-operation Council designated Hizbullah a terrorist organisation. Hizbullah and Iran are certainly amassing power in the Middle East, often in unsavoury ways. They have propped up Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s blood-spattered despot, and provided men and weapons to help Iraq fight Islamic State. They are also thought to be helping Yemen’s rebel Houthis. But although in Lebanon Hizbullah has been blocking the nomination of a new president, it has done little new to ignite Saudi anger there. The move probably has more to do with a bolder—and often clumsy—foreign policy under King Salman and his favoured son, Muhammad. Their fear of Iran has bordered on panic, not least since Iran concluded a nuclear deal with America and other powers. Saudi Arabia’s moves against Lebanon seem amateurish. Even if the Lebanese parties wanted to, they could do little to diminish the role of Hizbullah, which acts as a state within the state and also dominates the government. “Saudi Arabia sometimes acts with bombast and violence that makes it look like the Donald Trump of the Arab world,” says Rami Khouri of the American University of Beirut. The result is likely to be that the Saudis lose influence in Lebanon, possibly to Iran. The squabble risks destabilising a divided nation that is already buckling under the weight of Syrian refugees. Lebanon’s politicians, divided by their attitudes to Saudi Arabia and Iran, among many other things, are already trading accusations. Hizbullah and the Future Movement, the main Sunni party led by Saad Hariri, the son of a revered former prime minister, may call off their regular meetings. This probably makes Lebanon less secure. It is facing threats from the war next door in Syria and from terrorists inspired by it at home. Signalling its concern, the UN has called on other countries to make up the $4 billion. Many Lebanese fear that if the row escalates, the economy will suffer. They worry that the Gulf will kick out Lebanese residents, who send home hefty remittances. Saudis and other Gulf spenders may well ignore the travel warnings and still spend their money on holidays in freewheeling Beirut, but far fewer have come since the carnage started in Syria. The squall looks unlikely to blow over. Hassan Nasrallah, Hizbullah’s leader, piled on the rhetoric against the Al Sauds on March 1st, accusing them of crimes and massacres. Hussein Shobokshi, a Saudi columnist, does not think the kingdom will back down. “Any rise in Iran’s role will hurt the Lebanese more than us,” he says. Hizbullah has even suggested that Saudi Arabia has cut the cash because it is going bankrupt as a result of low oil prices. Loth to miss an opportunity, Iran has offered to make up the money. The Iranians’ aim may be nothing more than to tweak royal Saudi noses; they can barely afford such a sum.“THAT precision! Look at that car! Wait for the missile to come down! No one gets away.” Ahmed Moussa, an Egyptian television host, sounded like a kid playing a video game when he showed “satellite imagery” of Russia striking Islamic State in Syria last autumn. Perhaps that is because Mr Moussa was, in fact, showing clips from a video game. “We aren’t making anything up,” said Mr Moussa, as he made it all up. Mr Moussa’s programme, called “Ala mas’uliyati” (“My Responsibility”), epitomises the absurdity of Egypt’s popular talk shows. In February a host called Khairy Ramadan was suspended after a guest claimed that women in Upper Egypt are generally unfaithful. Another host, Reham Saeed, was sentenced to six months in prison for airing the private photos of a sexual-harassment victim (whom she also blamed for the attack). Most hosts not only support the government, but take direction from it. “I would say anything the military tells me to say out of duty and respect for the institution,” Mr Moussa told the Guardian. Others mix conspiracy and sycophancy, as when Amr Adeeb worried that “[foreign] intelligence officers who are trying to ruin our country” might kill Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, the president. Mr Sisi says back him or stay mum—but some have not. Egypt has locked up more journalists than any country save China. Media outlets that supported the Muslim Brotherhood have been closed down. Most network heads are anyway disposed to self-censor. Nearly all support the regime, which protects their business interests. So critics such as Bassem Youssef, the former host of a satirical news programme, have been taken off the air. Egypt is “the target of many conspiracies”, claims Mr Sisi. Hosts detail the plots. In October Tamer Amin interviewed Hossam Sweilam, a former deputy defence minister, who claimed that America was behind the uprising in 2011 and now controls Egypt’s weather. Lyrics from an obscure American hip-hop group were cited as proof. The conspirators vary, but often include America, Iran and Israel, sometimes (oddly) working together. Mr Moussa says he would like to see Barack Obama “impaled”. Though their ranting is often nonsensical, talk-show hosts sway opinion in Egypt, where over a quarter of people are illiterate. Fortunately, some hosts have stiffened their spines of late, criticising the government for a poor economy, among other things. The recent murder of a young Italian student prompted a few to ask, obliquely, whether the state was involved, as evidence suggests. Perhaps sensing a shift, Mr Sisi has warned Egyptians, “Don’t listen to anyone but me. I am dead serious.”OUT in the farthest reaches of Lagos, a bumpy boat ride across the city’s dividing lagoon, Egbin power plant is trying to light up one of the world’s darkest nations. Six turbines growl in its huge belly, watched over by mechanics in a futuristic control room. They say the place is barely recognisable since privatisation in 2013. Output has rocketed since Sahara Group, a Nigerian energy conglomerate, took over. When running at full steam, Egbin generates almost a quarter of the whole country’s electricity. That is not a particularly stretching target. Of Nigeria’s many daily headaches, power is perhaps the worst. After years in which state-owned power plants decayed, the government changed course by selling power stations and the distribution grids that carry power to homes and businesses. This bold stroke was meant to turn the lights on, and indeed it has encouraged investors to put millions of dollars into upgrading the battered system. Yet the supply of power has failed to respond as hoped in the two years since privatisation. At the moment the country’s big stations produce a pitiful 2,800MW, which is about as much as is used by Edinburgh. Only just over half of Nigerians have access to electricity, and it is still harder for businesses to hook up to the grid than almost anywhere else. One reason why privatisation has failed to improve Nigeria’s power supply is that the process itself was flawed from the start. Even as companies were bidding to buy power stations or distribution companies, striking staff prevented them from looking at what they were buying. Once the deals were done they found they had bought rundown equipment and companies whose books had been systematically cooked. More important, though, was that many could not get the gas they needed to power their plants. Government meddling held down gas prices, which meant that many producers would simply flare it off (while extracting oil) instead of bothering to sell it at a deep loss. Moreover, the pipes meant to carry the flammable stuff are rusting and regularly vandalised by thugs demanding money to protect them. The privatisation process was also incomplete and left the transmission grid (which carries electricity from power stations to the local distribution grids) in the hands of the state. It has not invested much, so huge amounts of power fizzle out on its dilapidated lines. Even if power plants could generate more electricity, the grid would not be able to handle it. At Egbin a handful of people employed by the state-owned transmission network sit watching YouTube clips as their private-sector colleagues beaver away. Power plants are also owed colossal sums by the agencies that act as middlemen between generation companies and the distributors. Egbin alone is some $225m out of pocket. The intermediaries, in turn, blame distributors, saying they have not been collecting cash from their customers. As for the distributors, they say that the tariffs they are allowed to charge are too low to cover their costs and that, in any case, Nigerians do not pay their bills. Depressingly, the biggest offender is the government, whose various departments and agencies owe almost $300m. “It’s difficult for anyone to go to a military barracks and order them to pay—except if you’ve written your will,” says one insider. More than a year ago the Central Bank of Nigeria organised a $1 billion loan to plug the gap and avoid a wave of insolvencies among power generators, but only a fraction has been disbursed. Since then a falling currency and shortages of foreign exchange have made it harder for private power producers to service debts denominated in dollars, a currency many chose because it offered lower interest rates than borrowing in naira. Finding cash (and hard currency in particular) to buy gas, maintain machinery and pay technical partners is a growing strain. Dallas Peavey, Egbin’s chief executive, reckons that without repayment or preferential access to foreign currency he can keep the country’s biggest power station running for just another four weeks. Still, there are glimmers of hope. In recent years the government has raised the price of gas, and supplies are growing more reliable. Distribution companies are installing new meters, which are harder to fiddle. Unpaid public electricity bills are being chased up. Most crucially, tariffs were increased in February by as much as 45%. It did not go down at all well with locals. But if Nigerians can be convinced to pay their bills, it ought to get some cash flowing through the system. That would be a start.Long walk to the detention centre SOME African migrants forge across the Mediterranean in flimsy boats. Others take a somewhat less risky (and cheaper) journey, heading for the bright lights of South Africa. Unemployment may be a shocking 34% south of the Limpopo river, but there are still plenty of opportunities for those who are prepared to work hard. Many migrants follow in the footsteps of their compatriots. Malawians and Mozambicans are often found tending lush suburban gardens. Somalis run tiny convenience stores, known as spaza shops, in black townships. Johannesburg’s “Little Addis” bustles with Ethiopian traders and the sound of Amharic. Congolese and Cameroonian vendors hawk cassava and plantains in Yeoville, another Johannesburg neighbourhood. Zimbabweans, who are typically better educated than their South African peers, can be found totting up company accounts, working as mining engineers or, failing that, waiting on tables. For many Africans, South Africa seems a stable, functional, prosperous place. It is also a potential stepping stone to the rest of the world. Getting there is not easy. Many do it in stages, finding work along the way. Some are arrested and locked up. On South Africa’s border with Zimbabwe migrants must ford crocodile-infested rivers. Happily, the main fence is so tattered that you can simply walk through it. At many posts, border guards demand bribes. Some of the greatest dangers for migrants arise after they arrive. Last year seven people were reportedly killed in a spate of anti-foreigner violence, though the real number is probably much higher since most attacks never make the news. Thousands of immigrants fled their homes and businesses. Among them was Salat Abdullahi, 20, who moved from Somalia to Soweto to run a spaza shop with his older brother. They ran away when xenophobic locals looted and destroyed it. “We came here with nothing, and made a business,” Mr Abdullahi said. “They don’t like that.” After the violence against migrants came a crackdown on the victims: more than 15,000 immigrants were arrested and deported in a government sweep. Many were held in a detention centre notorious for overcrowding, corruption and abuse. Xenophobia has spread since 1994, when the fall of apartheid led to an inflow of black migrants from across the continent. The South African government has discouraged immigration, despite a shortage of home-grown skills, by tightening border controls and laws. It sees foreigners as competing with locals for scarce jobs rather than as boosting the economy with their talent and entrepreneurial nous. Despite a widespread perception among South Africans that their country is packed with immigrants, the latest census found just 2.2m of them, or less than 5% of the population (though people in the country illegally probably don’t confess this to census officers, so the true figure is higher). In Johannesburg, the most cosmopolitan of South African cities, 13% of the population was born abroad. Many of those who come seek asylum: the South African government lets refugees work and even obtain some public services while their papers are being processed. Between 2008 and 2012 South Africa received 778,000 asylum applications, in a system that is slow and riddled with corruption. Despite the well-documented hostility and harassment, foreigners are still more likely to be employed than South Africans. Often they work in the informal sector, or do jobs that locals are not willing to take. Enterprising migrants rent shops from South Africans and thereby create jobs. Johannesburg, built on gold mines and migrant labour, is becoming a truly international city. But local elections this year could be the catalyst for more foreigner-bashing.
