IN THE eyes of many foreigners, two numbers encapsulate French economic policy over the past decade or so: 75 and 35. The first refers to the top income-tax rate of 75%, promised by François Hollande to seduce the left when he was the Socialist presidential candidate in 2012. The second is the 35-hour maximum working week, devised by a Socialist government in 2000 and later retained by the centre-right. Each has been a totem of French social preferences. Yet, to the consternation of some of his voters, Mr Hollande applied the 75% tax rate for only two years, and then binned it. Now he has drawn up plans that could, in effect, demolish the 35-hour week, too. Mr Hollande’s government is reviewing a draft labour law that would remove a series of constraints French firms face, both when trying to adapt working time to shifting business cycles and when deciding whether to hire staff. In particular, it devolves to firms the right to negotiate longer hours and overtime rates with their own trade unions, rather than having to follow rules dictated by national industry-wide deals. The 35-hour cap would remain in force, but it would become more of a trigger for overtime pay than a rigid constraint on hours worked. These could reach 46 hours a week, for a maximum of 16 weeks. Firms would also have greater freedom to shorten working hours and reduce pay, which can currently be done only in times of “serious economic difficulty”. Emmanuel Macron, the economy minister, has called such measures the “de facto” end of the 35-hour week. At the same time, the law would lower existing high barriers to laying off workers. These discourage firms from creating permanent jobs, and leave huge numbers of “outsiders”, particularly young people, temping. For one thing, it would cap awards for unfair dismissal, which are made by labour tribunals. Laid-off French workers bring such cases frequently; they can take years and cost anything from €2,500 to €310,000 ($2,700 to $337,000) by one estimate. The underlying principle, laid out in government-commissioned reports over the past six months, is simple and radical. The country’s ponderous labour code, currently longer than the Bible, should limit itself to basic protection of workers, and leave bosses and unions within firms to hammer out finer details. This is based on the belief that French employees—only 8% of whom belong to a union—are more pragmatic and flexible than the national union leaders in Paris who supposedly negotiate on their behalf. At a car factory making Smart vehicles in eastern France, for instance, a recent deal to work 39 hours a week was approved by most employees, yet blocked by the firm’s unions. Under the new law, if no deal can be reached with a company’s unions, employees may vote in a binding internal referendum. The draft law does not deal with all the rigidities of the French labour code. Nonetheless, “it’s the most important piece of labour-market legislation for 15 years,” says Ludovic Subran, chief economist at Eurler Hermes, a credit-insurance firm. It is the closest France has got to the reformist Jobs Act rammed through in Italy by Matteo Renzi’s government. And it could be the legacy that Manuel Valls, the ambitious centre-left prime minister, seeks as he and Mr Macron try to steer the Socialists in a more market-friendly direction. The great difficulty is political. For much of the left, the 35-hour week remains not only a badge of progress but the mark of a preference: for shorter hours, more holidays and higher productivity—even at the price of fewer jobs. French productivity per hour remains far higher than Britain’s and even a touch above Germany’s (though yearly hours worked in France are lower, and the unemployment rate twice as high). In fact, the French already work more than 35 hours a week on average, partly because so many employees get extra holidays to compensate. White-collar employees at EDF, an energy firm, average 39 working hours a week, but until recently got 23 extra days off each year on top of the statutory five weeks’ holiday. (A hard-won deal has reduced this to a mere 16.) Managing so much absence has become an art. “Employees prefer to work less, earn less and have more time,” says Pierre Vauterin, who runs a firm that makes ball bearings on the outskirts of Paris. Challenging this doctrine is becoming a stinging headache. Already, Mr Valls has postponed the presentation of his draft law to the cabinet, thanks to an uproar within his own party and the threat of street protests by unions and students. In a barbed article in Le Monde, Martine Aubry, mayor of Lille and architect of the 35-hour week, accused him of selling out socialist ideals. “Who could imagine”, she asked, “that making redundancies easier…will encourage employment?” Mr Hollande is enfeebled. Even France’s more moderate unionists are wary. If Mr Valls waters down the draft, his reformist credentials will be damaged. If he pushes ahead, he could find himself with a choice between unmanageable unrest—or resignation.WHEN polling stations closed on February 26th, Fine Gael and Labour, the two parties that have governed Ireland since 2011, were hoping for a surprise result like the one Britain’s Conservatives achieved last May. They had come to power with the largest majority in Irish history, but five years of austerity had drained their support. Instead, the result was worse than expected: the political fragmentation seen in recent elections across Europe hit both parties hard. Fine Gael, a centre-right party whose leader Enda Kenny has been taoiseach (prime minister) since 2011, lost nearly a third of its vote. Labour, its centre-left partner, suffered worse still, losing two-thirds. The polls had predicted Labour’s rout, but for Fine Gael the shock was greater. Its gaffe-prone campaign was clearly not up to scratch: at one point Mr Kenny managed to insult some of his own constituents as champion “whingers”. Fine Gael relied on broadcast messages aimed at all voters. This proved less effective than the Conservatives’ campaign last year, which targeted swing voters with tailored messages. More tellingly, Fine Gael’s slogan, “Let’s keep the recovery going”, which it borrowed from the Conservatives, failed to resonate. As in recent elections in Portugal and Spain, the emphasis on economic competence fell flat with voters, says Dan O’Brien of the Institute of International and European Affairs, a Dublin think-tank. Although Ireland recorded GDP growth of nearly 7% in 2015, one exit poll found that only 26% of voters felt better off than a year ago. The country’s GDP figures include profits of multinational firms headquartered for tax reasons in Ireland, but much of that money never reaches the Irish. GNP, which excludes income earned by foreigners, has been flat in real terms since the end of 2014. The opposition exploited the feeling that many were being left out of the recovery. Fianna Fail, the populist centrist party that dominated Irish politics before the financial crisis, gained 24 seats. Sinn Fein, a hard-left nationalist party with strong working-class support, gained seats too, though not as many as it had hoped. Smaller left-leaning parties such as the AAA-PBP and a wide range of independents also did well, gaining a record 30% of the vote. Because the anti-government vote was split between so many parties, Fine Gael still has the most seats. As in Spain, it is thus unclear who will form the government. Although Fine Gael and Fianna Fail together have a majority of 30, a grand coalition would be difficult. Both parties’ activists are tribal, and have been since their split during the civil war of the early 1920s. Besides, Fianna Fail fears it would lose support if it became Fine Gael’s junior coalition partner, just as the (Irish) Labour party has since 2011. Both have also ruled out any coalition involving Sinn Fein, which they see as fiscally irresponsible and tainted by links to violence and the IRA in Northern Ireland. Fianna Fail says it does not want to leave Sinn Fein as the only official opposition party either. That appears to leave one solution: some sort of temporary deal between Fine Gael and Fianna Fail, with another election called after the budget later this year. The political uncertainty comes at a bad time. Slowing growth will limit what Ireland can do without breaching its EU deficit targets. And political fragmentation threatens a return to the politics of giveaways, when Ireland should instead be running a surplus to prepare for the next downturn, says Colm McCarthy of University College Dublin. Euro membership puts Irish policymakers under pressure to show much greater fiscal discipline. Whether Irish politics can withstand the pressure is unclear.GREECE’S migrant crisis is getting worse. Macedonia has closed its border to all but a trickle of migrants, following the example of Austria and other countries along the so-called West Balkans route to Germany. Yet desperate Syrians and Iraqis continue to arrive at the Idomeni crossing point. On February 29th Macedonian police used tear gas against scores of migrants trying to break down the border fence. As The Economist went to press, more than 12,000 people were crammed into a tent camp with facilities for only 1,500. Food is in short supply. “It’s a tense situation,” says Panagiota Siafaka, a social worker with the UN High Commission for Refugees. So long as the border remained open, Greece could manage the flow of arrivals from Turkey. Now almost 30,000 migrants are bottled up in Greece. Nikos Kotzias, the foreign minister, expects the number to reach 150,000; local aid agencies worry that 200,000 people may arrive in March alone. Reception centres around Athens for migrants are hopelessly overcrowded. Half a dozen new ones, mostly refurbished former military camps, are quickly filling up. Local and international charities provide food and medical care. “The state seems absent, but luckily ordinary people are here every day to help,” says Mariana, a paediatrician working at Piraeus port, gesturing towards a group of elderly Greek women handing out bananas and chocolate bars to harassed mothers in headscarves. Things will improve, if only gradually. Greece expects to receive a large chunk of the EU’s new €700m ($760m), three-year humanitarian aid package for countries that host a lot of migrants. Of that, €300m would be spent this year. Athens-based aid agencies hope that funds will bypass the slow-moving Greek bureaucracy, going straight to needy migrants in the form of vouchers for food and housing. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers But stemming the flow of migrants from Turkey is proving hard. A NATO naval mission was due to begin monitoring the strait between Greece and Turkey on February 29th, electronically locating smugglers’ boats so Turkish coastguards could nudge them back to shore. But on March 2nd the NATO vessels were still in port. The Greek defence ministry said Turkey had raised “technical problems”. EU leaders hope for a breakthrough at a summit on March 7th with Ahmet Davutoglu, Turkey’s prime minister. The Turkish government has yet to crack down on the people-smugglers. Diplomats in Athens believe the Turks will make a deal conditional on EU countries resettling Syrians from refugee camps in southern Turkey. Meanwhile, Turkey has agreed to take back economic migrants who crossed to the Greek islands from Turkey. After weeks of bureaucratic exchanges between the Greek and Turkish police, a first group of 270 Moroccans, Tunisians and Algerians were handed into Turkish custody on March 2nd at the land border in Thrace. A group of 150 Pakistanis will be next. It is a modest start, yet even a small reduction in numbers helps relieve Greece’s migrant burden.MORE herbicides contain glyphosate, a weedkilling chemical, than any other agent. Monsanto, an agricultural giant, first sold Roundup, a product containing the stuff, to farmers in the 1970s. Since then use of glyphosate-based concoctions has increased about 100-fold; gardeners as well as farmers have taken to it for killing weeds and keeping paths clear. The firm’s last patent on it expired in 2000, and farmers from Brazil to Russia spray it as never before. But as larger quantities are used, concerns grow over the harm some say it may cause. On March 7th a European Union (EU) committee will vote on whether to renew approval of glyphosate for the next 15 years. Farmers value glyphosate for reasons that have changed since it first appeared. Once a kill-all for unwanted weeds, it was transformed in 1996 when Monsanto developed genetically engineered crops able to withstand it. In 2014 selling Roundup and modified seeds earned the company $5 billion in America alone. It is also useful in drying crops before harvests. Estimates suggest that two-thirds of all the glyphosate ever sprayed in America has been applied in the past ten years. Glyphosate’s benefits vary depending on what crop it is sprayed on. But no organisation tracks pesticide use by type across Europe, making comparisons difficult. Monsanto claims that using glyphosate can raise crop yields between 30% and 60%—a huge boost. According to a 2011 estimate by Michael Schmitz, head of the Institute of Agribusiness, a German research organisation, a ban on glyphosate in the EU could cause annual losses of €1 billion-3.1 billion ($1.1 billion-3.4 billion). Some scientists claim that dousing crops in glyphosate may be harmful, however. It lingers in soils and water for much longer than studies once suggested. Low levels of the stuff have been detected in products from bread to pantyliners. And as resistance to glyphosate increases in plants, as it has in recent decades, changes to cropping and tillage patterns may be needed—alongside gallons of other pesticides—to ensure good harvests. The hottest debate surrounds glyphosate and human health. Last July the WHO’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) found that the herbicide is “probably” carcinogenic. But six months later the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), which oversees the assessment of active chemical substances within the EU, cleared glyphosate of causing cancer. The two bodies traded furious letters throughout January and February; the spat is unprecedented. IARC argues that the research on which EFSA based its decision, completed by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, ignored an association between non-Hodgkin lymphoma and glyphosate seen in certain research and relied on studies not publicly available, while it denigrated peer-reviewed ones. The furore led France’s Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety (ANSES) to step in. It concluded that glyphosate “arguably could be classified” as a substance “suspected of being carcinogenic to humans”. EFSA plays an active role in the EU’s pesticide-approval process; IARC does not. But the European Ombudsman, Emily O’Reilly, found that process flawed after a long inquiry that ended on February 22nd. She criticised the European Commission for approving chemicals before there was “sufficient information to say that they were completely safe”. The authority now has until 2018 to ensure that those keen to clear a substance provide more data to show that it is harmless. The dispute suggests that more research is needed. For one thing, certain ingredients with which glyphosate is mixed to form pesticides are more toxic to humans than the substance itself. But regulators examine only the compound, not the cocktail. For another, traditional toxicological tests could miss the weedkiller’s possible effects on endocrinological, reproductive and developmental systems. Others, too, struggle with what to do about glyphosate. The Canadians have little problem with it. America’s Environmental Protection Agency failed to produce a planned risk assessment on it last year. California’s ultra-cautious environmental agency added the herbicide to a list of carcinogens last September. Monsanto is challenging the move in court. Robust studies into glyphosate’s effects should be considered carefully alongside better data on the role it plays in feeding the world. The ways farmers use the compound have evolved. The ways regulators evaluate its safety should, too.MORE than 1m refugees arrived in Germany last year, mainly young Muslim men. They entered a society that, relative to other Western countries, has embraced multiculturalism only recently. Suddenly these foreigners are in co-ed schools, discos, swimming pools, hospitals and parks. Some of their interactions with their hosts go easily. Others do not—as epitomised by New Year’s Eve in Cologne, where gangs of North African men sexually assaulted scores of German women who had come to watch the fireworks. Germans who only a year ago oozed confidence about their economy and their country are now losing faith that they “can manage”, as Angela Merkel, the chancellor, likes to put it. Many fear the crisis will render Germany unrecognisable. A sense of loss pervades many conversations. To grasp this trauma it helps to understand the German zeitgeist that developed (mainly in the former West Germany) in the post-war years, and lingered in the reunited country. Germans call it Heile Welt. The term means something like “wholesome world”, and describes an orderly, idyllic state. It may connote the nurturing environment parents create for their children to protect them from life’s ugliness, or a private oasis of peace amid public chaos. It was a state of mind that Germans clung to after the second world war. Because it implies a degree of escapism, the term can be used sardonically. In 1973 Loriot, West Germany’s most incisive humourist, chose it for the title of an anthology of cartoons skewering his country’s bourgeois pretensions. In 1998 it was the title of a novel by Walter Kempowski, set in 1961, in which a teacher moves to an idyllic village but discovers that behind every silence and glance lurks a demon of the Nazi past. In the immediate post-war years, with Holocaust, firebombing, mass rape and the carving up of their nation still recent memories, Germans flocked to watch Heimat (“homeland”) films. Usually shot in the Alps or in heaths and forests, they featured clean, simple tales of love and friendship between pure women and men dressed in regional garb. Outside the cinemas, Germans revelled in their “economic miracle”, as they rebuilt a devastated country into a commercial powerhouse. Foreigners were allowed into this Heile Welt, but not entirely accepted. To man its assembly lines, Germany invited workers from southern Europe and especially Turkey. The millionth arrived in 1964 and got a motorcycle as a gift. By the time the programme ended in 1973, 4m foreigners lived in West Germany. But they were called “guest workers” rather than immigrants, on the premise that they would ultimately leave again. Unsurprisingly, most stayed. Yet mainstream Germany continued to see itself as ethnically homogenous—a Heile Welt in a tribal sense. As part of Heile Welt, West Germans atoned for their past by becoming good democrats, good Europeans and ardent pacifists. But they did so like a teenager who experiments with increasing autonomy, confident that his uncool but protective parents are always standing by. For West Germany, dad was America, which held its aegis over the country throughout the cold war. Mum was France, which despite its nervous vanity gracefully accepted Germany back into the European family. The dystopian flip side of Heile Welt was never far away. If the cold war had ever turned hot, Germany would have been vaporised first. (“The shorter the range, the deader the Germans,” missile strategists used to quip.) West Germany even had terrorism. But its terrorists were native white leftists who killed industrial tycoons. Ordinary Germans never felt threatened. In their private lives Germans created micro-idylls. They kept garden plots orderly, guarded by the requisite gnome. East Germans seeking refuge from the cynically implausible Heile Welt offered by communism retreated to “the niches”: private book readings among intellectuals, or nude bathing with friends by pristine lakes. East or west, order was paramount. Visitors were impressed (if not intimidated) by how fastidiously Germans separated their white, brown and green glass for recycling. One by one, these facets of Heile Welt are becoming brittle. Russia is aggressive again; Germans fret that, when it comes to it, the ageing American dad may not show up. Having cultivated non-violence to the point of pacifism, they now realise that defence of their state and their values may someday require them to fight, kill and die again. The terrorists they now face are not German leftists, but foreigners ready to kill women and children. Globalisation no longer just means exporting BMWs, but also allowing in Muslim refugees, some of them with attitudes on gender and Jews that Germans find offensive. Gnomic wisdom Some Germans react by fleeing into ever tinier Heile Welten. “We are becoming ever more like our garden gnomes,” says Wolfgang Nowak, one of Germany’s most astute social observers—inward-facing rather than open-minded. Every Monday a movement called Pegida, or “Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the Occident”, marches through Dresden. For many in the surrounding area of Saxony, these gatherings have become convivial rituals similar to American tailgate barbecues, but to outsiders they appear xenophobic and menacing. Even moderate Germans are turning against globalisation. Many see a free-trade area being negotiated between America and the EU not as an opportunity but as yet another threat to their way of life. Above all, the tone of German conversations is changing. Language in the era of Heile Welt was sanitised, with political correctness often taken to ludicrous extremes. Now, in the name of “telling it as it is”, it is becoming coarser and aggressive. It is not clear what kind of world will replace the wholesome one the Germans once dreamed up. But it will be a rougher one.IF YOU want to get rich, goes a Chinese saying, first build a road. George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor, seems to agree. He seldom misses a chance to put on a hard hat and proclaim the virtues of more roads and railways. His idea of a “Northern Powerhouse” would boost the north of England with a big new transport network that better connects the region. Certainly, if people are not stuck in traffic jams or can work in peace on a train they can get more done, leading to higher productivity and increased wages. Yet for all the rhetoric, in recent years British infrastructure has been deteriorating. Roads are more clogged: the percentage of journeys on main routes that are classed as “on time” has fallen by six percentage points since 2010. Trains are getting more crowded, too: a quarter of trains arriving in London in rush hour are overcrowded, up from a fifth in 2010. Commuters are putting up with creaky carriages: in 2005-15 the average age of the rolling stock rose from 15 to 20 years. The number of local buses has fallen by 2.5% since 2010, even though the population has grown by 3%. The World Economic Forum ranks the quality of Britain’s overall infrastructure 24th in the world, down from 19th in 2006, and behind Iceland and America (which is 13th). It is unlikely that things will improve soon. When the coalition government came to power in 2010, Britain was already one of the lowest spenders on infrastructure in Europe. But as Mr Osborne tries to balance the books, public-sector investment is projected to fall from 3.2% of GDP in 2010 to just 1.4% in 2020. A small infrastructure budget is not necessarily a bad thing, if the money is used wisely. This often means spending on unsexy things—improving traffic lights and so forth—rather than big, expensive undertakings. In 2006 Sir Rod Eddington, an Australian businessman, published a government-backed review of Britain’s infrastructure provision, warning against grands projets for having cost-benefit ratios that are often worse than other less-exciting transport projects. Politicians like to be photographed at big digs, but the returns from such projects are hard to predict. Sometimes there is no option but to build big. On many London Underground lines—which already run as many as 30 trains an hour—it is hard to make incremental improvements; the only sensible way to create new capacity is to build a new line, as the government is doing now with Crossrail, an east-to-west London link. Still, it has mostly ignored the recommendations of the Eddington review, says John Van Reenen of the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics, instead focusing its energy on larger, shinier projects. The addition of a third runway at Heathrow airport, for example, would cost over £20 billion ($28 billion). Transport for the North, the infrastructure arm of the powerhouse idea, envisages building an 18-mile road tunnel, perhaps Europe’s longest, under the Pennine hills, and constructing other expensive new highways. The tunnel alone could cost up to £6 billion. Meanwhile, £1.5 billion is likely to be spent improving a few miles of road between Cambridge and Huntingdon. Government figures suggest that since 2011 the expected cost of the average public infrastructure project has roughly doubled. As a result less money is available for smaller upgrades. Funding for local roads has been cut by 20% in real terms since 2010. Analysis by the RAC Foundation, an independent think-tank, found that the number of potholes being filled in per year has increased fourfold since 2005, suggesting that costly, long-term repair is being sacrificed in favour of patching up. Government support for local bus services is down by 20% in five years. Not down the tubes Another consequence of tighter budgets is that the state relies more heavily on the private sector to fund infrastructure projects. An extension to the Northern Line of the London Underground is a good example. The Greater London Authority is borrowing £1 billion. But that will ultimately be repaid, largely by the scheme’s direct beneficiaries, in the form of an uplift in business rates alongside developer contributions, says Alexander Jan of Arup, a consultancy. Ultimately, the government will pay little towards the project from general taxation. Prosperous cities are most likely to be able to generate big contributions from the private sector and thus better infrastructure, says Mr Jan; poor places may miss out. In recent years, government figures suggest, London has taken up a bigger share of Britain’s overall infrastructure spend. Business gripes that, although it may be expected to shoulder more of the cost, it is not always consulted enough. Kate Willard, an executive at Stobart Group, which runs airports and other big projects, argues that politicians do not take sufficient account of future shopping patterns and retail trends when making their infrastructure plans. Andy Clarke, the head of Asda, a supermarket chain, believes that productivity could be boosted as much by getting high-speed broadband as by building HS2, the £50 billion new railway being built between London and the Midlands. Stand up for your rights Fortunately, as well as building shiny new stuff there are also low-cost ways of improving infrastructure. Transport nerds favour ripping seats out of certain carriages in commuter trains, making them look more like Underground trains and thus increasing their capacity (though with little regard for passengers’ comfort). Those willing to stand could pay less. “Smart motorways”, which were first deployed in 2006, use the hard shoulder as an extra lane at busy times. One plan popular with economists is to use “dynamic pricing”—similar to that used by taxi apps—where prices rise at peak times to discourage people from travelling. Thanks to a series of subtle changes, this could soon be a reality across Britain. In 2015 the Highways Agency, which manages motorways, was converted into a free-standing company owned by the state (renamed Highways England), meaning it has secure funding for the foreseeable future. Road tax, which is now largely payable electronically and enforced with cameras that recognise number plates, will be earmarked for Highways England, says Mr Jan. In theory, the stage is set for the government to start charging for using certain roads. Many are hoping that Mr Osborne will make such a change in his budget on March 16th. Dynamic pricing for rail travel seems off the table, though: the government considered a plan for “super-peak” tickets, only to drop it in 2013. If, as seems probable, a big boost of public money does not arrive, Britain will have to take such radical decisions. Creaky infrastructure is already weighing on productivity and wages. Without a change of direction, the load will get ever heavier.“WHAT I want is facts…facts alone are wanted in life.” Thomas Gradgrind’s grim message in Charles Dickens’s “Hard Times” is echoed in the debate ahead of the referendum on June 23rd about whether Britain should leave the European Union. Voters confused by claims made by opposing sides and in the media are asking for plain facts on Britain’s EU membership so they can make up their minds. Sadly, hard facts are hard to find. There is a good reason for this: nobody knows what would happen post-Brexit. That is especially true of the trade deal that Britain would have to negotiate with the EU—and how long that might take (the government this week suggested up to ten years). But there is also a bad reason: that the uncertainty lets all sides distort, exaggerate or simply make up their own facts. Three examples illustrate this. The first is an old assertion that 3m jobs in Britain depend on trade with the EU. In fact, because of the close links among European economies, many economists reckon the true figure is higher. Yet the claim sometimes made by pro-EU voices that all these jobs would be at risk post-Brexit is a nonsense. Nobody can plausibly argue that all trade with the EU would cease. Anyway, job creation depends more on demand, wage levels and labour laws than on membership of a trade block. The second example concerns the British contribution to the EU budget. Leavers claim that Britain pays an unfairly large amount of almost £20 billion ($28 billion) a year to Brussels, or £55m a day. In fact this is the gross amount before deducting both the rebate won by Margaret Thatcher in 1984 and the money the EU spends in Britain. Adjusting for these, and for the funnelling of some foreign-aid spending via Brussels, the net payment is less than one-third as big, at £17m a day—and Britain is only the eighth-largest contributor per head. The third example is competing claims about trade patterns. Remain campaigners say the EU takes 45-50% of British exports, whereas Britain accounts for a tenth or less of the EU’s. Yet Nigel Farage, leader of the anti-EU UK Independence Party, has said Britain takes 20% of EU exports, giving it a stronger hand in future trade talks. One issue here is which source to use: Europe’s statistical office, the British government and the IMF all have different figures. Another is whether to cover just goods or to add services. But the biggest question is whether to count the EU as a block, discounting all intra-EU exports. Doing that puts the share of EU exports going to Britain at almost 16%. But John Springford of the Centre for European Reform, a think-tank, points out that, in trade negotiations, individual countries, not the EU as a whole, decide what to accept. Britain’s share of all other EU countries’ exports is only around 8%, he says (our chart, using IMF figures, puts it even lower), and in many individual cases a lot less, leaving it in a weaker bargaining position. The arguments over facts in these areas are as nothing compared with the differences on migration and sovereignty—nor compared with the bitter rows within the Tory party (see article). What should undecided or poorly informed voters do? Fortunately, there are some good sources they can turn to. Two websites, the broadly neutral fullfact.org and the pro-EU infacts.org, both puncture myths in the debate. The House of Commons library produces excellent reports, which are available online. And a group of academics led by Anand Menon of King’s College, London, have set up “The UK in a Changing Europe”, financed by the Economic and Social Research Council, which has a lively website. The Economist is not neutral in this debate: we believe Brexit would be bad for Britain, Europe and the world. But we also want to explain the issues and present the facts. So over the next four months, we will publish a series of Brexit briefs that seek to do this, as dispassionately as possible—in the hope of satisfying even the Gradgrinds among our readers.Two-bedroom flats a steal “I CAN’T imagine it not being there,” says Kathy Daly, a resident of north London for 64 years, reflecting the feelings of many living around Holloway prison. This summer, the largest women’s prison in western Europe, first built in 1852, will close, to make way for new homes. The move is part of a bigger drive to sell off government assets. In its spending review in November, the government encouraged departments to find land and property to vacate and sell, with the aim of raising around £5 billion ($7 billion) up to 2020. Financial and corporate assets are also being flogged to the private sector: this financial year the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), the government’s independent forecaster, thinks the Treasury will raise £30 billion from selling assets like shares in Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland—which were bought during the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009—and Royal Mail, with an extra £47 billion expected over the next five years. These asset sales will provide cash that George Osborne, the chancellor, can use to pay down public debt, which swelled from 37% of GDP in 2007 to 83% this year. Selling off state assets can benefit society, if private owners can whip them into better shape. The decision also rests on the difference between the returns to the asset and the government’s own borrowing costs; there is less urgency in paying down public debt while interest rates are so low. Any big improvement in the public finances will usually be largely illusory; debt might drop, but selling will swap a future flow of income for up-front cash. The government balance-sheet will be restructured, not necessarily improved. In November the government boasted that the land released by departments could free up space for 161,000 new homes, spurring economic growth. The proceeds from selling older prisons will be ploughed back into building nine shiny new ones, which the government hopes will save £80m in running costs each year. The newer prisons will be in cheaper locations; some women in Holloway prison will be relocated to a prison in Sutton, a south-western suburb, where a two-bedroom flat costs £300,000, compared with £600,000 in Holloway. But rows are already brewing; sometimes public services add extra social value by being located in prime spots; some worry about moving prisoners far from their families. And there are questions over how many affordable homes will be built on the Holloway site. Ms Daly is not keen on the idea of luxury flats beyond the means of local residents. Language used by senior members of the government indicates that there might be more to gain than just a leaner state. In a leaked letter to the county council in his local constituency, the prime minister, David Cameron, complained that local services were being cut without considering “savings” that could be made in the form of asset sales. In his leaked response, the council leader echoed the words of economists before and since, that “capital income cannot be used to support revenue costs—it is neither legal, nor sustainable, in the long term since they are one-off receipts”. Although some dispute whether the government is right to be selling its land, few would argue for holding on to the bank shares for ever. Buying the assets was meant to preserve financial stability, but now things are calmer the case for owning them has weakened. The government is keen to get the most from the sales. After market turmoil, on January 28th Mr Osborne announced that he would delay the sale of a tranche of Lloyds shares. Cynics suspect that the chancellor is interested in more than maximising value. One of his fiscal targets is to have debt falling as a share of GDP in every year after 2015–16, but in December the OBR pointed out that this year he would only achieve this because of planned asset sales. And it also pointed out that offering some of the shares at a discount (not to mention giving away some shares in Royal Mail) actually worsens the public finances. In some cases the struggle to achieve good value for money has prevented a quick sale. The government announced its plans to sell the student-loan book back in 2013. Currently the OBR predicts that investors would give the government around £12 billion in exchange for student-loan repayments, worth around £1.5 billion each year by 2020–21. It is unclear how much extra value could be squeezed from the asset by a private buyer, though a spokesman for the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills said unfavourable market conditions were the main reason for the delay. One worry is that the government will get a poor deal as it unloads treasures onto the private sector. An internal government evaluation of its stake in Eurostar priced it at £305m, and then saw it sold for nearly double that. The Treasury has since set up bodies to manage such sales. On February 26th Mr Osborne warned of looming “storm clouds” hurting economic growth and requiring bigger cuts to spending. The government owns £1.3 trillion of assets—the Ministry of Defence alone owns roughly 1% of all land in Britain—so speeding up the sell-off might look tempting. But a fire sale would burn a hole in the public finances, not fix them.AT CHARTER Academy, a small, immaculately kept secondary school in Portsmouth, children who qualify for free school meals—63% of the school’s pupils—are also given a free uniform. Mums are invited in to chat about their children’s progress over a glass of wine; dads prefer watching their children on boxing nights, says Dame Sharon Hollows, the school’s headteacher. “A lot of the parents had a poor experience at school, it’s about making them feel more comfortable,” she adds. If a child is taken into care, someone from the school takes them shopping to make sure they have enough clothes. When a child doesn’t turn up to school, staff head out in a leased car to look for them. The turnaround has been fast: in 2009, the year the school became an academy, 23 children applied for 120 places; last year, 200 applied. During a 2014 visit to the school, the prime minister, David Cameron hailed the “extraordinary achievement”. Some of these measures would have been introduced anyway, but many have been made possible by the huge boost to the school’s funding provided by the “pupil premium”, says Dame Sharon. The policy was introduced by the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition in 2011 to improve the academic performance of the poorest children. Schools receive additional funding for every child on free school meals (now £1,320—or $1,850—for primary schools, and £935 for secondary schools) and can spend the money how they see fit, with parents, governors and inspectors keeping tabs. In 2014-15, £2.5 billion was spent on the policy, 6% of the schools budget. Nick Clegg, the former deputy prime minister, called the premium one of his proudest legacies. Evidence suggests academic progress may be slow. The gap between children on free school meals and others at GCSE—the exams taken aged 16—has remained high if measured by the percentage of children attaining five A*-C grades. Indeed, the gap between the performance of rich and poor children in Britain is larger than average for the OECD club of mostly rich countries. But there are signs of progress: the gap in exam results taken aged 11 has narrowed, as has GCSE performance if measured by results in eight core subjects. Headteachers appreciate the flexibility the funding gives them. “It has allowed us to be much more creative, to take more risks,” says Hazel Pulley of Parkfield Community School in Birmingham. One of the school’s successful interventions was hiring teachers to work solely on communication in early years, since most of its pupils don’t speak English as a first language. Many schools use the money to help individual pupils: one in Sheffield bought a bike for a pupil struggling to care for his siblings and get to school on time. Meanwhile, the government has poured funding into studies looking at how best to spend money, providing the Educational Endowment Foundation (EEF), a charity, with £137m. It collates evidence from abroad and funds studies at home: around one-quarter of English schools are involved in randomised control trials run by the charity. Schools increasingly turn to the research for guidance: two-thirds now consult the EEF’s advice, up from one-third in 2012, according to a report by the National Audit Office (NAO), which scrutinises government spending. Surveys by the National Foundation for Educational Research, a charity, found that the most common interventions in the first years of the pupil premium were to reduce class sizes and increase numbers of support staff—neither of which are judged to be effective by the EEF. Now schools are more likely to put in place one-to-one tuition and pupil feedback—both of which are highly rated. Yet, for some headteachers, “the idea that you turn to evidence is just not part of the culture,” says Sir Kevan Collins of the EEF. A number of cheap, effective approaches, such as using older children to tutor younger ones, are still rarely used. Some 44% of schools have spent part of the pupil premium sprucing up classrooms or the school environment, which has little impact on student performance. Nearly eight in ten schools use the extra money to support activities that benefit all pupils, which makes sense only where there are many pupils on free school meals. Some argue that pupil-premium spending should be subject to tighter scrutiny. Others suggest that schools have become too reliant on research by the EEF for evidence of what works. Yet such debates are partly proof of the premium’s success. How to raise the attainment of children from poor backgrounds is now a focus for educators. Before the premium, 57% of school leaders said they aimed support at their most disadvantaged pupils; 94% now do, says the NAO. With such a wide gap in attainment between children from rich and poor families, that is no bad thing.BRITAIN’S big supermarkets have had a dismal few years. Aldi and Lidl, two upstart German-owned discounters, have taken huge bites out of their market share, margins have been squeezed and record losses have mounted. One refuge, however, was in online shopping, which Aldi and Lidl have been reluctant to embrace, despite the fact that British consumers are Europe’s most enthusiastic e-shoppers. Online grocery sales have been growing strongly, and the likes of Tesco, the biggest supermarket, and Sainsbury’s, have taken full advantage. Tesco, which runs a “Click+Collect” service, has about 40% of the online market. Now, however, that refuge is looking less safe. On February 29th Amazon, an American online retailer, announced that it will start selling fresh food and groceries as well, in a tie-up with the fourth-largest British supermarket, Morrisons. Thus Amazon, with deep pockets and a wealth of experience offering food online in American cities, will now go head-to-head with Tesco and others. The move had been expected, but that will be of no comfort to its new rivals. Shares in Tesco and Sainsbury’s were down on the news, while shares in Ocado, an online-only grocer, plummeted by about 10%. Shares in Morrisons rose. It has suffered more than most at the hands of Lidl and Aldi, selling, as it does, to the same customers in the same areas of the country. Yet the deal with Amazon gives it a straightforward new sales channel into the online market. Morrisons also makes its own food products, and under the new agreement it will supply fresh and frozen foods to Amazon to sell on its Prime Now and Pantry services. Until now, the Pantry service had offered only household goods such as cleaning products, drinks and pet food. Morrisons has an existing arrangement to sell its groceries to Ocado, and there are fears that the Amazon deal could undermine that. But Ocado hopes that the intervention of the American giant will just increase the market instead. For Amazon, this is probably just the beginning of its journey into Britain’s grocery market, which is worth about £180 billion ($254 billion) a year. “It is a real race now,” says Ray Gaul, an analyst at Kantar Retail, of the online market. And to add to the competitive pressures, the Amazon move comes only a month after Aldi launched its first British online-shopping service. This is, for the moment, limited to wine, offering hefty discounts on boxes of six, but there will undoubtedly be more to come. The north of England used to be the bastion of Aldi and Lidl, but Aldi is now advertising this service heavily in London, Tesco’s and Sainsbury’s backyard. The two discounters also have ambitious plans to open many more shops in the capital. The new competition should be good for online shoppers, but less so, perhaps, for the 3m or so people who work in retailing. The same day as the Amazon announcement, the British Retail Consortium, a trade body, published a report predicting that 900,000 jobs could be lost in the industry by 2025. The authors blame this partly on the cost of the new “national living wage” and apprenticeship levies, but also the rise in online shopping and the increasing costs of running shops on the high street. Avocados and cheese twists straight to the door won’t be helping everyone.
