Police patrol, Helmand-style IT IS just over a year since NATO formally ended its combat mission in Afghanistan. It left behind 13,000-odd soldiers to “train, advise and assist” Afghan security forces taking the lead in the fight against the Taliban. Of the foreign troops, America has provided about half (with a further 3,000 deployed on counter-terrorism operations against what remains of al-Qaeda). Twelve months on, the results of the so-called “transition” look grim. Both Afghanistan’s political condition and its security have sharply deteriorated. Determined to exploit the departure of Western forces, in 2015 the Taliban maintained their usual spring offensive much longer into the winter than in the past. The insurgents now control more territory than at any time since American forces kicked the Taliban out of power in 2001. Among recent blows were the short-lived but still shocking fall of the northern city of Kunduz to the Taliban in September; a raid last month on the south’s Kandahar airport, one of the most heavily defended bases in the country, that killed at least 50 people; and the deaths of six Americans near Bagram air base on December 21st. Worst of all has been the steady erosion of government control in Helmand province in the south. It had been recaptured from the Taliban in 2009-11, at considerable cost, including American and British casualties. Recently the Taliban have closed in from the south and north towards the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah. Of 13 districts in Helmand, five, including the key districts of Musa Qala and Sangin, are now controlled by the Taliban, with another five or more being contested. This week American special forces in the Nad Ali district came under heavy fire; one man was killed. Retaking Helmand, the heart of Afghanistan’s opium country, is a priority for the Taliban, who desperately want the money that drug-peddling generates. Out of nearly 400 districts across Afghanistan, the Taliban controls a tenth and contests another tenth. The growing intensity of the fighting is taking its toll on the 352,000-strong Afghan army and police. Last year they sustained 28% more losses than in 2014: 16,000 casualties, about 7,000 of them fatal. Some 6,500 civilians are also thought to have died. Insurgent casualties have shot up, too. The current Taliban fighting strength is believed to be between 40,000 and 60,000. The backdrop to the escalating violence is a largely dysfunctional government in Kabul, the failure of diplomatic attempts last year to start a peace process, splits within the Taliban and America’s lack of a long-term strategy for Afghanistan. The national-unity government that emerged 15 months ago has in many ways been an improvement on its predecessor, led by the erratic Hamid Karzai. President Ashraf Ghani and the “chief executive”, Abdullah Abdullah, the runner-up in a disputed election, get on reasonably well. In security matters, they welcome Western support. At home they have taken useful steps to curb corruption. But the fight for key government posts among rival supporters and ethnic groups has meant rudderless ministries and provinces without governors. Not least, the post of permanent defence minister still remains vacant. In government, a division appears to be opening up over Mr Ghani’s attempts to engage Pakistan. Many Afghans have long considered their southern neighbour to be a destabilising force. Even today it plays host to Taliban leaders. Mr Ghani wants Pakistan to help push the Taliban to the negotiating table, thus paving the way for peace and economic reconstruction. But after he received red-carpet treatment in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, in early December, his chief of the national security directorate resigned in disgust (though possibly before he was pushed out for a string of security failures). A new “Protection and Stability Council”, headed by a former warlord, Abdul Rasoul Sayyaf, has been set up as a rallying point against Mr Ghani’s emollience towards Pakistan. After Mullah Omar Yet despite promises from the Pakistani prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, and the powerful head of the army, General Raheel Sharif, that they will urge the Taliban to kill less and negotiate more, there is scant sign of progress. That may be because the spymasters of Pakistan’s “deep state” still prefer a weak, chaotic Afghanistan, or because Pakistan, itself locked in an existential fight with the Taliban’s sister outfit, the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan, may not have the control it once had. Meanwhile, a power struggle has been under way within the Afghan Taliban. When Mr Ghani’s government declared last July that the Taliban’s leader, Mullah Omar, had died in a Karachi hospital over two years earlier, it triggered a challenge to the authority of Mullah Omar’s deputy and de facto successor, Mullah Akhtar Mansour. While Omar was believed to be still alive, Mullah Mansour was able to crush dissent, while reportedly earning a fortune from the opium trade. But his part in the cover-up of the leader’s death, his perceived closeness to Pakistan and his interest in opening up a dialogue with the Afghan government before the news about Omar broke have all undermined his legitimacy. Others have challenged his leadership, while in some pockets Islamic State (IS) has been able to poach Taliban fighters and take root. To show that he is neither going soft on the government in Kabul nor a tool of Pakistan’s military spy agency, Mullah Mansour has had to redouble the ferocity of the insurgency. And so long as the Taliban think they are winning, they have no incentive to talk peace. Yet even after the departure in the past year of what Michael O’Hanlon of the Brookings Institution in Washington calls 100,000 of “the world’s best soldiers”, the Taliban have not made the breakthrough they were hoping for. Their recent victories in Helmand have been small. They rule over a mere 5% more of the country’s population than before. They threaten few cities of any size. And despite heavy losses, Afghan forces are mostly holding their own. It is, says Mr O’Hanlon, a “stalemate with a slight edge to the insurgency”. Meanwhile, President Barack Obama has been forced to break his ill-considered promise to remove all American troops from Afghanistan by the end of the year. Yet, to the dismay of his military advisers, he is still talking about cutting the force there to 5,500 before he leaves office in January 2017. That decision too is quite likely to be reversed. Mr Obama needs to consider how to help the Afghan government get through what is certain to be another tough year. He should give Afghan forces air support of the kind which, in Iraq, government forces are getting in the fight against IS. And, Mr O’Hanlon says, he should expand the training mission by providing another 3,000 mentors to work with the army. One reason for the setbacks in Helmand province is that there are too few trainers. What America cannot do is to improve the atrocious local governance that creates the grievances the Taliban exploit. At best, stabilising the security situation will allow more time for the well-intentioned Mr Ghani and Mr Abdullah to get their act together. That may seem a faint hope, but it is much better than the alternatives.IN THE recent history of relations between India and Pakistan, it has seemed an immutable law: that any apparent political breakthrough will be followed by a terrorist atrocity in India blamed on agents of the Pakistani state. The bloodiest of these—a murderous assault on Mumbai in 2008—brought a chill that has yet to thaw. And just last July, after India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, had met his Pakistani counterpart, Nawaz Sharif, at a regional summit in Russia and agreed that their national-security advisers should hold talks, terrorists attacked a police station in the Indian state of Punjab.    The latest turn in this cycle is remarkable both for the drama of the breakthrough and for the daring of the terrorist response. On December 25th Mr Modi, en route from Kabul to Delhi, made an impromptu stopover in Lahore in Pakistan. He dropped in on Mr Sharif, who was celebrating both his own birthday and his granddaughter’s wedding. No Indian prime minister had set foot in Pakistan since 2004, and much hugging, hand-holding and bonhomie ensued. It formed part of a series of diplomatic contacts intended to be followed by the launch of a “comprehensive bilateral dialogue”, with the details to be discussed at a meeting on January 15th in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, between the two countries’ most senior diplomats. That meeting is now in jeopardy. On January 2nd six gunmen in Indian army uniforms infiltrated a big Indian air base at Pathankot, near the Pakistani border, again in Punjab. Killing them all took over three days and cost seven Indian soldiers their lives. Indian analysts saw the hands of Pakistan-based Islamist groups with ties to the Inter-Services Intelligence, the ISI, Pakistan’s military spy agency. On January 3rd India suffered another attack, on its consulate in the city of Mazar-e-Sharif in Afghanistan. Again, many Indians blamed groups friendly with the ISI. The talks this month would in effect resurrect a “composite dialogue” pursued fitfully under Mr Modi’s predecessor, Manmohan Singh. Mr Modi presents himself as a very different sort of statesman from Mr Singh, who was cerebral, bureaucratic and mild-mannered to the point of diffidence. Mr Modi is both a chest-thumping nationalist and a compulsive hugger and hand-holder, whose diplomacy emphasises, quite literally, the personal touch. When in opposition, Mr Modi and his colleagues were fierce critics of Mr Singh’s alleged softness towards Pakistan. But in office he gives the impression of having inherited one of Mr Singh’s foreign-policy ambitions: to go down in history as the leader who made lasting peace with India’s neighbour. Mr Modi has boasted of “engaging Pakistan to try and turn the course of history”. Like Mr Singh, however, he now has to deal with the propensity of parts of the Pakistani state to dabble in terrorism as a way of disrupting talks or of furthering their own agenda. The United Jihad Council, an umbrella for militant groups fighting Indian rule of part of the divided and disputed state of Kashmir, said that it had organised the Pathankot attack. Many commentators were sceptical, blaming instead Jaish-e-Muhammad, a notionally banned Pakistan-based outfit nurtured by the ISI to harass India. It has a history of spectacular attacks, including one on Parliament in Delhi in 2001 that brought India and Pakistan to the brink of war. It was also guilty of the kidnapping and murder in 2002 of Daniel Pearl, an American journalist, and in 2003 even tried to blow up Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan’s military dictator. Yet its leader, Masood Azhar, is a free man. The fact that he and other leaders of terrorist groups are not in detention is proof, to India, of official Pakistani connivance in terrorism against it. It is Pakistan’s army, not Mr Sharif, that sets the country’s foreign and security policy. Yet under its present chief, General Raheel Sharif (no relation to the prime minister), it seems to have realised that it is not India that poses an existential threat to Pakistan; rather the greatest danger stems from the militant groups it has fostered itself to wage proxy wars in Kashmir and Afghanistan. To focus on quelling the Pakistani Taliban, in its strongholds in Pakistan’s western, Afghan borderlands, the army, too, has an interest in peace with India and a stable eastern front. Yet it is hard to imagine that extremists can cook up and execute elaborate plans such as the Pathankot attack without some level of official help. This suggests either that General Sharif is playing a double game, and that the army still wants to prevent rapprochement with India; or, perhaps, that the army and the ISI are internally divided. Our interactive map demonstrates how the territorial claims of India, Pakistan and China would change the shape of South Asia Now Mr Modi faces a dilemma familiar to Mr Singh and his predecessors. To proceed with talks in the face of such provocations looks weak and may encourage others. Yet conventional military options are limited, and nuclear ones unthinkable. And to call off dialogue gives the terrorists what they want. Not much to talk about In fact, initial reactions by Mr Modi and his colleagues to Pathankot were restrained. Mr Modi blamed not Pakistan but “enemies of humanity”. The foreign-secretary talks were not called off at once. Maybe Mr Modi calculated that India had more to gain internationally from appearing accommodating than from acting the victim, and that the domestic political cost would be small—after all, he is known as a “Hindu nationalist” who will not yield to Muslim-majority Pakistan. His political allies still talk about the eventual “unification” of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Yet all that is at stake at the moment is, in effect, talks about talks. Mr Modi, with his impeccable patriotic credentials, can make the concessions needed to hold them. But nobody expects issues festering since India’s partition in 1947—notably the status of Indian-administered, Muslim-majority Kashmir, which at times seemed tantalisingly close to resolution under Mr Singh—to be solved soon. Hard as it is, getting back to the table is the easy part. DISCRETION is not a trait often associated with the glitzy shopfronts of Hong Kong’s Causeway Bay, but the low-key entrance to a small bookshop belies the store’s recent notoriety. Tucked between a chemist and a clothes shop, Causeway Bay Books (pictured) has become the centre of a mystery involving alleged kidnappings by Chinese secret agents, and of a fierce debate in Hong Kong about the former British colony’s autonomy under Chinese rule. The door to the shop, up two flights of stairs, is now locked. The trickle of people going up are journalists and passers-by curious for news about five men connected with the shop who have disappeared in recent months. Many Hong Kongers fear that agents from China’s mainland may have been involved, and that the men were targeted because of the shop’s gossipy books. Titles recently on sale include “The Collapse of [President] Xi Jinping in 2017” and “Xi Jinping and the Elders: War at the Top”. When China took Hong Kong back from Britain in 1997, it agreed to give the territory a “high degree of autonomy”. Outspoken critics of the Communist Party remained free to air their views without fear of being “disappeared” by police, as commonly happens to their counterparts on the mainland. Hence huge public interest in this case. “The midnight knock on the door is not something we have had to worry about in Hong Kong,” wrote a columnist in the territory’s leading English-language newspaper, the South China Morning Post (recently bought by a mainland businessman). “But if we do now, that would be the end of our way of life.” Worries about skulduggery by the mainland’s agents have been growing since October, when four of the men disappeared. One of them was Gui Minhai, the owner of Mighty Current, a publishing house which controls the shop. Mr Gui, a Swedish citizen of Chinese birth, went missing while staying in Thailand. Three members of the shop’s staff—Lam Wing-kei, Lui Bo and Cheung Jiping—disappeared during visits to China’s mainland. Ominous clues But it was the disappearance of Lee Bo, a shareholder in the shop, that aroused the biggest concern because it occurred in Hong Kong itself. Mr Lee, who is a British citizen, failed to return home after visiting his warehouse on December 30th. His wife told a television news channel that Mr Lee had later telephoned her to say that he was “assisting in investigations” relating to the other disappearances. She said he had sounded harried, and, unusually for him, had spoken in Mandarin—the official language of mainland China—rather than in Hong Kong’s Cantonese tongue. Mrs Lee said her husband had called from Shenzhen, a mainland city adjoining Hong Kong. Yet police in Hong Kong said they had found no record of him having crossed the border. Mr Lee did not take his mainland travel permit, his wife said. The authorities in Beijing have done little to dampen speculation. Wang Yi, the foreign minister, told journalists that Mr Lee was “first and foremost a Chinese citizen”—implying that Mr Wang’s British counterpart, Philip Hammond, who happened to be visiting China this week, had no right to poke his nose in (Mr Hammond said British diplomats had “urgently inquired” about Mr Lee’s whereabouts). A newspaper published in Beijing, Global Times, accused the bookshop of selling works that “viciously attacked” the mainland’s politics and said Mr Lee was “well aware” of the “harm” these books were causing across the border. “Hong Kong cannot be a special base for hostile forces to carry out activities [aimed at] subverting the country’s political system,” it said. Officials in Beijing have long worried about Hong Kong’s role as a safe haven for outspoken critics of the Communist Party, and those who try to expose its secretive inner workings. There is speculation that the mainland authorities may have finally lost patience having got wind of reported plans by Mighty Current to publish a book about President Xi’s private life. Even the Hong Kong authorities—usually reluctant to hint at any disagreement with the mainland—are sounding a bit anxious. On January 4th the chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, told a hastily arranged press conference that any unauthorised encroachment by mainland agents would be an “unacceptable” breach of the Basic Law, the territory’s mini-constitution. But he said there was “no indication” of outside involvement in the case. On January 5th a Taiwanese news agency published a faxed letter purportedly from Mr Lee saying everything was “normal” and that he had gone to the mainland “using his own method”. His wife said the letter appeared genuine, and that she had withdrawn her request for police help in finding her husband. Many commentators believe that the letter was written under duress, however, and that it hinted at the abnormality of his crossing into the mainland. Mr Leung said investigations would continue into Mr Lee’s case. Mr Leung’s popularity has already badly suffered as a result of his endorsement of the mainland government’s refusal to grant full democracy in Hong Kong. He would risk even greater opprobrium if it became evident that he was turning a blind eye to mainland snatch-squads. Despite his efforts, he will find it hard to dispel the territory’s fears. WHATEVER image you may have of the reformists hoping to shake up China’s creaking economic system, it is probably not one of octogenarians who fiddle with their hearing aids and take afternoon naps. But that is a fair description of three of the country’s loudest voices for change: Mr Market, Mr Shareholding and the most radical of all, the liberal. With growth slowing, the stockmarket once again in trouble and financial risks looking more ominous, their diagnoses of the economy, born of decades of experience, are sobering. Wu Jinglian, Li Yining and Mao Yushi—their real names—were born within two years of each other in 1929 and 1930 in Nanjing, then China’s capital. Whether it was that or pure coincidence, all three grew up to demand an end to Soviet-style central planning and to propose, to varying degrees, capitalism in its place. Their influence has waned with age, but their powers of analysis remain sharp. And they do not much like what they see. Mr Wu is in some ways the most important of the group. He advised the government from the earliest years of China’s “reform and opening” in the 1980s, through the 1990s when the great China boom got under way (see timeline). He proposed that the Communist Party should declare China a “socialist market economy”, a twist of words (and a hugely controversial one—conservatives abhorred any positive mention of markets) that opened the door to private enterprise. But Mr Market, as he came to be called, thinks this kind of linguistic ruse has outlived its usefulness. Imprecise concepts have led to flawed actions, he warns. Though the private sector has flourished over the past couple of decades, the state still looms large, controlling financial flows and acting as gatekeeper for virtually all important decisions, from land deals to mergers. “Even a low-level bureaucrat can decide the life or death of a company. You need to listen to the party,” says Mr Wu, who now teaches at the China Europe International Business School in Beijing. Mr Wu notes contradictions in the official blueprint for reforming state-owned firms. The party promises to empower their boards, but still wants to retain authority over the appointment of top executives. “If you can’t solve this problem, it will be very difficult to develop effective corporate governance,” he says. Mr Wu argues that political change is now needed to shore up the economy: the government must stop meddling in markets and instead focus on developing the rule of law. Holding up a copy of his recent book, he chuckles softly. “All my ideas are in here. No one pays them much attention.” Getting heard is less of a problem these days for Li Yining, who has spent his entire academic career at Peking University. His former pupils include Li Keqiang, China’s prime minister. His big idea in the 1980s was that selling partial stakes in state-owned companies to the public would improve their performance—hence his nickname, Mr Shareholding. The party eventually took his advice, though the companies remain hugely inefficient. In diagnosing the problems of today, Li Yining is blunt: the previous few years of ultra-high-speed growth “did not accord with economic laws”. China wasted natural resources, damaged its environment, piled up excess capacity and missed opportunities to fix its economic model. Yet perhaps because of his connections to those in power, Mr Li is by far the most sanguine of the old guard of reformers. “The new normal”—President Xi Jinping’s favourite economic slogan—is shifting the economy in the right direction, by aiming for lower growth and structural changes. China's growth is slowing. A detailed look at what is behind the slowdown Mao Yushi disagrees. And unlike many economists cowed by a frostier political climate, he is unafraid to say so. Mr Mao started his career in the railway system, including a spell driving trains, before retraining as an economist in the 1970s. Always on the margins of Chinese academia, he founded the Beijing-based Unirule Institute of Economics in 1993, an independent think-tank (a rarity in China). He champions deregulation and courts controversy in his criticism of Mao Zedong’s disastrous rule. Some diehard Maoists call the softly spoken economist “Mao Yu-shit” online, playing on a homonym of his name. In Mr Mao’s view it is already too late for the economy. China has too many empty homes and its banks have too much bad debt. “A crisis cannot be averted,” he says. Mr Mao allows himself some optimism, however. The young generation is educated and open-minded. The waste of capital and resources of recent years implies that China still has good potential for growth, if it can operate more efficiently. But he believes that Mr Xi, while espousing reform, is strengthening the state’s economic grip. “He has the power and the determination to fix problems, but in many cases he does not properly understand the problems,” says Mr Mao. Such unvarnished, open criticism of Mr Xi is rare in China these days. Speaking in the living room of his apartment, its walls stacked high with books and yellowing newspapers, Mr Mao says that his age and experience give him, and the other elderly reformists, a bit of leeway. “If it was someone else speaking, they would probably be arrested. But to me, the government is polite.” If only it would pay more heed to the elders’ advice, too.“I AM the free and fearless. I am secrets that never die. I am the voice of those who will not bow…” The voice in question, raised in song amid the crowds packing Avenue Bourguiba, a promenade in Tunis, at the beginning of 2011, was that of Emel Mathlouthi. For a moment of calm in a month of clamour, she gave voice to the aspirations of hundreds of thousands of her compatriots. On January 14th those protesters forced Zein al Abidine Ben Ali, Tunisia’s dictator for the previous quarter-century, from office. What followed was not easy. Terrorism hindered both economic progress and deeper political reform. But in 2015 the country became the first Arab state ever to be judged fully “free” by Freedom House, an American monitor of civil liberties, and it moved up a record 32 places among countries vetted by the Vienna-based Democracy Ranking Association. In December Ms Mathlouthi sang before another spellbound audience—this time in Oslo, as part of celebrations surrounding the award of the Nobel peace prize to four civil-society groups that shepherded in the new constitution of 2014.    Sadly, that outcome remains a stark anomaly. There were six Arab countries in which massive peaceful protests called for hated rulers to go in the spring of 2011. None of the other uprisings came to a happy end. Libya and Yemen have imploded, their central states replaced in whole or part by warring militias, some backed by foreign powers, some flying the flags of al-Qaeda or Islamic State. Egypt and the island kingdom of Bahrain are now yet more autocratic, in some ways, than when the protests began. And Syria has descended into an abyss. Half its cities lie in ruins, much of its fertile land has been abandoned; millions have been displaced within the country, millions more have fled beyond it; hundreds of thousands have died; there is no end in sight. With the exception of its far east and west—the oil-rich Gulf and quietly prospering Morocco, aloof behind a border with Algeria that has been sealed for 21 years—the rest of the Arab world does not look much better. Iraq’s Shia south and Kurdish north and north-east are, in effect, separate countries, while in the war zone of its Sunni-dominated west the fearsomely brutal rule of the so-called Islamic State has taken root. The Algerians and Sudanese have emerged from civil wars to find themselves still beholden to opaque and predatory army-backed cliques. Palestinians, divided into rival cantons, are weaker and more isolated than ever. Jordan remains an island of calm preserved through fear: both the kingdom’s own people and the donor countries that prop it up are too spooked by the chaos buffeting its borders and flooding it with refugees to talk much of political reform. Change it had to come In short, Arabs have rarely lived in bleaker times. The hopes raised by the Arab spring—for more inclusive politics and more responsive government, for more jobs and fewer presidential cronies carving up the economy—have been dashed. The wells of despair are overflowing. The wealthy Gulf states have seen their incomes slashed by collapsing oil prices. The tighter immigration rules they have set up to replace expatriate labour from other Arab states with natives, or Asians, have hit the remittance flows through which they subsidised their poorer brethren. Demographic pressures are unyielding. Some 60% of the region’s population is under 25. Figures from the International Labour Organisation show that youth unemployment in the Middle East and north Africa, already a terrible 25% in 2011, has risen to nearly 30%, more than double the average around the world. Rent-seeking remains rampant, and standards in both public education and the administration of justice are still dismal. Economic growth is slow or stagnant; the hand of the security forces weighs heavier than ever, more or less everywhere. Sectarian divisions and class rivalries have deepened, providing fertile ground for radicals who posit their own brutal vision of Islamic Utopia as the only solution. The Arab spring seems therefore to have brought nothing but woe. It has become fashionable in some circles to ape Russia and Iran in blaming this failure on supposedly “naive” Western policymakers. Had Western powers not abandoned old allies such as Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak; had they not intervened in support of Libyan rebels; had they not presumed that the Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad was just another domino waiting to topple; had they not turned a blind eye to the danger of Islamist fanatics: then all would be well. This is tosh. To frame the uprisings of 2011 as a sequence of isolated events, each of which had a unique and optimal policy response, is to deny the historical reality of what happened. Such hindsight belies the actual experience of seeing an entire region—and the world’s most politically torpid region, at that—whirl into sudden, synchronised motion. It also denies agency to the actors themselves: to the crowds whose cries of “Enough!” reached critical mass; to the paranoid rulers whose responses exacerbated the protests. This is not to say that the events of 2011 had no precursors. Algeria’s Islamist uprising in 1991, two intifadas in Palestine, the “Independence revolution” that ousted Lebanon’s government in 2005, even the short-lived “Green revolution” in non-Arab but nearby Iran, all signalled the region’s desire for change. But the world’s democracies were, by and large, correct in judging that what they were seeing in 2011 was something broader, more potent and more difficult to steer than a set of national crises that happened to coincide. Nor were they naive to think that an empowered “Arab street” would seek to move its countries closer to global norms of good governance. That was the demand the demonstrators made in protest after protest, from the Gulf to the Atlantic. In judgment of all wrong The West’s naivety, which was shared—and paid for—by those hopeful demonstrators, lay in underestimating two things. One was the fragility of many Arab states, too weak in their institutions to withstand such ructions in the way that, say, South Africa did when apartheid fell. The other was the vicious determination with which established regimes would seek to retain or recapture control. Who could believe that a soft-spoken leader such as Mr Assad would prefer to destroy his country rather than leave his palace? Those were the truths that brought hope to the ground. Just as the spring itself was more than just a set of national events, so the current period of counter-revolution is an international matter. Conservatives across the region have received powerful backing from the Gulf. One early and stark example of this was Bahrain, where the ruling family called on fellow Sunni monarchs to help it crush a pro-democracy movement championed by its Shia majority. Last year’s intervention in Yemen by a Saudi-sponsored coalition can be seen in the same light. The Saudis are seeking not only to thwart Houthi rebels, whose Iranian backing they revile. They are trying to force a return to the status quo. The most internationalised conflict is the bitter civil war in Syria, where powers from the region and beyond contend through proxies. The war has long since metastasised into a monumental free-for-all involving dozens of belligerents. But it remains at its core a fight between aggrieved citizens and a narrowly based—and in Syria’s case largely sectarian—elite intent on keeping its hold on power. In Egypt, a nation-state of longer standing and greater stability, the ancien régime’s fight has—again with help from the Gulf—been won, for now. Egypt has long been seen as the region’s bellwether, and for good reason. Over the past five years it has provided the Arab spring’s most revealing story of failure; today it highlights the degree to which the tensions persist that brought about the uprisings. The world looks just the same In 2010, six months before the protests in Tahrir Square turned into the uprising (even Egyptian enthusiasts are now shy of calling it a revolution) that ousted Mr Mubarak, this newspaper warned of looming change in Egypt and suggested that there were three ways in which it might play out. The country might, like Iran in 1979, experience a popular revolution which would then be hijacked by Islamists. Like Turkey in the 2000s, it might become a genuine, if shaky and flawed, democracy, one with the power needed to tame the military-backed “deep state”. Or, like Russia, it might suffer a Putinist putsch, with the deep state reasserting control under a new strongman. We were too parsimonious. Egypt has, in a jumbled fashion, experienced not just one but all three of these outcomes. Its revolutionaries did overcome, if briefly, the security forces that underpinned Mr Mubarak’s rule. Egyptians then voted in a government headed by the Muslim Brotherhood—a government which, rather than shrinking the deep state, tried instead to insert party loyalists into its depths. (As it happens, this is also what Turkey’s Islamist-leaning government has been doing since 2011, with rather more success.) Popular anger against the Islamists, stoked and nurtured by the deep state, then brought Egypt to the Russian option in a soft coup that saw Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, a general and the minister of defence, installed as president in June 2013. Two and a half years later, Mr Sisi’s counter-revolution appears all but complete. Mr Mubarak and his cronies, not to mention the police responsible for killing and maiming hundreds in the clashes of 2011, are out of jail. Tens of thousands of Muslim Brothers, along with hundreds of secular revolutionaries, are imprisoned, in exile, or dead. Nearly 1,000 Islamists were killed when anti-coup protests were crushed in 2013. The police have killed scores more since then; others have died from torture or neglect in prison. Mr Sisi’s men have taken particular care to harass the technically adept young people whose social-media skills made the revolutionary experiment possible. And the state has made an unprecedented effort to control the courts, universities and media. A tailor-made constitution that grants sweeping powers to the president and the army, and electoral rules designed to produce a fragmented parliament, furnish it with the trappings of democracy. But it is a sham. The Mukhabarat (secret police) intervened in 2015’s elections to ensure supine legislative loyalty to the president. Not surprisingly, turnout was dismal, particularly among the young. Their disdain proved further justified when the government abruptly cancelled the results of December’s student-council elections in the country’s universities. Pro-revolution candidates had won across the board. Many Egyptians praise Mr Sisi for delivering the country from both Islamists and revolutionary hotheads. Many more now shun politics altogether, which from the autocrats’ point of view is almost as happy a result. The Muslim Brotherhood remains in shattered abeyance and more radical Islamists, who have mounted terror attacks and grabbed a chunk of territory in north-east Sinai, have not made broader inroads among the general public. Another uprising on the scale of 2011 is unlikely in the near future. But the effort to build a bigger, stronger “wall of fear” has further alienated Egypt’s people from a state that is not just cruel, arbitrary and unaccountable, but also both too incompetent and too broke to buy their acquiescence. Investors are put off by erratic policymaking, the overweening power of the army and Mukhabarat, and unpredictable, often vindictive courts. Egypt’s government debt remains colossal. The budget deficit has topped 10% every year since 2011; in mid-2015 Egypt’s combined domestic and foreign liabilities pushed past 100% of GDP. The currency is in decline—and so is tourism. Incidents such as the killing of a group of Mexican tourists mistaken for terrorists by the air force, or the government’s farcical handling of what appears to have been the bombing of a Russian civilian airliner on Egyptian territory in October, show the state to be inept. Mr Sisi’s benefactors in the Gulf, who have propped up his regime with perhaps $30 billion in cheap loans, central-bank deposits and fuel, are reputedly running out of patience and risk running out of money. Repeatedly bailed out in the past, Egypt has no more saviours-in-waiting. Tip my hat to the new constitution A recent tweet—“Has anyone tried switching Egypt off and turning it on again?”—sums up the despairing mood of this broken country’s people. For lack of an alternative, or an on-off switch, most have adopted a wait-and-see attitude, praying that Mr Sisi will lighten his grip or hoping for a palace coup to install a less military-minded ruler. “The cheapest option is internal change inside the regime,” says Abdel Moneim Abul Fotoh, a former Muslim Brother whose centrist platform captured 4m votes in the 2012 presidential election. “Revolutions are cumulative, and it will take time for pressure to accumulate.” But if the uprising changed little in the way things work, it changed much in how they are perceived. Hani Shukrallah, an Egyptian commentator, likens memories of Tahrir Square to King Hamlet’s ghost, a presence that may be intangible yet remains the driving force of the drama, and which mutely insists that something is rotten in the state of Egypt. What underlies the rot, in Egypt and elsewhere, is the failure of generations of Arab elites to create accountable and effective models of governance, and to promote education. After some 60 years of essentially fascistic rule—the forced rallying behind a bemedalled patriarch, pomp and parades and propaganda disguising the reality that the people have no voice—it was perhaps not surprising that the backlash, when it came, was inarticulate and lacked direction. The Arab revolutions produced few leaders, few credible programmes for action, and few ideas. But they did produce much-needed clarity about such things as what political Islam actually means in practice, where the Arabs stand in the world and with each other, and what the weaknesses and strengths of Arab states and societies are. Before it came to brief and inglorious power in Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood attracted believers with the simple but vague slogan “Islam is the solution”. Experience now prompts many more Arabs to ask, which Islam? If it is the arm-twisting, head-lopping version proclaimed by Islamic State (IS), which dismisses all Muslims but its own ardent followers as shirkers and sinners, there are few takers. If it means giving political power to more mainstream religious figures who cannot agree on points of doctrine, this does not look appetising either. Nor do the Muslim Brothers, who revealed themselves to be conservatives bent on capturing rather than reforming the state, hold much more of an appeal. Grid of grievances: Enemies, alliances and animosity in the Middle East For decades Arab opinion-makers have ascribed a host of regional ills to Western—and particularly American—meddling, even as its leaders turned habitually to the West for aid or military protection. And the West is hardly innocent; the biggest regional debacle until recent years was America’s spectacularly inept occupation of Iraq. But the morass left by that unforced error, along with the West’s ineffectual response to the Arab spring, have convinced all but a conspiracy-addled fringe that there is not much substance to talk of Western omnipotence, American hegemony or even a Zionist conspiracy. The West’s capacities have been revealed as limited and seldom effectively exercised. It is the region’s own weakness, rather than malign Western intent, that keeps sucking in outside powers. At the same time many Arabs have also seen, not for the first time but perhaps now more clearly than ever, how weak the links between Arab states actually are, despite decades of slogans proclaiming Arab unity. And they have seen how weak the states themselves are, and more sadly how weak many of their own societies are. Iraqis and Syrians are fond of saying that before the American invasion or the 2011 uprising there were no tensions between Sunnis and Shias. If this is true, though, such solidarity was very easily shattered. History ain’t changed If states’ weaknesses stand exposed, so do their workings. In Egypt and Tunisia, and even more so in Mr Assad’s Syria, no one used to know who in which of the many competing security agencies really controlled what, or how. They could not put their finger on the way that, say, a compliant judiciary fitted in to the overall shape of things. Now they can. In Egypt the current crop of thoughtful young revolutionaries shuns the street in favour of drawing up quiet plans for overhauling the police or reforming the judiciary. If another uprising starts, its demands will go beyond the removal of a figurehead and the election of a legislature kept well away from the levers of real power. Mr Sisi and Mr Mubarak: meet the new boss… And what else may be on the agenda for change? One place to look is to IS—which, in ghastly irony, is the only truly new model of government that the wave of revolutions has thrown up. The group is monstrous. Its “state” is in many ways a far nastier reproduction of previous autocratic regimes, overlaid with a brutal “Islamic” veneer that most Muslims find repulsive. Yet the fact that this ugly experiment survives at all, despite the world’s semi-united efforts to abort it, holds lessons for the region. Although IS’s laws are grotesque, other Arab states should take note that its emphasis on quick and firm justice appeals not only to Syrians and Iraqis desperate for order amid chaos. It responds to a burning public need to right decades of perceived wrongs. So does IS’s intolerance of corruption within its own ranks and its focus, even with limited means, on providing services such as health, education and social welfare. Unlike other Arab states, which tend to be hyper-centralised, IS grants broad powers to local administrators. These officials seek to regulate and tax commerce rather than to control it. Instead of assuming ownership of the oil industry, as nearly all other Arab states do, it sells the crude oil in its territory at the wellhead, subsequently exacting taxes from the people who go on to refine and transport it. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts The missing ingredients in this formula are obvious: a basic respect for human rights and for diversity, systems of accountability, a method of lawmaking that pays heed to the will and interest of the public and not simply religious texts or the whims of a so-called caliph. Such essential components of good governance are often lazily bundled together as part of a grab-bag labelled democracy. The Arab spring showed that it may be these constituent elements, more than such theatrics as toppling tyrants or holding noisy elections, that are the key to success. In the tense calm that has settled over countries such as Tunisia and Egypt, in the brittle peace that will no doubt eventually prevail across Iraq, Syria and Yemen, and during the continuing, ever-expectant pause endured by other Arabs as they wait for change, it is these kinds of institutional building blocks that need attending to. Arabs may take heart from the fact that in Europe, the supposedly revolutionary years of 1848 and 1968 produced little forward motion; indeed their immediate effect was to prompt a conservative backlash. A.J.P. Taylor, a historian, described 1848, a year of continent-wide insurrection against autocracy, as a moment when “history reached a turning point but failed to turn.” But in both cases revolutionary change did come, in protracted form, in the next generation. It was brought about less by street action than by quiet evolutions in culture, society and the economy, and by the building of new and stronger institutions. It is not as intoxicating as mass action in Tahrir Square. But if some future season of rebirth is to lead to a lasting summer, there needs to be some thoroughgoing climate change first.Who has custody of the country this weekend? DIVORCING couples usually squabble over custody of the children. Jacob Zuma seems to be wondering how to share custody of the country with his ex-wife. Mr Zuma must retire as South Africa’s president in 2019. He appears to favour Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, to whom he was married until 1998, as his successor. The couple often appear on stage together at political events, as they did during the African Union (AU) summit in Johannesburg in June. A quiet race is under way to pick the next president of the ruling party, the African National Congress (ANC). The winner will inevitably become president of the country, too. For Mr Zuma, there is much to commend his ex-wife. For a start, she has not been accused of trying to poison him (unlike one of the current crop of first ladies, whose lawyers issued a statement in which she denied being part of a plot to do so). Furthermore, Ms Dlamini-Zuma has plenty of political experience. She currently chairs the AU. She has served as South Africa’s health minister (under Nelson Mandela), foreign minister (under Thabo Mbeki) and home affairs minister (in her ex-husband’s cabinet). She is also loyal. Mr Zuma faced 783 charges of corruption, fraud, money-laundering and tax evasion before he became president. (He denies them all.) These charges were dropped, but the opposition Democratic Alliance is doggedly trying to reinstate them. Mr Zuma’s critics speculate that he wants his ex-wife at the helm as an ally to argue that the charges—which he claims are politically motivated—should never see the light of day. The odds of another Zuma running South Africa are hard to gauge. There is no open, formal campaigning within the ANC. Candidates maintain the fiction that they are “deployed” by the party. The other strong contender is Cyril Ramaphosa, a union-leader-turned-tycoon who is now deputy president. He has the tacit support of the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), a part of the ruling alliance. At the COSATU national congress in late November several unions openly backed Mr Ramaphosa, saying that the deputy president of the ANC should succeed as party president, as in the past. Mr Ramaphosa stands to benefit from the mess Mr Zuma has made of the country’s credit rating. In December the president replaced a respected finance minister with an unknown backbencher, spooking the markets. He soon relented and appointed a third finance minister, whom investors trust, but the episode solidified his reputation for capricious decision-making. Even so Mr Ramaphosa, who has a sober, Mr Fix-It reputation, will have to build support softly-softly, in the ANC style. Ms Dlamini-Zuma received a boost in November when Sihle Zikalala beat a candidate who supported Mr Ramaphosa to be elected as ANC chairman in KwaZulu-Natal province, the party’s biggest support base. Three provincial premiers, known as the “Premier League,” are drumming up support for her. Ms Dlamini-Zuma’s fans often say that “South Africa is ready for a woman president.” Would she be any good? Her record in government is not exactly impressive. As health minister, she extended health services to black South Africans but also promoted a quack “cure” for AIDS based on a toxic industrial solvent, and purged South Africa’s drug-safety authority when it objected. As foreign minister she failed miserably to address the implosion of next-door Zimbabwe. Some argue that, as home minister, she cleaned up a dysfunctional ministry; others say the reforms were under way before she took over. On January 8th the ANC will celebrate the anniversary of its founding. It is customary for the president to set out the party’s agenda on such occasions, but all eyes will be on the succession struggle behind the scenes. Not long afterwards, probably in May, South Africa will hold municipal elections. If the ANC does poorly, the Zumas will be weakened. Ms Dlamini-Zuma has said nothing publicly about what she might do if she becomes president. Susan Booysen, author of the book “Dominance and Decline: The ANC in the Time of Zuma”, predicts that she would be much like her ex-husband. That worries liberals, who fret that Mr Zuma has undermined institutions that check presidential power and tolerated widespread corruption. “I think Zuma is going to be with us long after he has actually left office,” says Ms Booysen. Mr Zuma may not be able to name his own successor, however. He is unpopular, even among ANC supporters. A recent Afrobarometer survey found that public distrust of him had increased from 37% in 2011 to 66% in 2015. “A majority of citizens believe that he routinely ignores both the legislature and the judiciary,” the pollster said. Public approval of his performance dropped from 64% in 2011 to 36% this year. Mr Zuma giggled throughout his last day of questions in Parliament for the year, despite the serious issues before him: a severe drought, an economy close to recession and reports that taxpayers are to fork out for a brand-new, 4 billion-rand ($251m) presidential jet. After a younger opposition MP scolded him Mr Zuma responded: “I don’t know how to stop my laughter.”NIGERIA’S 37 governors cannot have expected cheers when they declared late in 2015 that they could no longer pay a minimum wage of just $3 per day to their employees. Politicians are seldom brave enough to cut civil servants’ pay but Nigeria’s governors are desperate. Low oil prices have slashed government revenues. Nigeria, which nowadays is comprised of 36 states and Abuja, the capital territory, operates as a federation in which most decisions over spending take place in the various state capitals. Every month the central government collects money from oil sales (which still account for more than 50% of its total revenues) and hands over just under half to the states. But that sum has plummeted since the price of crude declined. BudgIT, a Lagos-based analysis group, reckons that the states got a bit less than $7 billion between January and September 2015 compared with almost $14 billion over the same period in 2013. That led to a crisis in June when, having not paid their workers for months, 27 state governments begged President Muhammadu Buhari for a bail-out. By December 2015 several states were again failing to pay civil servants on time, provoking strikes. Although the fiscal crisis came to a head when the oil price collapsed, its origins are much older. At independence in 1960 the country was made up of just three regions. Since then it has been divided and subdivided. There are perhaps 250 ethnic groups in Nigeria. The big ones all want states where they are in a majority, so they can divvy up oil money and government jobs among their kin. “Some states were created by military leaders just to look after friends and businesses partners,” says Adigun Agbaje, a professor at the University of Ibadan. In charts: Explore Nigeria’s economy and politics This balkanisation of Nigeria has spawned a poisonous kind of politics. At the ballot box, religion and ethnicity matter far more than a candidate’s ideas. Politicians often win votes by stirring up animosity against the ethnic group next door. This can turn violent. More than 8,000 people were killed in ethnic or religious clashes in 2015. Few states gather much revenue themselves. Borno, a state in the north-east, collected about $3 per head from its 5m people in the whole of 2014. To be fair, it is besieged by Boko Haram insurgents. Still, other more peaceful states such as Osun are scarcely doing better yet hire civil servants by the busload. Some financiers think the federal government should provide conditional lending to troubled states. It probably won’t, given its own ballooning budget deficit. States could cut wages, but workers will howl. Some governors have hit on the original idea of trying to collect more tax. Lagos, the nation’s most self-sufficient state, thinks it can tax another 4m people, doubling the number who pay. Many states, however, are simply “hoping that future residents will pay off today’s costs”, says BudgIT’s Oluseun Onigbinde.AT THE edge of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania’s commercial capital, in a space roughly the size of a football field, stands hope for Africa’s industrial future: the Ubungo power plant. Gleaming pipes emerge from the ground; five modern generators hum quietly. This was where, in 2013, Barack Obama announced his Power Africa plan to electrify the continent. The trouble with plants such as Ubungo is that there are not enough of them. Opposite the power plant, young men sell charcoal to burn for cooking and heat. At night in the city centre the streetlights are turned off. South of the Sahara there are only seven countries—Cameroon, Gabon, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Namibia, Senegal and South Africa—in which more than 50% of people have access to electricity. In a typical year the whole region generates less electrical power than Canada, and half of that supply is in South Africa. Generating power in Africa ought to be a good business. Africans tend to pay extraordinary prices for electricity. Businesses rely on dirty and expensive diesel generators. Tanzanian mines are powered by generators burning diesel that has been trucked across the country; a kilowatt-hour can cost as much as $1. Grid power at an American mine, by way of comparison, costs less than a tenth as much. So there ought to be a rush to invest in African power plants. But there is not. Tanzania, a country of 50m people with substantial recent discoveries of natural gas, illustrates some of the bottlenecks. Tanzania has about 1,500MW of installed electricity-generation capacity—about as much as a small American city. More than a third comes from hydroelectric power stations. Because of drought in recent years, these rarely run at full capacity. In early October, at the end of the dry season, the country had to shut down all its hydroelectric plants. Tanzania is not alone in relying heavily on hydropower. In Malawi and Zambia almost all power comes from water, when it flows. Tanzania wants to build new gas-fired plants, connected via a new pipeline from a newly discovered gasfield in the south. Plants such as the one at Ubungo ought to generate lots of extra power cheaply. But that is not happening as quickly as it should. The Ubungo plant, which is owned by an American firm, Symbion, did not begin running at full capacity on local gas until last September. Before that, shortages meant that production often relied on imported liquid fuels such as kerosene. Gas is relatively clean, reliable and inexpensive. Indeed, the Ubungo power station could easily add capacity, says Magesvaran Subramaniam, Symbion’s local boss. It is just a matter of buying more mobile generators. The trouble is neither a lack of gas to power the plant nor a shortage of demand for the juice it sends down the wire; it is that the only customer does not pay its bills on time. Tanesco, which has a monopoly on distributing power in Tanzania, is severely cash-strapped. Its outgoings are inflated by the need to buy expensive emergency backup fuel to keep the lights on when the supply from dams falters. In practice, payments to independent power producers such as Symbion often come last on its list. On December 2nd SonGas, a private-equity owned firm that runs another gas-powered plant in Dar es Salaam, and which contributes as much as 20% of Tanzania’s grid power, threatened to stop generating electricity unless it is paid money is it owed by Tanesco. SonGas, like other firms investing in power plants across Africa, has a guarantee from Tanzania’s government that it will be paid—something financial backers generally insist on before investing in private power producers. But this does not help its short-term cashflow. Tanesco’s arrears do not mean that SonGas can refuse to pay for the gas it buys. For many, then, the best hope of getting the lights on is to bypass the grid entirely. M-Kopa, a Kenyan firm, is expanding across east Africa selling its solar-powered battery systems, which contain a torch and a mobile-phone charger. Customers are effectively given loans to buy them; repayments are made through mobile money. Generating power at home may transform life in rural areas for the better, but factories, mines and mills need a reliable, large-scale power supply. If Africa is to industrialise, it needs power plants. These will not be built unless customers start paying their electricity bills.
