Less strain than the train BULLDOZERS and demolition teams moved into the migrant camp at the French port of Calais on February 29th, part of the latest attempt to resolve the problems that have plagued the port for years. Migrants breaking into lorries and rushing the rail tunnel to England have caused frequent delays to rail services, affecting schedules nearly every week last summer. Yet scenes of burning tents and migrants scaling fences have done little to dampen a little-expected commercial resurgence: for cross-channel ferry firms. When the Channel Tunnel opened in 1994 between Folkestone and Calais, many thought that the speed and convenience of rail travel would put ferries out of business. In the late 1990s the tunnel and the advent of cut-price air fares hit the ferry market hard (see chart). But as new figures published last week show, ferry companies sailing to and from Dover, at least, have managed to stay afloat. They have even seen demand grow since 2012. Operators believe that ferries will always have a role providing extra capacity. This is partly because it is still cheaper, on average, to cross the channel by boat than by train, says Torben Carlsen, chief financial officer at DFDS, a ferry company. The average price of taking a car with two passengers on the ferry from Kent to France is less than £50 ($70); the standard fare for taking the tunnel is £76. Many drivers do not like the shuttle services through the tunnel, either because they fear boarding the train will damage their vehicles or because it is less comfortable: the tunnel often gets very hot and there are no catering services onboard the trains. P&O, DFDS’s main rival on the route, has started to emphasise the comparative comfort of ferry travel in its advertising, trying to borrow the glamorous image of cruising for its more mundane voyages. This has also helped boost ancillary revenues. Although the end of duty-free shopping within the EU in 1999 cut profits from onboard shops, new revenue streams, including posher restaurants, Wi-Fi and business-lounge entry, have helped make up the difference. Ferry firms have been hit by migrant problems, too. Immigrants have regularly tried to stow away in cars and lorries waiting to board ferries at Calais; in January dozens of them managed to storm the gangway onto P&O’s Pride of Britain. The disruption led to the delay or cancellation of many sailings. Wildcat strikes by workers in Calais also contributed to a dip in ferry services last summer, as did the EU’s decision to close down MyFerryLink, a service owned by Eurotunnel (which also owns the Channel Tunnel) for anti-competitive behaviour last July. The disruptions particularly affected cross-channel freight traffic, some of which was forced to use other ferry routes or air freight. However, the chaos in Calais failed to deter passengers from taking a boat to other destinations. Although numbers on the DoverCalais route fell by 800,000 in 2015, demand grew by a similar amount between Dover and Dunkirk. Maintaining their market share helped ferry firms swing back into profit for the first time since the financial crisis. P&O made £13m in profit in 2015 after a loss of £10m the year before. DFDS broke even on its cross-channel routes for the first time ever, on the back of lower fuel costs and higher occupancy rates. Both firms are ramping up capacity in the expectation that clearance of the migrant camps will mean less disruption this summer, for both trains and boats. Two new ships have entered service with DFDS in February to meet the expected demand. It seems it will take more than a tunnel to put an end to Britain’s long-running ferry services.EYES hooded, features blade-sharp and shoulders square, Margaret Thatcher looked every bit her caricature as she addressed the House of Commons on October 30th 1990. Just returned from a European summit in Rome, she sounded it, too. The prime minister took aim at the Commission’s federal ambitions and boomed her dissent: “No. No. No.” So stark was this objection to the continent’s integration that Geoffrey Howe, her former foreign secretary, resigned two days later, triggering her fall from office. Partly because of the drama of those days, Europe has since transfixed and sundered the Conservative Party. That seems especially so now, as Britain’s in-out referendum campaign gets rolling. Having promised the vote three years ago in an (apparently vain) attempt to cure the Tories of their neurosis, David Cameron hoped to limit support for Brexit to his party’s margins. But at the latest count a little under half of his 330 MPs are for Out, among them two big names: Michael Gove, the justice secretary, and Boris Johnson, London’s mayor. Merely disappointed in the former (a convinced eurosceptic), the prime minister is incandescent at the latter (a political opportunist). In a statement to the Commons on February 22nd he issued a string of barely veiled attacks on Mr Johnson’s arguments and motives as his target looked on, rather sheepishly, from the back benches. The family feud will only intensify in the months leading up to the referendum on June 23rd. Piqued by Mr Cameron’s barbs, the popular mayor is now throwing his full weight behind the Out campaign. On March 1st he dismissed dire government warnings about the risks of Brexit as baloney. Meanwhile otherwise loyal MPs mock the prime minister’s “renegotiation” of Britain’s EU membership with Trump-esque scorn. Out in the country some six in ten Tory members plan to vote to leave the EU according to YouGov. Strategists worry about how to “heal the wounds” after the referendum. So it is tempting to see the surprisingly sudden and vitriolic confrontation between parts of the party as the latest chapter in its long history of eruptions over Europe. That story encompasses first Thatcher and her Europhile assassins, then John—now Sir John—Major and the anti-Brussels “bastards”, as he called them, in his cabinet and later the party’s irritable 13 years in opposition. But what is happening now is different. Take the comparison with the Major years. In the 1990s the Conservative fringe was calling for Brexit, but a significant section of the party also remained wedded to the European ideal. In 1994, two years after Britain’s humiliating crash out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, the forerunner to the euro, almost a third of Tory members supported further integration and almost a quarter wanted a federal Europe. Although Sir John insisted that Britain must remain at the “heart of Europe”, in 1996 party bigwigs chided him for being insufficiently pro-European. In the intervening years Europe’s economic woes—combined with the drum beat of the anti-EU newspapers, Mr Cameron’s ill-advised Eurosceptic overtures to his base and the rise of the UK Independence Party—have transformed the picture. Look past today’s theatrics and it is clear that almost the whole party has rallied around what, two decades ago, would have counted as its anti-EU pole. On one extreme are hard nationalists who want a complete breach. On the other are a handful of convinced Europhiles. But the vast majority, spanning In and Out camps, agrees that Britain should be in the EU’s outermost orbit: beyond the euro zone and the (notionally) borderless Schengen zone, exempt from as many rules and costs as is practical and under no circumstances subject to further integration. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union The referendum debate, however bad-tempered, merely concerns the most beneficial way to achieve this semi-detachment; it is about procedure more than principle. Most Conservative supporters of membership argue that Britain’s interests are best served by remaining a member and securing opt-outs reinforcing its “special” position on the edge of a multi-speed union. Some on this side (like Oliver Letwin, who runs the Cabinet Office) actually support Brexit but think now the wrong time. Their opponents generally want the country to quit, retain its access to the single market—perhaps at the price of some continued pooling of power—and assume an observer status in the European institutions. “We’re all Eurosceptics now,” reckons Michael Fallon, the defence secretary (and a typically unsentimental In voter). The best example of the muddy reality of what at first glance looks like a binary divide is Mr Johnson who, by his own admission, has been “veering all over the place like a shopping trolley” on the subject. Having initially endorsed Out on the grounds that it would enable Britain to demand and secure a bespoke form of half-membership, he switched to admitting “out means out” when Mr Cameron refuted his claim, but still hints at the possibility of some sort of intermediate option. Bastards get the last laugh The Tory party’s convergence on this territory will continue beyond June. Whatever the result of the vote, London’s mayor stands a good chance of succeeding Mr Cameron (YouGov gives him a 21-point lead among party members) whenever the prime minister chooses, or is forced, to step down. The elevated salience of the EU question means it will dominate candidate selections, propelling the parliamentary party in a yet more Eurosceptic direction. Even if the country votes In there could be talk of a new referendum in the near future. And either way, any notion of Britain being at the heart of Europe will be dead. Thus although today’s campaign will bruise egos and break friendships, the bigger story is of a creeping consensus: over years of squabbling a once keenly pro-European party has gradually embraced a peripheral status in the union. In 1990 Thatcher’s Euroscepticism shocked her party. Now it looks restrained. Economist.com/blogs/bagehotIF A satirist were to create a parody of an international conference, amping up the insularity and tedious intricacies for comic effect, he might come up with something rather like the meeting that will take place this week in Marrakech. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, known as ICANN, will bring together 1,300 participants for 346 sessions. The gatherings include “NCPH Reception and Informal Meeting: CSG with the NCSG” and “CJK Generation Panels Co-ordination Mtg with Integration Panel”. Barring any last-minute hiccups, though, something remarkable will happen at the meeting. After two years of negotiations, ICANN is set to agree on a reform that would turn it into a new kind of international organisation. If this goes ahead, a crucial global resource, the internet’s address system, will soon be managed by a body that is largely independent of national governments. And some of ICANN’s champions reckon this is just a start. In future, similar outfits could be tasked with handling other internet issues that perplex governments, such as cyber-security and invasions of privacy. The beauty of the internet is its openness. As long as people stick to its technical standards, anybody can add a new branch or service. For everything to connect, though, the network needs a central address book, which includes domain names (such as economist.com) and internet-protocol addresses (such as 216.239.38.21). Whoever controls the address book can censor the internet: delete a domain name and a website can no longer be found. That is why, as the internet grew up, America decided not to hand control to the United Nations or another international body steered by governments. Instead, in 1998 it helped create ICANN, a global organisation that gives a say to everybody with an interest in the smooth running of the network, whether they be officials, engineers, domain-name holders or just internet users. Because few precedents existed, and because of a fear that ICANN would lack legitimacy, America kept it on a long leash. American approval is still required in some areas, including changes to the innards of the internet’s address system. Most were happy with the arrangement at first. But American oversight came to seem odd as the internet grew into a vast global resource with much traffic no longer passing over American cables (see chart). Then came revelations that the National Security Agency had spied on internet users in America and elsewhere. The snooping was unrelated to the management of internet addresses. But America’s Department of Commerce, which oversees ICANN, was provoked to announce in March 2014 that it would relinquish its role if it were convinced that ICANN would be truly independent and able to resist power grabs by other governments and commercial interests. America’s decision to let go triggered much wrangling and some stalling by those who benefit from the status quo. Gradually, though, plans for an independent organisation have come together. The new ICANN will resemble a state, says Thomas Rickert of eco, Germany’s internet association and co-chairman of one of the main negotiation committees. It will have a government (the organisation’s board), a constitution (its by-laws, which include its mission and “core values”), a judiciary (an “independent review process”, which leads to binding recommendations) and a citizenry of sorts (half-a-dozen “supporting organisations” and “advisory committees”, which represent the different interest groups). These will have the right to kick out the board and block its budget. Even some of ICANN’s harshest critics, such as Milton Mueller of the Georgia Institute of Technology, say the proposals are pretty good on balance—though he would like the citizenry to have more powers. One point, however, could cause trouble in Marrakech. More than a dozen countries, including Brazil, France and Russia, argue that governments will have too little sway in the new structure. ICANN’s board is obliged formally to weigh advice from a government advisory council only if that group has adopted such advice with “full consensus”, meaning no government openly objects. The dissenting countries say that full consensus will be tough to achieve. Governments are being expected to jump over a higher bar than others, complains one representative from a dissenting state. Discussions are likely to be heated, if incomprehensible to outsiders, but few expect the reform plans to be derailed in Marrakech. How American politicians will react is another matter. Some Republicans, in particular Senator Ted Cruz, who is running for president, dislike the idea of America letting go of ICANN. Opponents have not managed to pass legislation that would give Congress the right to stop the change: as things stand, a report sent to the relevant committees would suffice. But Republicans have blocked the commerce department from spending any money on the transition. Reform could well become mired in the presidential race, and other hurdles could pop up. Some lawmakers now argue that giving ICANN more independence amounts to the transfer of government property, which requires a vote by Congress. Dissenting governments and recalcitrant Republicans notwithstanding, an independent ICANN is not only likely to come to pass but also to become a model for other sorts of internet governance. The network is becoming Balkanised, with each country seeking to control what goes on within its own borders. Without generally accepted global rules, governments are bound to create their own, even if these cannot be implemented. “Multi-stakeholder” outfits like ICANN, where all opinions are aired, might well be the best hope to come up with rules that work. The consensual model is hardly perfect. It seems to work well for settling technical questions (see article) but can stumble when things get more political. And it is not clear who would launch other ICANN-like organisations. NETmundial, an initiative created in 2014 to do just that, has only produced some worthy “internet governance principles”. Perhaps Fadi Chehadé, ICANN’s president and one of the instigators of NETmundial, will be more successful getting such efforts off the ground in his new job. He will step down after the meeting in Marrakech, to be succeeded by Göran Marby, a Swedish telecoms regulator, and join the World Economic Forum to create all sorts of multi-stakeholder groups. “We need many little ICANNs,” he says.The wizard of the web TODAY ICANN is almost synonymous with internet governance (see article). But spare a thought for the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Without this little-known outfit, which developed many of the internet’s technical standards, the network would not even exist. The IETF just celebrated its 30th anniversary. Will it be around in another 30 years? The IETF, which was born at a meeting in San Diego, is known for its pragmatic way of making decisions. Rather than having governments or companies haggle over changes to networking protocols or routing services, “rough consensus and running code” is the rule. “Not everyone has to agree. And no votes are counted,” explains Scott Bradner, one the group’s grey-bearded elders (pictured). If the difference between two options is merely cosmetic, the IETF generally goes ahead with the more popular one if dissenters do not number more than about 20-30% of the total, although there is no firm rule. That proportion shrinks to 5-10% when a more fundamental choice must be made. At first IETF meetings were a festival for academics and engineers such as Mr Bradner. But as the internet has grown and become vital to companies’ fortunes, that has changed. First, representatives of big makers of networking gear such as Cisco and Ericsson began to turn up. They were followed by delegates from online giants like Facebook and Google. Now a large Asian contingent is present. When the IETF met in Yokohama last November, Cisco sent around 100 engineers, Google 50 and Huawei, a Chinese hardware maker, about 60. Jari Arkko, the IETF’s chairman (who also works for Ericsson) wants it to remain the place where exciting new technologies are discussed. But it seems to be turning into more of a conventional standards body. Commercial interests weigh heavily and issues take ever longer to sort out, says Kieren McCarthy, a longtime observer of internet-governance groups. Increasingly, internet standards are being set by more specialised groups covering the web, mobile technology and the internet of things. The pioneers are retiring: Mr Bradner will say goodbye in the next few months. But even if the organisation becomes less relevant, its decision-making standard of “rough consensus and running code” is likely to endure. Most internet-related technical groups follow it. The IETF’s dress code is influential, too. “Many newcomers are often embarrassed when they show up Monday morning in suits,” the official “Tao of IETF” warns, “to discover that everybody else is wearing T-shirts, jeans and sandals.”VOLKSWAGEN’S new boss, Matthias Müller, was no doubt hoping that his firm’s launches of new models at the Geneva motor show this week would help it move on from the scandal over its cheating in emissions tests. A British prankster had other ideas. As VW’s sales chief, Jürgen Stackmann, unveiled a new version of the Up city car, Simon Brodkin, a comic whose past targets include FIFA’s former boss, Sepp Blatter, gatecrashed the presentation in overalls, with a spanner and a “cheat box” which he tried to fit to the car (see picture), before being led off by security men. Mr Müller can afford to see the funny side of the stunt: he owes his job to the scandal. He was brought in to replace Martin Winterkorn, who was forced out when it emerged last September that 11m of the company’s diesel cars had been fitted with software to cheat tests for nitrogen-oxide emissions. This week VW admitted that Mr Winterkorn had been sent a memo in May 2014 about irregularities in the cars’ emissions, but said he may not have read it. Speaking to The Economist in Geneva, Mr Müller promised “monumental change”. But whatever VW does to make amends, the more far-reaching overhaul that it needs seems unlikely to happen. The emissions scandal was a symptom of a corporate culture focused on ramping up output to 10m vehicles a year and toppling Toyota as the world’s biggest carmaker. In the quest for scale, profitability suffered. Operating profits have hovered around €12 billion ($13 billion) for years despite a big expansion in output, with the group’s huge returns from China disguising poor performance in Europe and losses in America and emerging markets. Mr Müller says he is determined that VW not be “paralysed” by the emissions affair. Its sales fell in Europe and America in January even as their overall demand for new cars rose. But Mr Müller says 2016 has started well and that he expects little lingering impact from the scandal. He may be right. General Motors’ faulty ignition switches and Toyota’s “unintended accelerations” forced both firms to make huge recalls and generated plenty of bad press. Yet sales recovered within a few months. Uncertainty about financial penalties will hang over VW for some time. It has delayed its annual report for 2015 until April, when the picture should be clearer. America’s Department of Justice could in theory levy a fine of €60 billion but it is unlikely to go that far. Some analysts reckon that the cost of settling with the authorities and private litigants, worldwide, and fixing the affected cars or compensating their owners, might come to a grand total of as much as €30 billion—roughly the amount by which VW’s stockmarket value has fallen since the scandal broke. Others think it could be far less: both GM and Toyota escaped with fines of around €1 billion. If paying for its perfidy proves painful but not life-threatening, the impetus to overhaul VW will lose some of its force. Change is needed. VW is a sprawl of brands of varying fortunes. Almost two-thirds of its profits come from its premium-car brand, Audi, and performance-car division, Porsche (see chart 1). The main VW brand is a drag on the group: Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, reckons that in 2014 the brand’s profits essentially came from parts sales and royalties (paid by its joint ventures) in China, and that it made no money in its core European market. Mr Müller is making a start by attempting to revamp the culture of a company in which hitherto a strict hierarchy sent decisions, big and small, to the German engineers that ran VW from its headquarters in Wolfsburg. Mr Müller has replaced seven out of ten senior executives. Some are outsiders, though many of the “new” faces are, like Mr Müller, VW insiders ingrained in the firm’s ways. He is, however, trying to speed up sclerotic decision-making by giving the heads of the group’s profusion of brands more responsibility. A comprehensive restructuring plan is promised for later in the year, but the firm has said it will concentrate harder on profits. As a start, it will make €1 billion of cost cuts at the VW brand next year. But analysts reckon the company, which alone among big carmakers failed to reduce costs during the financial crisis, has plenty more fat to cut. For no good reason, its administrative expenses have trebled since 2007. The firm will also cut the extravagant number of model variations it offers—more than 300 at last count—and its absurdly long lists of options. The choice of steering wheels on the VW Golf is set to fall from 117 to a mere 43. VW will “reconsider all costs”, says Mr Müller, including even its hallowed research-and-development budget. In 2014 it was €13 billion, €5 billion more than Toyota’s. But it is unclear what VW’s huge outlays have yielded. It missed the craze for SUVs, it is lagging its main rivals in electric-car technology and it lacks a cheap platform for budget cars in emerging markets. A project to standardise the underpinnings of many VW group models with a platform called the MQB seems not to be producing the expected cost savings. Mr Müller is resistant, however, to disposing of any part of the firm, even a unit that makes marine diesel engines. A gruff “No” is his response when asked if he would consider selling it, though it is unclear that this division, or another that builds lorries, or Ducati, a maker of exotic motorbikes, is a core part of VW. The most intractable problem is low productivity, especially at the mass-market VW brand. The group’s labour costs have risen from around 13% of sales in 2007 to almost 17%. Outside China (where it makes cars in joint ventures with local firms), the group’s 520,000 workers made 6.7m vehicles in 2014, or about 13 each. That is about the same productivity as at Daimler’s Mercedes division, which makes only high-margin premium models (see chart 2). As other carmakers have shifted production to low-wage countries, VW has remained largely stuck in Germany. Some 45% of its employees are based there, many enjoying a four-day work week. The VW brand’s German factories are “among the highest-cost plants in the industry”, says Patrick Hummel of UBS, a bank. But VW’s commitment to Germany is absolute. “We are a German company”, says Mr Müller, and will “preserve German jobs”. Powerful unions would be sure to resist job cuts. Mr Müller says that they agree on the need for reform but admits to disagreement over how it might happen. Unions could also prevent a wider rethink that might shift investment from the VW brand to others that are more profitable. The supervisory board, made up largely of union representatives and nominees of the state of Lower Saxony, which holds a 20% stake in VW, has the power to resist most changes of strategy. Maybe an outsider with a mandate for change, if backed by the Porsche-Piëch family, which controls the voting shares, could have achieved more. But Mr Müller’s hands seem tied. The good bits of the VW group will continue to prop up the underperforming bits. That burden may get heavier: premium and low-cost carmakers are thriving while the mass market, the core of VW’s business, becomes more competitive. Odd as it sounds, VW could have done with a bigger crisis.“To hell with OPEC” IT WAS a tragic end to a life that epitomised the winner-takes-all spirit of American capitalism. On March 2nd, the day after he was indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of rigging bids for oil-drilling rights, Aubrey McClendon, a founder of Chesapeake Energy and one of the pioneers of America’s natural-gas revolution, died after driving his car at high speed into a wall. Mr McClendon, 56, was one of the high-rollers of the shale boom—and of its bust. He turned a $50,000 investment in 1989 in Chesapeake, based in Oklahoma City, into what became one of the two biggest natural-gas producers in the United States, with an acreage of leaseholds almost the size of West Virginia. He was also one of the champions of natural gas as a relatively clean fuel compared with coal, and an advocate for freeing America from dependence on Middle Eastern oil. “To hell with OPEC”, he was fond of saying. Yet his ride was a white-knuckled one even by the standards of America’s oil industry. He quickly seized on the potential of two emerging technologies, horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing (fracking), to unlock vast new sources of natural gas and change the face of American energy. But it was his zeal in amassing land by borrowing heavily that gave him his edge—and ultimately brought him down. “To be able to borrow money for ten years and ride out boom-and-bust cycles was almost as important an insight as horizontal drilling,” he was quoted as saying in Rolling Stone magazine, in 2012. That was four years after he had lost most of his personal fortune on margin calls during the global financial crisis. A year later he was ousted from Chesapeake for mixing reckless personal bets with those of his publicly traded company. Mr McClendon, the great-nephew of a former Oklahoma governor, was not a typical wildcatter. He had preppy, Richard Gere looks. His first career choice was to be an accountant. But with Chesapeake’s other founder, Tom Ward, he was adept at leasing land quickly and quietly to secure the shale resources beneath before others realised their potential, and he was as keen to flip it for a higher price as he was to frack it. “Geologists and engineers were the important guys—but it dawned on me pretty early that all their fancy ideas aren’t worth very much if we don’t have a lease. If you’ve got the lease and I don’t, you win,” he once said. He became an Oklahoman hero, particularly after bringing a professional basketball team, the Oklahoma City Thunder, in from Seattle. He had a wife and three children, and regularly treated friends to his collection of fine wines. But his brash business tactics also brought him a number of lawsuits. His leasing methods eventually attracted the attention of America’s Department of Justice. On March 1st it accused him and an unnamed co-conspirator of lowering the price of leases to drill for oil and gas on land in Oklahoma between December 2007 and March 2012, charges which carry stiff jail penalties if they lead to a conviction. It said “various corporations and individuals” were not charged but were also involved. Chesapeake said it did not expect to face prosecution. Mr McClendon swiftly described the charge as “wrong and unprecedented”, saying he was the first person in the oil-and-gas industry in 110 years to face antitrust prosecution under the Sherman Act for joint bidding on leaseholds. His lawyers argued that the “business practices” in question were well-known in the Oklahoman and American energy industries. “Starting today, Aubrey gets his day in court,” they said. He died the next morning. As The Economist went to press, police in Oklahoma City were still unable to say whether the crash, in which he was the only victim, and which involved no other vehicle, was intentional or not.IT IS still common to see headlines announcing the first woman to occupy some important post or other. Asako Suzuki has just been appointed the first female board member at Honda, a Japanese carmaker. In January the Irish central bank appointed its first female deputy governor. And of course Hillary Clinton could become America’s first female president. But such milestones may not be much of a guide to the opportunities women have to make progress in the workplace. So, in 2013, we created a “glass-ceiling index”, ranking countries by how good it is to be a working woman in each of them, to be published each year to mark International Women’s Day (March 8th). Our index now covers 29 countries; our website has a full, interactive version of the adjacent chart. Besides taking into account such things as women’s access to higher education, their labour-force participation, pay, business-school applications, representation in senior management and the cost of child care, this year we have added a new indicator: as well as measuring maternity-leave rights, we now include paternity leave. Studies show that where new fathers take parental leave, mothers tend to return to the labour market, female employment is higher and the earnings gap between men and women is lower. Among countries in the OECD, a group mostly of rich countries, paid leave for new daddies generally remains short, averaging just eight weeks. Nine countries, America included, offer them none. Although they fare poorly on a number of other indicators, Japan and South Korea now offer the longest paternity leave in the OECD. In those two countries, fathers (and mothers) are entitled to more than 50 weeks’ paid leave. Under Japan’s latest change to the law, in 2010, new mothers and fathers have 14 months from the birth in which to take up to a year’s paid leave, as long as they both take it. The idea is that men have the same career gap as women, and the career slippage among women of childbearing age is reduced. But cultures are hard to change, and so far the uptake has been low. Depending on nationality, new parents take home very different proportions of their usual pay while on leave. Turkey and Spain, for example, both offer 16 weeks’ maternity leave, but in Spain new mothers receive 100% of salary whereas in Turkey it is just 66%. Our index takes this into account: it includes a “full-rate equivalent” leave entitlement for Turkey of 10.6 weeks, to reflect the pay difference. Unsurprisingly, the Nordic countries—Iceland (a newcomer to our index), Norway, Sweden and Finland—come out top overall. In these countries, women are present in the labour force at similar rates to men. Finland has the largest share of women who have gone through higher education compared with men (49% of women have a tertiary degree, and 35% of men). Norway’s gender wage-gap (6.3%) is less than half the OECD average (15.5%). Women have 44% of seats on listed-company boards in Iceland; strong representation in Scandinavian boardrooms is common thanks to quotas. Norway and Iceland also have voluntary political-party quotas, as does Sweden where 44% of parliamentary seats are occupied by women, one of the highest rates in the world. Hungary ranks fifth, having the lowest gender wage gap, of 3.8%. Despite having few women on boards (11%) and in parliament (10%), Hungary has generous paid leave for mothers (71 weeks at 100% of recent pay) and low child-care costs. INTERACTIVE: Adjust the weightings and create your own “Glass-Ceiling Index” At the bottom of the ranking are Japan, Turkey and South Korea, where men are more likely than women to have degrees, to be in the workplace and to hold senior positions. Their pay gap is also wide. In Japan and South Korea the favourable parental-leave system is mainly a response to their ageing populations and shrinking labour forces; but in other respects they are far behind the Nordic countries, whose commitment to sexual equality goes back a long way. Even among better-ranked countries though, there is room for improvement. On average, across the OECD women are more likely to have a degree than men, but they are still less likely to be in the labour force and are paid significantly less. This is partly because of career choices (boys tend to choose things like engineering and computing; girls go for education, health care and welfare). But much of the difference also comes from child-bearing. Although the share of women on listed-company boards has increased since last year by 2.5 percentage points to 18.5%, women still hold less than a third of positions in senior management (a pipeline for board membership). Those that are in the higher echelons of management, according to the UN’s International Labour Organisation, are clustered in specific areas: human resources, public relations and communications management, and finance and administration. Although American firms have fewer women on boards than European ones, according to MSCI, a financial-data firm, they are more likely to have a female CEO or chief financial officer—the top jobs that bring headlines. But MSCI also found that of the rich-world listed companies where the CEO is a woman, 58% had at least three others on their board. This suggests that once one woman breaks through the glass ceiling, others find it easier to follow.The next job is just one click away MENTION “logistics” and it may bring to mind shiny FedEx or UPS vans with their neatly uniformed drivers. However, the business of shifting cargo by road, especially larger loads, is far more fragmented and inefficient than the image of its best-known brands would suggest. Even the world-famous names in parcel delivery compete with many lesser firms. Likewise, “third-party logistics”—the outsourcing of a business’s transport needs, including running fleets of lorries and vans on its behalf—also has some big firms but lots of smaller ones. There is even more fragmentation in what Americans call the “truckload” part of the industry—one-off deliveries of entire lorry trailers—and in the “less-than-truckload” business—the carriage of a pallet or two of goods. Whereas America’s top five airlines earn around 90% of their industry’s domestic revenues, the equivalent figure for the top five logistics firms is just 20%, reckons Armstrong & Associates, a consulting firm. Official figures show that one in nine American truckers is an independent owner-operator rather than an employee. The entire industry is a juicy target, ripe for disruption. Together, road haulage of all kinds is worth around $700 billion a year in America and more than €310 billion ($335 billion) in Europe. The rise of internet shopping and other factors will help the industry to keep growing, by around 3% a year worldwide for the next decade, according to Deloitte, another consulting firm. But it is a wasteful business. Every year American lorries travel empty for 50 billion miles (80 billion km)—28% of their total mileage. In Europe, a quarter of the containers on the road are empty, reckons InlandLinks, a container-tracking service. Some moves have been made towards consolidation. Low fuel prices, cheap finance and recovering rich-world economies have given larger companies the means and the motive to buy rivals. Last year FedEx bought TNT, a European parcel-delivery counterpart, for $4.8 billion. XPO Logistics of America, a broker in the truckload and less-than-truckload businesses, bought a French firm, Norbert Dentressangle, for $3.5 billion; and then a domestic rival, Con-way, for $3 billion. European firms have joined in too: SNCF Geodis, a French state-owned logistics outfit, recently bought OHL for $800m, to establish a foothold in America. However, there seems little prospect so far of consolidating the multitude of freelance truckers into employees of a handful of big firms. This is because of the comparatively low barriers to entry in their business, says Jack Semple of the Road Haulage Association, a British trade body. The average cost of a lorry-driving course in Britain is less than £1,000 ($1,400). In California it can be as little as $1,100. Lorries can be leased, or bought on cheap credit provided by their makers. Britain nationalised and merged its biggest hauliers in the 1940s, but a state behemoth was outrun by one-man outfits and the business was privatised again in the 1980s. The best prospects for efficiency and rationalisation, then, are in improving the creaky system by which large numbers of freight-brokers haggle with even larger numbers of truckers. Deals can take days of telephone calls to organise. And for their efforts, brokers charge hefty commissions—of as much as 45% of the delivery cost per load for short-haul trips. Brokers have an incentive to choose the priciest options for their clients to extract as high a fee as possible. Inevitably, a bunch of startups are now seeking to make the business cheaper, quicker and more transparent by replacing the brokers with mobile-app platforms that match shippers’ loads with available trucks and truckers. Cargomatic, based in Los Angeles, lets shippers list local jobs on its app, which are pinged to the smartphones of nearby drivers. When one of them takes on a job, the shipper can track his journey in real time. Trucker Path, already a popular social app that helps around 450,000 registered American drivers find rest-stops and poker partners, is currently testing its Truckloads app, which does something similar to Cargomatic for the long-haul market. Other systems automatically match drivers to loads, much as Uber does for taxis and passengers. Transfix, developed by a New York startup, not only scans for nearby lorries, but also rates each driver based on how many miles he would have to drive his lorry empty, how soon he will be available and his past performance. The best match is offered the job first. The whole process takes minutes, says Drew McElroy, a founder of Transfix. And the commission is just 10%, a fraction of what some brokers charge. Other apps are attempting to do the same for containers whose journeys do not just involve the roads. Kontainers, based in Britain, aims to be a one-stop-shop for businesses that want their goods moved across the oceans. Now, to shift a load from a shipper in Britain to a customer in Australia typically requires two days, 20 phone calls and 40 e-mails to reach an agreement, says Graham Parker, one of Kontainers’ founders. He wants to make booking a container shipment as easy as buying a plane ticket. Its website does this by dealing directly with truckers and shipping lines, which provide real-time tracking throughout the journey. Mr Parker says one of his clients discovered though Kontainers that shipping from Britain to Australia could be done in 38 days rather than the 55 his broker had always told him. Previously Nam Nguyen, of Skyline Steel in Seattle, would call five or six haulage companies whenever he needed to move a load from the company’s yard to a customer. For local jobs he says he now uses the Convoy app, created by another firm in Seattle, which went live in September. The main gains, he says, have been the “huge time savings” and reliability of delivery. Although it was at first assumed that only small businesses would be interested in such apps, big companies have also started to use them too. Barnes & Noble, an American bookshop chain, was one of Transfix’s first clients; Bosch, a German industrial giant, is now one of Kontainers’ best. Road to riches Drivers’ hours are restricted by law, so anything that helps them cut the time spent behind the wheel with no load (and thus no pay) is a bonus. Apps can help with this, and in generally helping them find more jobs. Mr McElroy says some of his drivers now average five weekly one-way trips between Indianapolis, where several publishers are based, and Barnes & Noble’s warehouse in New Jersey, instead of four. So they earn 25% more, with less waiting around. The apps also arrange payments much more quickly than brokers typically do, another important benefit for drivers. Some platforms, such as Transfix, guarantee payment within 24 hours of a delivery. Others, such as Truckloads, allow drivers to filter for shippers’ credit ratings and thus the likelihood of getting paid. Investors have concluded that such platforms have proved their worth, and are ready to take off. Last year $63m was raised for seven of these companies, including $12m for Transfix and $20m for Truckloads. Such sums are small change compared with the huge sums that taxi-app firms like Uber and Didi Kuaidi are raising, but it is in the haulage apps’ favour that they can achieve scale with such relatively modest sums. And they do not need to attract millions of users to turn profitable. Kontainers says it already has more than 100 businesses as customers in Britain, a number which many offline brokers would be more than happy with. So far, the big names of road logistics have largely stood back and left the business of “Uberising” the haulage business to the startups. Dan Lewis of Convoy argues that newcomers such as his have an edge, because incumbents would need to integrate new technology into their legacy systems, and “retrofit solutions rarely outperform something built from the ground up.” As for the established brokers, they have an incentive to maintain the status quo and keep the market offline, argues Mr Parker of Kontainers. This will change if the apps begin to eat into brokers’ business and divert a significant share of work from the big parcels and haulage firms towards freelance drivers. Brett Parker, a founder of Cargomatic, sees large, asset-heavy logistics firms like UPS and FedEx not as competitors but as future partners, and says many such incumbents are seeking alliances with on-demand-economy firms like his. Others think the incumbents will eventually buy the most successful haulage-broker apps. Two other, deep-pocketed names are also casting an eye over the delivery business. Uber itself is testing a service in some cities in which its freelance taxi drivers also collect and drop off parcels; and Amazon is developing an app, “On My Way”, which allows any member of the public to get paid for delivering packages. If these two giants eventually adapted their services to cover larger loads—not much of a technological challenge—then the scale of their resources and expertise would be hard to compete with. By then, another wave of upheaval may be in prospect—including for today’s app-based disrupters—as driverless lorries begin taking to the roads. It seems likely that they will be phased in over a number of years, starting perhaps with bigger, longer-distance loads. An industry that has less need for drivers ought to tip the scales away from freelancers and towards large fleet owners. But the advantages of being able to book a shipment quickly and cheaply by app will remain.Seeking a caffeine boost CAFÉ culture may be quintessentially Italian, but it took an American firm to make it global. Howard Schultz says visiting Milan and its cafés in the 1980s inspired him to develop Starbucks into what it is today. More than three decades later, the Seattle coffee giant is poised to enter the Italian market itself. On February 26th Mr Schultz announced a deal with Percassi, a retail developer, to open the chain’s first location in the country next year, in Milan. Starbucks is not the only firm to have stolen a march. An Italian developed the first espresso machine, but a Swiss firm, Nestlé, conquered the market for personal espresso-makers with its Nespresso system. The world’s second- and third-largest coffee groups, which merged in 2015 to create Jacobs Douwe Egberts, were American and Dutch, respectively. Italy’s coffee firms are trying to grab more of the global industry for themselves. Italy’s re-exports of beans, mostly roasted, have more than doubled over the past decade, to the equivalent of 3.2m standard 60kg sacks, increasing their share of global trade from 6.7% to 8.9%. Last year Lavazza, Italy’s biggest coffee firm, bought Douwe Egberts’ Carte Noire premium brand for €800m ($870m), making it the market leader in France. That followed an initial public offering of 40% of Massimo Zanetti, to raise capital for expansion. Zanetti owns a score of brands, including Boncafé, an Asian roaster; and it is buying a stake in Club Coffee, a Canadian firm with which it has developed compostable capsules. Besides continuing to develop its business-to-business side, Illycaffé is expanding its younger direct-to-consumer arm. It has opened flagship coffee shops in big cities, from Seoul to San Francisco, and plans to open more. Jeffrey Young of Allegra World Coffee Portal, a consulting firm, doubts if all this is enough in what has become a highly competitive and consolidated market. Many Italian firms have rested on their laurels, he says, believing their product to be superior. That was once true, but the emergence of coffee-shop chains, and then of craft coffee brands, has changed that. Quality is now a given; branding and the ambience of coffee shops are ever more important. The industry is now in the grip of a fad for the “science” of coffee-making—improved grinding methods, better monitoring of water quality, and so on. Illycaffé was an early innovator, having pioneered the use of pressurised cans when most others were still selling coffee in paper bags. More recently it has created an app that lets coffee-lovers design and buy their ideal blend—it will be rolled out in some of the firm’s shops later this year. But if innovation and product development continue to be important routes to growth, even Italy’s biggest firms may be outgunned by global giants with much deeper pockets.IN 1984 Ronald Reagan ran a re-election ad on the theme of “It’s Morning Again in America”. Today’s presidential hopefuls ought to run a follow-up called “It’s Almost Midnight”. Donald Trump laments the loss of America’s greatness. Bernie Sanders says the country is being wrecked by greedy businesspeople. America’s leading intellectuals are equally gloomy. Charles Murray, a conservative, says that America is “coming apart”; and George Packer, a liberal, agrees that it is “unwinding”. Mercifully, not everyone is a doom-monger. In his annual letter to shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway, on February 26th, Warren Buffett noted that “for 240 years it’s been a terrible mistake to bet against America, and now is no time to start.” The March issue of the Atlantic magazine has a cover story by James Fallows on “How America is putting itself back together”. The author undertook a three-year journey across the country in a single-engine plane and saw signs of reinvention and renewal wherever he went—and not just in trendy tech hubs. A new book by Antoine van Agtmael, who coined the phrase “emerging markets”, and Fred Bakker, a Dutch journalist, called “The Smartest Places on Earth”, argues that the rust belts of the rich world, especially in America, are becoming hotspots of innovation. Boosterism is as American as apple pie. But this time the boosters can point to some hard data. The Kauffman Index of Startup Activity, which measures business creation, had its biggest increase in 2015 for two decades. Bruce Katz of the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, reckons that America’s 50 most research- and technology-intensive industries have added nearly 1m jobs since 2010. These industries are disproportionately based in cities and, since they pay high wages, have a galvanising effect on local economies. Three powerful forces are breathing life into bits of America that had looked as if they were permanently left behind. First, old industrial skills are acquiring new relevance thanks to such things as advances in materials science. As Messrs Van Agtmael and Bakker note, Akron, in Ohio, has capitalised on its heritage as home to America’s four biggest tyremakers by turning itself into America’s capital city of polymers. The University of Akron’s Polymer Training Centre houses 120 academics and 700 graduate students. Companies such as Akron Polymer Systems and Akron Surface Technologies are inventing new ways to commercialise synthetic materials. North Carolina has done the same for textiles. Its state university is home to the Nonwovens Institute, which does research on textiles that can resist heat and chemicals, including ones used in weapons. Second, old industrial towns are realising that they have a vital asset: cheap property. Disused mills and warehouses, with their high ceilings and exposed bricks and beams, can make attractive homes and workspaces for knowledge workers. In Watervliet, New York, firms such as Cleveland Polymer Technologies occupy space in an old US Army arsenal. In Manchester, New Hampshire, the old and once-crumbling riverside mill district now buzzes with knowledge businesses and fancy restaurants. The hunt for Lebensraum is driving young entrepreneurs to explore the neglected peripheries of big cities, such as Boston’s South Side (“Southie”), Seattle’s South Lake Union Area and San Francisco’s twin city of Oakland. Some entrepreneurs are cutting the cord completely and swapping broom-cupboard-sized premises by the Bay for mansions in flyover territory. Mr Fallows also found older industries reviving in out-of-the-way places, such as in north-eastern Mississippi, where a steel mini-mill was expanding and a $300m new tyre factory was opening. The third trend combines elements of the first two: the rise of manufacturing entrepreneurs. Startups are beginning to transform manufacturing just as they transformed service industries like taxi-hailing and short-term room lets. New techniques such as 3D printing, combined with a rapid decline in the cost of computing power, are making it easier for small firms to compete with big ones. Crowdfunding sources such as Kickstarter are making it easier for them to raise capital. And big companies such as GE are trying to crowdsource innovation by providing small manufacturing firms with space and seed-money. Exponents of this “hardware renaissance” frequently locate themselves in old industrial towns such as Pittsburgh and Detroit, in part because there is lots of cheap space available and in part because they can draw on established manufacturing skills. Formidable problems, formidable resources There are plenty of reasons to be sceptical about rust-belt revivalism. The overall number of jobs in manufacturing has been declining for decades, and is set to continue falling as automation keeps advancing. Brain-intensive manufacturing will not provide many jobs for high-school dropouts. Such rebirths have been heralded in the past, only to come to nothing. The rate of business creation is still 50% lower than it was in the 1980s. Still, America’s old industrial cities have formidable resources as well as formidable problems. Akron and North Carolina point to one of the country’s strengths: it has first-rate universities almost everywhere. GE built a factory for jet-engine parts in out-of-the-way Batesville, Mississippi, largely because Mississippi State University is a centre of expertise in the new materials needed for them. America’s success in software also gives it a huge advantage in a world in which ever more software is being embedded into hardware, be it cars or smart watches. American firms also enjoy much cheaper energy than their European and Asian rivals, thanks in large part to an American innovation, fracking. It is too early to remake Reagan’s “It’s Morning Again” ad. But it is time for Americans to recognise that, for all its troubles, their country has not lost the ability to remake and revitalise itself. As Hillary Clinton put it, “America has never stopped being great.” Messrs Trump, Sanders et al should take note.
