OIL PRICES have perked up a bit, but producers are still reeling from the slump in crude prices last year. The boss of Pemex, Mexico’s state-owned oil firm, said this week that the company faced a “liquidity crunch”. Malaysia’s state oil firm is laying off workers. Petrobras, Brazil’s troubled oil giant, recently secured a $10 billion loan from the China Development Bank to help it to pay off maturing bonds. The trouble at these firms underlines broader concerns about the burden of corporate debt in emerging markets. A particular worry for resources firms is the rising cost of servicing dollar debts taken out when the greenback was much weaker than it is now. Short-term dollar loans to be repaid with earnings in falling currencies featured prominently in past emerging-market crises. But the concern about the role of dollar lending in the current cycle is different. The numbers are startling. Corporate debt in 12 biggish emerging markets rose from around 60% of GDP in 2008 to more than 100% in 2015, according to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Places that experience a rapid run-up in debt often subsequently endure a sharp slowdown in GDP (see article). An extra twist is that big emerging-market firms were for a while able to borrow freely in dollars. By the middle of last year, the stock of dollar loans to non-bank borrowers in emerging markets, including companies and government, had reached $3.3 trillion. Indeed until recently, dollar credit to borrowers outside America was growing much more quickly than to borrowers within it. The fastest increase of all was in corporate bonds issued by emerging-market firms. Jaime Caruana, the head of the BIS, argues that a global liquidity cycle—the waxing and waning of dollar borrowing outside America—helps to explain the slowdown in emerging-market economies, the rise in the dollar’s value, and the sudden oil glut. When the dollar was weak and global liquidity was ample thanks to the purchase of Treasuries by the Federal Reserve (so-called “quantitative easing”, or QE), companies outside America were happy to borrow in dollars, because that was cheaper than borrowing in local currency. Capital inflows pushed up local asset prices, including currencies, making dollar debt seem even more affordable. As long as the dollar remained weak, the feedback loop of cheap credit, rising asset prices and strong GDP growth could continue. But when the dollar started to strengthen, the loop reversed. The dollar’s ascent is tied to a change in America’s monetary policy which began in May 2013, when the Fed first hinted that it would phase out QE. When the Fed’s bond-buying ended in October 2014, it paved the way for an interest-rate increase 14 months later. The tightening of monetary policy in America has reduced the appetite for financial risk-taking beyond its shores. The impact of this minor shift on the value of the dollar has been remarkable, particularly against emerging-market currencies (see chart 1). Wherever there has been lots of borrowing in foreign currency, the exchange rate becomes a financial amplifier, notes Mr Caruana. As companies scramble to pay down their dollar debts, asset prices in emerging markets fall. Firms cut back on investment and shed employees. GDP falters. This drives emerging-market currencies down even further in a vicious cycle that mirrors the virtuous cycle during the boom. Since much of the credit went to oil firms, the result has been a supply glut, as producers pump crude at full tilt to earn dollars to pay down their debts. Mr Caruana’s reading of events has dollar borrowing at its centre. Yet the sell-off in emerging-market currencies has more to it. Rich countries that export raw materials, including Australia, Canada and Norway, have also seen their currencies plummet against the dollar. Falling export income as a consequence of much lower oil and commodity prices is likely to have played a similar role in the slump in other currencies. Some analysts think the problem of dollar debt is blown out of proportion. There are countries, such as Chile and Turkey, where dollar debts loom large (see chart 2). But the average dollar share of corporate debt in emerging markets is just 10%. Chinese firms account for more than a quarter of the $3.3 trillion of dollar loans to emerging markets—and since August, when fears surged that the yuan would be devalued, they have been swapping dollar loans into yuan, notes Jan Dehn of Ashmore Group, a fund manager. Much of the foreign-currency debt taken out by companies elsewhere was long-term: the average maturity of bonds issued last year was more than ten years, for instance. That pushes refinancing, and the associated risk of default, far into the future. In many cases, dollar debt is matched by dollar income—even if, as in the case of oil exporters, it is much diminished by low prices. And there are pots of dollars in emerging-market banks to which indebted companies may have recourse. In any event, the dollar’s ascent has stalled because of concerns about America’s faltering economy and doubts that the Fed can raise interest rates again. Yet the cycle of dollar lending nevertheless has implications that may not be fully appreciated. A recent study of firm-level finances by Valentino Bruno and Hyun Song Shin of the BIS found that emerging-market firms with strong cash balances are more likely to issue dollar bonds. That goes against a tenet of corporate finance, that firms only borrow to invest once they have exhausted internal sources of funds. It suggests that financial risk-taking was the motivation for borrowing. On average, 17-22 cents of every dollar borrowed by an emerging-market company ends up as cash on the firm’s balance-sheet. Such liquid funds could go into bank deposits, or be used to buy other firms’ commercial paper or even to lend to them directly. In other words, the authors say, companies seem to be acting as surrogate financial firms. As a result, dollar borrowing spills over into easier credit conditions in domestic markets. This is one of the ways the dollar-credit cycle exerts a strong influence over overall lending in emerging markets. The credit cycle took an apparently decisive turn last year. The stock of dollar credit to emerging markets stopped rising in the third quarter, says the BIS, the first stalling since 2009. Dollar credit is much harder to come by than it was. So are local-currency loans. Bank-lending conditions in emerging markets tightened further in the fourth quarter, according to the Institute for International Finance. The dollar may have peaked but, for emerging markets, tight financial conditions are likely to endure.FOR as long as there have been organised economies, people have been employed to look after the wealth of others. More than 4,000 years ago landowners in Akkad, an early Mesopotamian civilisation, hired local managers to look after their farms. In their new book, “Investment: A History”, Norton Reamer and Jesse Downing explain how the industry has changed over time. Their fundamental idea is that investment has become “democratised”, available to a wider range of individuals. Early investment was conducted on behalf of the wealthy, often by individuals with low status—current or former slaves in the Roman Republic, for example. In the Biblical parable of the talents, a master entrusts his wealth to a range of servants. Two of the servants doubled the master’s money but the third buried it in the ground, rather than “investing it with the bankers”. For this failure, the poor performer was “cast into the outer darkness” where “there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth”. Today’s clients might welcome the ability to add this penalty clause to their contracts. Looking after the assets of the rich—or high-net-worth individuals, as they are known in the jargon—is still big business. But the fund-management industry’s growth has been turbocharged by the evolution of a much wider client base. In the rich world, most people have some money available for savings after they have paid for the necessities of food, clothing and shelter. With a retirement age of, in effect, around 65, they have two decades or so of old age to provide for. In America, retirement savings grew from $368 billion in 1974 to more than $22 trillion by 2014—a fivefold increase in assets relative to income. This has transformed the industry. Investment management was once a dull business, consisting mainly of helping trust funds stock up on government bonds. The standard joke was: “Why don’t fund managers look out of the window in the mornings? Because then they’d have nothing to do in the afternoons.” Nowadays fund management is a much more glamorous profession—more masters of the universe than keepers of the paper clips. Another key to the change in the industry’s fortunes is its reward system. Fees are linked to the value of the assets, even though the cost of managing $10 billion is little more than the cost of looking after a measly $1 billion. So fund managers have benefited twice over: first, from the expansion of pension and other savings and, second, from the huge rise in asset prices since the 1980s. The latter has been driven by falls in inflation and interest rates which have reduced the yield (and thus increased the price) of financial assets. When markets faltered in the financial crisis, central banks stepped in to buy assets through quantitative easing (QE)—in effect, an indirect subsidy of fund managers’ profits. As Messrs Reamer and Downing point out, some fund managers have become very wealthy by looking after other people’s money. A quarter of all American billionaires work in finance and investments, an industry that employs less than 1% of all workers. In ancient times, the poor looked after the assets of the rich; in modern times, it is the other way round. Successful managers deserve decent rewards, but a lot of mediocre managers have prospered too. Just because they are rich does not mean they are clever. Their position is slowly being eroded by the emergence of index-trackers and exchange-traded funds, which charge much lower fees. But the transformation is not occurring fast enough. A world of low inflation and low nominal returns should prompt clients to pay a lot more attention to fees. Instead, many pension funds and endowments are moving into higher-charging “alternative asset” categories like hedge funds and private equity, a “Hail Mary” strategy that cannot work in aggregate. There may be market inefficiencies that are profitable to exploit, but none large enough to give a big, across-the-board boost to the returns of a $22 trillion industry. The authors are right that the democratisation of investment is, on the whole, good news. Millions of people have access to diversified savings vehicles that will deliver, on average, returns that are better than those available from a savings account. But, these days, technology means that such funds can be provided for a fraction of a percentage point a year. This is becoming a utility business, and you don’t get rich by running a utility. Fred Schwed’s question to a pre-war Wall Street mogul—“Where are the customers’ yachts?”—remains as relevant as ever.RUSSIA last issued a dollar-denominated bond in 2013. Since then it has annexed part of Ukraine, launched a proxy war in another bit and destabilised the rest. That prompted Western financial sanctions on Russia’s banks and oil firms. Its government, though, can still tap foreign debt markets. On March 1st the ministry of finance said it would appoint advisers this month to help it issue a $3 billion bond. One explanation might be a need for foreign cash. As Russia’s recession has eased, the government’s cost of borrowing has fallen. It could be planning to filter the dollars to favoured companies. That would help firms struggling to service foreign debt thanks to sanctions and the halving of the value of the rouble since 2014. Alternatively, the government could use the money for itself. The budget assumes an oil price of $50 a barrel and a corresponding deficit of 3% of GDP in 2016. Now the oil price has crashed to $30, the deficit could reach 7% of GDP. But the private sector is not as desperate as it was, having reduced its external debt by about a third over the past two years. No big foreign-debt repayments are looming. Many firms still have high levels of foreign assets, according to Liza Ermolenko of Capital Economics, a consultancy. Nor is the government in dire straits. The reserves of its sovereign-wealth funds, which Russia is already using to fund the budget deficit, still exceed $100 billion. The finance ministry is expected to propose a new budget in April, which will trim the deficit through spending cuts and tax rises. The government can readily borrow roubles, and the interest rate on dollar borrowing is likely to be high. That suggests that the Russian government sees the bond as a long-term, strategic move. It has tapped domestic markets in the past when running budget surpluses, to prove that it could borrow more if it needed to, says Ms Ermolenko. A successful trial would be reassuring to the Kremlin, since Russia’s sovereign-wealth funds are likely to run dry within a few years if oil prices stay low. “There will be much more to come,” says one banker, who reckons that Russia will seek to borrow $6 billion-8 billion next year. A successful international bond placement would also be a public-relations coup. Russia must tread carefully, since Western banks are wary of cavorting with the Kremlin—hence the small sum to be raised. Yet all the signs suggest that Russia will find willing partners.A SIGN on the door of a Wild Bean café in Zurich shows the nine different cards accepted for payment inside. Below the logos is a picture of a purple bank note, crossed out in red. From behind the counter, Aymen Kandil explains that for everyday transactions, “thousand-franc notes are not so good”. Although many merchants will not accept them, the SFr1,000 ($1,000) note makes up over 60% of all Swiss cash in circulation. It is the most valuable banknote issued by a Western country and is worth twenty times its weight in gold. Rather than being a way of paying for things, it is meant to act as a convenient store of value. In 2008, as banks were failing and the value of most assets collapsed, demand for the SFr1,000 note jumped by 16%, having grown by only 1-4% in previous years. Yet lawmen suspect that most high-denomination notes are in the hands not of jittery savers, but of criminals. Good data on the use of such notes are scarce—their anonymity is one of their attractions. But a report in 2010 from a British police unit that focuses on organised crime claimed that only 10% of €500 ($542) notes were used for legitimate purposes. A report from Europol recounts how criminals will sometimes pay more than face value for high-value notes because of how convenient they are to transport. And it seems telling that the €500 note accounts for around 30% of euros in circulation, yet 56% of Europeans surveyed by the European Central Bank say they have never seen one. David Lewis of the Financial Action Task Force, an international body that co-ordinates efforts to prevent criminals using the financial system, says big notes are used mainly in drug- and people-trafficking, money-laundering and racketeering. Finance for terrorism is another concern. A courier for jihadists caught travelling to Turkey in 2014 with 40 €500 bills (€20,000) in her underwear would have needed knickers of epic proportions to transport the same sum using €100 notes. To make life difficult for criminals, Britain has barred banks and money-changing firms from providing €500 notes; the biggest British note is a mere £50 ($70). Canada started withdrawing its C$1,000 note (then worth $670) from circulation in 2000 for the same reason. Singapore is phasing out the S$10,000 note, the world’s most valuable (worth $7,100). The ECB seems to be moving in a similar direction. In early February it announced an investigation into the use of the €500 note. The ECB will report to euro-zone finance ministers by May 1st, but resistance to scrapping the €500 note is already strong. Some (particularly in Germany) fear that the withdrawal of big notes is a precursor to the eventual abolition of cash, and thus a vast increase in the state’s power to pry and meddle. There are other benefits to the state from getting rid of high-value notes than hitting big-time criminals. Withdrawing them could help fill government coffers, by making tax-avoiding cash payments more awkward. It might even grease the wheels of monetary policy, by making it easier to impose negative interest rates. Yet the “slippery slope” argument need not hold: Canada still has smaller notes, long after it binned the C$1,000 bill. A weightier concern is that the process of eliminating big notes has less impact on criminals the more slowly it proceeds. But central banks are reluctant to cancel or even put an expiry date on notes, for fear that this would undermine trust in those left in circulation. Instead, they tend to ask commercial banks to filter out the offending notes whenever they receive any. That is what Canada did in 2000 and, 16 years on, some 20% of C$1,000 notes remain in circulation. Moreover, getting rid of one kind of big note will have only limited impact as long as there are others in circulation, points out Peter Sands of Harvard University. He would like to see the ECB scrap the €200 and €100 notes as well, and the Federal Reserve withdraw the $100 bill, which would be a huge inconvenience to drug-traffickers moving money across the Mexican border. The Swiss National Bank has stated categorically that it has no plans to get rid of high-value notes, so criminals will have at least one option for the foreseeable future. As Mr Lewis says, “Whatever you do, the problem is going to get pushed somewhere else.” Nonetheless, he continues, “What you’re doing is making it harder for criminals to smuggle cash and easier for authorities to detect them.” That is nothing to sneer at.A local fixture THE chairman of Barclays, a big British bank, was asked in a conference call last year whether the firm might draw back its investment in its listed African subsidiary. Actually, he replied, “we would probably be biased to own more than less.” Yet on March 1st Jes Staley, Barclays’ CEO since December, announced that it hopes to reduce its 62% stake in Barclays Africa over the next two or three years, to focus on its main business in Britain and America. On the face of things, the reversal is surprising. Barclays has been in Africa for over a century. Its blue eagle logo can be found in shopping centres from Nairobi to Lagos. Moreover, Barclays Africa made a healthy return on equity of 17% last year. It has grown quickly in recent years and plans to keep doing so. Over the past year it has acquired licences of various sorts in Ghana and Nigeria and part of an insurance business in Kenya. This will continue despite the sale of Barclays’ stake, Maria Ramos, Barclays Africa’s CEO, insisted this week. But Barclays is one of the most weakly capitalised big Western banks. As well as the sale of its African division, Mr Staley announced this week that it would cut its dividend by more than half. (The not-so-prescient chairman, John McFarlane, had also suggested last year that the dividend would soon go up.) Selling Barclays Africa would help boost Barclays’ capital in two ways. The proceeds of the sale could be retained to bolster the buffers directly. In addition, a sale would make Barclays’ existing capital go further. At the moment, even though Barclays owns less than two-thirds of the business, international rules oblige it to hold enough capital to absorb all its likely losses. If Barclays’ stake falls below 20%, however, it is off the hook, freeing it to use its capital more efficiently. Its capital ratio would rise by a percentage point. The heavy capital requirements also make Barclays Africa less profitable for its parent, reducing last year’s 17% return on equity to 8.7%. (That is still better than Barclays’ struggling investment bank, which made a return on equity of just 5%.) Declining currencies—particularly the South African rand—and slowing growth in its main markets have further diminished Barclays Africa’s allure. Its branches outside South Africa are expensive to run and, thanks to falling commodity prices, may get less profitable in the future. And then there is the fear that it may inadvertently abet crime or corruption, earning its parent a swingeing fine in America. Unfortunately for Barclays, there is no obvious buyer. In South Africa, its main market, where it is listed, competition authorities would probably prevent a local rival from snapping it up. Atlas Mara, an African investment fund run by Bob Diamond, a former CEO of Barclays, might bid. But with a market capitalisation of roughly $300m, it will struggle to raise the $8 billion or so it would need to buy the whole stake. There is vague talk of Chinese or Japanese buyers. If none appears, Barclays may have to reverse itself yet again.THE launch, a year ago, of the European Central Bank’s programme of quantitative easing (QE—creating money to buy bonds) sparked elation. Growth was picking up, consumers had a spring in their step and stockmarkets were jubilant. A year later spirits are sombre as the recovery flags, stockmarkets languish and deflation returns. After prescribing more medicine in December, the ECB is expected to increase the dose again on March 10th. But there are increasing doubts about its effects. Consumer prices fell by 0.2% in the year to February (see chart), reinforcing the case for greater stimulus. Though this fall was driven by a renewed collapse in oil prices, the core inflation index, which excludes volatile items such as energy, is also looking wan. Prices rose by just 0.7% in the year to February, among the lowest readings since the euro was born 17 years ago. Despite a year of QE, during which the ECB has bought €60 billion ($65 billion) of bonds a month, it appears to be no closer to its goal of inflation of nearly 2% than when it started. Unemployment has at least carried on falling, to 10.3% in January, reflecting the continuing economic recovery since the spring of 2013. But the upturn has failed to live up to the promise of early 2015, when GDP growth reached 0.5% (an annualised rate of 2.2%). That turned out to be the (not very) high point. Expansion subsequently slowed, to 0.3% (an annualised rate of 1.1%) in the final quarter of last year. GDP in the single-currency club is still below its peak in early 2008, whereas America’s is almost 10% above its pre-crisis high from eight years ago. Consumers have sustained the euro-zone recovery as household budgets have stretched further thanks to lower energy prices. But investment growth lacks the vitality of previous upturns. That has left the currency union vulnerable to the recent setback in emerging economies, especially in China, which is hurting exporters. Industrial output fell in December in Germany, France and Italy, the three biggest economies in the euro area. Whereas European stockmarkets were buoyant in early 2015, they sank in the first six weeks of 2016, with particularly sharp falls in bank shares. Though they have since recovered some of their poise, the Stoxx Europe 600 index remains 7% down this year; its banking component has fallen by 15%. An index of business and consumer sentiment compiled by the European Commission, which tends to mirror GDP growth, has fallen from a recent high of 106.7 in December to 103.8 in February, with especially big declines among French and Italian consumers. German industry and trade is more worried about business prospects than at any time since late 2012, not long after the euro zone skirted a break-up, according to the latest Ifo survey. All this will probably spur the ECB to do more when its monetary-policy council meets this month. In December it extended QE by six months until March 2017, raising the programme’s total size from €1.14 trillion to €1.5 trillion (14% of euro-zone GDP). It also cut interest rates, which first fell below zero in 2014, deeper into negative territory. The deposit rate was lowered from -0.2% to -0.3%. At its March meeting, the ECB is likely to keep pulling on more than one lever. The deposit rate looks set to fall again, to -0.4%. The central bank may also extend another programme that it introduced in 2014, in which it has offered ultra-cheap long-term funding (stretching until September 2018) to banks that improve their lending to the private sector. Most important, the ECB may step up the pace of QE for the next six months or so, from €60 billion a month to, say, €75 billion. It may also extend the programme again, until September 2017, a full year after it was first supposed to end. The markets had expected more from Mario Draghi, the ECB’s president, back in December. But even if he comes up with the goods on March 10th, they are likely to remain sceptical. The effects of negative interest rates on inflation are hard to discern, but banks and insurers are obviously suffering. The ECB could introduce tiered negative rates, protecting most of banks’ reserves from the lowest rate, but that did not spare Japanese banks from a stockmarket beating. Moreover, twiddling the dials of QE will not have the same impact as its introduction. Mr Draghi won a reputation as a magician when he cast his “whatever it takes” spell to save the euro, but now even he seems to be running out of tricks.FINANCIAL markets can seem bewildering to those who don’t have the time and energy to understand them: all that jargon, all those sudden switches in mood. So it is natural that people look for help when trying to find the right products. In America, more than half of all households have sought advice, according to a survey conducted in 2010. They have more than 650,000 registered financial advisers to choose from. But how good is that advice? It can be hard to tell. There may be an “information asymmetry” between the advisers and the clients, simply because finance can be so complex. Furthermore, although a diner can instantly tell if wine is corked or steak is tough, it may be many years before the success or failure of a financial tip becomes apparent. A new paper* examines the records of American financial advisers between 2005 and 2015, using a database that contains 1.2m individuals. It finds that 7% of the advisers were disciplined for misconduct over the period, resulting in a median payment to customers of $40,000 in compensation. Around one-third of the miscreants are repeat offenders; past transgressors are five times more likely to engage in misconduct than the average adviser. What happens to the offenders? Just over half, astonishingly, keep their job. Although the remainder are let go, 44% of them are rehired by another firm within a year. On average, they take a 10% pay cut, but they continue to work as investment advisers. Unsurprisingly, the paper finds that these miscreants tend to move to firms that hire more people with a record of misconduct than is typical. The same firms are less likely to fire their staff if they do something wrong. Why don’t such firms lose all their clients? The authors suggest that advisers with a dark past tend to prey on elderly or unsophisticated customers. At any rate, they seem to congregate in relatively wealthy, elderly and less educated counties. In some places in Florida and California, one in five advisers has a record of misconduct. It is a sorry tale. But information on advisers’ records is at least readily available at BrokerCheck, a website run by FINRA, an American regulator. Clearly, a lot more investors need to use it.HOW worrying are China’s debts? They are certainly enormous. At the end of 2015 the country’s total debt reached about 240% of GDP. Private debt, at 200% of GDP, is only slightly lower than it was in Japan at the onset of its lost decades, in 1991, and well above the level in America on the eve of the financial crisis of 2007-08 (see chart). Sooner or later China will have to reduce this pile of debt. History suggests that the process of deleveraging will be painful, and not just for the Chinese. Explosive growth in Chinese debt is a relatively recent phenomenon. Most of it has accumulated since 2008, when the government began pumping credit through the economy to keep it growing as the rest of the world slumped. Chinese companies are responsible for most of the borrowing. The biggest debtors are large state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which responded eagerly to the government’s nudge to spend. State sponsors of error The borrowing binge is still in full swing. In January banks extended $385 billion (3.5% of GDP) in new loans. On February 29th the People’s Bank of China spurred them on, reducing the amount of cash banks must keep in reserve and so freeing another $100 billion for new lending. Signs of stress are multiplying. The value of non-performing loans in China rose from 1.2% of GDP in December 2014 to 1.9% a year later. Many SOEs do not seem to be earning enough to service their debts; instead, they are making up the difference by borrowing yet more. At some point they will have to tighten their belts and start paying down their debts, or banks will have to write them off at a loss—with grim consequences for growth in either case. An IMF working paper published last year identified credit growth as “the single best predictor of financial instability”. Yet China is not obviously vulnerable to the two most common types of financial crisis. The first is the external sort, like Asia’s in 1997-98. In such cases, foreign lending sparks a boom that eventually fizzles, prompting loans to dry up. Firms, unable to roll over their debts, must cut spending to save money. As consumption and investment slump, net exports rise, helping bring in the money needed to repay foreign creditors. China does not fit this mould, however. More than 95% of its debt is domestic. Capital controls, huge foreign-exchange reserves and a current-account surplus help defend it from capital flight. The other common form of crisis is a domestic balance-sheet recession, like the ones that battered Japan in the early 1990s and America in 2008. In both cases, dud loans swamped the banking system. Central banks then struggled to keep demand growing while firms and households paid down their debts. China’s banks are certainly at risk from a rash of defaults. Markets now price the big lenders at a discount of about 30% on their book value. Yet whereas America’s Congress agreed to recapitalise banks only in the face of imminent collapse, the Chinese authorities will surely be more generous. The central government’s relatively low level of debt, at just over 40% of GDP, means it has plenty of room to help the banks. Indeed, with the right policies, China could survive a deleveraging without too much pain. By borrowing and spending, firms boost demand; when paying down debts they subtract from it. In the absence of new borrowing elsewhere in the economy, growth will atrophy. China’s government could try to compensate by borrowing more itself to finance a fiscal stimulus. It might also use low interest rates to encourage households to borrow more. (This week’s cut in banks’ reserve requirements seems designed to buoy China’s property market.) But orchestrating such a switch in growth engines is not easy. Firms and households might instead be forced to deleverage simultaneously, exacerbating the pain. Household debt in China is low but rising fast, raising the risk of a double crunch in future. Moreover, China would have to ensure that existing bad debts are written down and bankrupt SOEs shut—a tall order politically. Reports this week claimed it plans to lay off 5m workers, but big firms will resist a proper reckoning. The bumbling response to the stockmarket and currency wobbles of the past year calls into question the leadership’s competence. The government may be able to prevent an outright banking crisis, but the slump that usually accompanies a deleveraging will be harder to avoid. Foreign demand could perhaps help make up for the shortfall in domestic spending. Deleveraging commonly occurs alongside large depreciations; as spending in indebted economies falls the value of the currency declines, giving exports a boost. That, in turn, helps put idle capacity to work and bolsters the income of firms repaying loans. Big depreciations can also boost inflation, helping keep the deleveraging economy out of a debt-deflation trap, in which falling prices and incomes make debts with fixed values more expensive to service. Countries that see big depreciations while deleveraging, as many Asian ones did in 1997-98, typically suffer sharp but short downturns before reverting to growth. In contrast, in countries that resist depreciation, as Japan did in the 1990s and peripheral Europe has done recently, deleveraging is slower and more painful. China’s government seems determined to prop up the yuan. But it may struggle to do so while the economy deleverages. The grinding recovery that would imply has political costs. And cutting rates to boost borrowing elsewhere in the economy would place further downward pressure on the yuan, forcing the government either to tighten capital controls yet more, run down its foreign-exchange reserves or let the currency drop. With a deft enough touch, China’s debt bomb could fizzle. The rapid pace of credit growth makes a benign outcome ever less likely, however. Given China’s size, a prolonged deleveraging would place a dangerous drag on global demand growth, which the world’s weakened economies would struggle to cope with. The sooner China turns off the credit taps, the better.FRED McNEILL, an American-football player, died in November at the age of 63. Between 1974 and 1985 he appeared for the Minnesota Vikings. After leaving them he became a lawyer but in later years suffered from dementia and was told that he had signs of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a degenerative brain disease. His recent death has become a milestone in the understanding of brain disorders, for post-mortem examination has confirmed this diagnosis—retrospectively making him the first person to be so diagnosed while alive. CTE is the physical manifestation in the brain of punch-drunk syndrome—or dementia pugilistica, to give its Latinised, medical name. As that name suggests, this form of dementia particularly affects boxers, who are hit on the head as a matter of course. But doctors now understand that it is also a problem in people like Mr McNeill, who get hit on the head accidentally in contact sports. Mr McNeill, along with several other retired players, volunteered to let researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) use a scanning technique called positron-emission tomography (PET) to look at their brains. In his case, and in those of others who had suffered concussion (a form of brain injury that leads to headaches, dizziness and nausea, and causes blackouts in 10% of those who experience it), this revealed a pattern of abnormal protein deposits. Mr McNeill’s death enabled his scans to be compared with the results of an autopsy. That confirmed the PET-based diagnosis. Specifically, PET was recording deposits in his brain of a protein called tau, which is tied to CTE and other neurological disorders, including Alzheimer’s. Knocked about Until quite recently, according to Julian Bailes, a director of the NorthShore Neurological Institute in Evanston, Illinois, it was thought that concussion from accidents in contact sports such as American football was a temporary malfunction rather than a permanent injury. This view began to change in 2005, when Bennet Omalu, a pathologist at the county coroner’s office in Pittsburgh, wanted to find out why another footballer, Mike Webster, had suffered mental ill-health before dying unexpectedly at the age of 50. Webster had become confused, angry and violent, and even bought a Taser gun to treat his own back pain. Dr Omalu discovered tau-protein deposits in his brain, and proposed that the footballer had died of CTE, something which had previously been recognised as a cause of death only in boxers. This revelation, and his fight with the National Football League, which regulates the game, was the subject of a recent film called “Concussion”. Since then, he and Dr Bailes have been collecting the brains of former athletes, and also of old soldiers who have been exposed to explosions, to try to understand who gets CTE, and why. The road to CTE, their research suggests, does indeed start with concussion. One incidence in five of this then leads to post-concussion syndrome, a period of cognitive impairment that may last months, in which patients have headaches, unsteadiness and other problems. And it seems increasingly likely that, in some cases, repeated concussions may lead to CTE. In recent years the underlying biology has started to become apparent. Mostly, this relates to the release of certain chemicals when axons, the filamentous connections between nerve cells, are damaged. Concussion is different from blunt-force trauma, such as that which results from getting hit on the head by a rapidly delivered cricket ball. Then, the injury is caused by directly transmitted shock from the impact. Concussion, by contrast, is caused by the internal movement and distortion of the brain as it bounces around inside the cranium after an impact. This bouncing, research has shown, stretches and deforms bundles of axons that connect different regions of the brain. The deformation shears some axons directly, releasing their protein contents, including tau, which with time can form abnormal tangles similar to those found in Alzheimer’s disease. It also causes abnormal inflows of sodium and calcium ions in unsevered but damaged axons. These, in turn, trigger a process which releases protein-breaking enzymes that destroy the axon, further disrupting the brain’s internal communications. Concussive injury also damages the blood-brain barrier. This is a system of tightly joined cells surrounding the capillaries that service the brain. Its purpose is to control what enters and leaves the central nervous system. One consequence of damaging it is to release into general circulation a brain protein called S100B. The body mounts an immune response against this protein, and the antibodies it generates can find their way back into the brain and harm healthy brain cells. Researchers propose that repeated damage could set the stage for a continuous autoimmune-type attack on the brain. The relationship between brain injury and behavioural symptoms is, nevertheless, unclear. The work at UCLA suggests a characteristic pattern of protein deposits in people who have suffered repeated concussions. The death of Mr McNeill suggests that may lead to CTE and dementia pugilistica. But many uncertainties remain, according to Huw Morris, a clinical neuroscientist at University College, London. One challenge is to connect concussion, post-concussion syndrome and CTE itself. The immediate relevance of this will be to help understand whether a particular injury is likely to have long-term consequences. In this context yet another protein released during concussion, SNTF, is of interest. Work on concussed ice-hockey players suggests its level in the blood after a blow to the head predicts the severity of a concussion. A test for this, or for S100B, might provide a way to determine an injured player’s prognosis. That is a matter of interest both to sportsmen and—women, and to the clubs they play for. Neither coaches nor athletes tend to be good judges of fitness to play after a head injury. It seems likely that many people return to the field long before the brain’s physical healing is complete. And players tend to underreport symptoms. A survey of American university athletes in 2014 found that 20% believed they had suffered a concussion, but almost 80% of those decided to continue to play rather than seek medical attention. Most felt their concussion was not serious and were concerned that revealing their injury would affect their standing with the team. To try to find an objective measure of the damage an episode of concussion has caused, Dr Morris and his colleagues are studying players at Saracens, a rugby club in London. Participants will wear impact sensors to monitor collisions and give blood samples at the end of every game. The study hopes to find chemicals associated with brain injury that could be used to develop a blood test. A similar project is under way at the Translational Genomics Research Institute, in Phoenix, to study American-football players at Arizona State University. Brain scanning, too, may have something to contribute. Magnetic-resonance imaging (MRI), a mainstream and widely available technique, can reveal reduced blood flow in the brains of athletes who have had concussions, even long after the injury. An MRI–based test might thus be developed to determine when or whether a player is well enough to return to play. There are also commercially available apps called HeadCheck and Braincheck, which are intended to help athletes work out their baseline brain performance and allow the organ’s health to be tracked. They are not approved as medical devices, so cannot be used to diagnose concussion. But they may let players, especially amateurs, monitor themselves after blows to the head to search for signs that they might need medical advice. Suffer the little children In the end, adult athletes can make up their own minds about what risks they wish to take. Children, though, cannot. It is therefore children who should attract the greatest attention. Not only are some children obliged to play contact sports at school, but they may also be participating in an environment that encourages a “stiff upper lip” when they are injured. Yet it has been clear since a study published in 2012 by Andrew Mayer at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque that subtle brain changes in children who have sustained a concussion persist for months after the injury, even when there are no longer any obvious symptoms. Work published last December by Charles Hillman of the University of Illinois found that children who had sustained a single sports-related concussion still had impaired brain function two years later. Ten-year-olds with a history of concussion performed worse on tests of working memory, attention and impulse control than did uninjured confrères. Among the children with a history of concussion, those who were injured earlier in life had larger deficits. This study was small (it involved 15 injured participants) but if subsequent research confirms it, that will be great cause for concern. Concussion—once an invisible injury—is rapidly being illuminated. Many sports-lovers have been disturbed to learn that injuries on the field have caused their heroes to undergo profound personality changes. And many parents now worry, with good reason, about their children playing sports. Taking one for the team is all very well. But the price of doing so may be paid over a lifetime.Peril on the sea STORMY seas can wreak havoc on ships and oil rigs, but the damage they do pales beside that which a rogue wave can dole out. These behemoths, which may be up to 30 metres (100 feet) high, can badly damage, and even sink, all but the largest merchant vessels. They form when smaller, harmless waves meld into one. Until now, predicting them has proved impossible. But Will Cousins and Themistoklis Sapsis, two mechanical engineers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, think they have cracked the problem. Most ocean waves move independently of one another. Sometimes, though, they travel in groups. Waves within a group have the potential to share energy via a phenomenon called modulation instability, in which one wave grows at the expense of the others and all of the group’s power is thus concentrated into it. Past teams of researchers who have attempted to predict such rogues have tried monitoring every wave in a region using radar, and then forecasting the behaviour of each of them. This needs a lot of processing power—far more than is carried on board an average merchant vessel. Moreover, it can take hours to run the calculation, which rather diminishes its value. Yet Dr Cousins and Dr Sapsis suspected they could bypass these problems by ignoring most of the waves in an area and homing in on only a tiny, relevant subset of them. Their system starts by tapping into statistics collected over the years by instruments such as buoys about a particular part of the ocean surface. Using these data, it works out how that sea area normally behaves. It then analyses this behaviour alongside data on wave heights and movements collected in real time by ships’ radar, looking for groups of waves that might possibly end up forming a rogue. Only when it has identified these does it bring the full power of the computer to bear on them. It thus conserves its resources for those analyses that actually matter. The two researchers report in the Journal of Fluid Mechanics this week that because their algorithm is so parsimonious, it runs well on the sorts of laptops skippers often take to sea. They also report that when they tested it on 100 simulations containing 336 rogue waves, it was able to run all of the calculations needed to predict such waves in a matter of seconds. There were false alarms—91 of them. But, crucially, the algorithm successfully flagged up all 336 “real” rogues, and did so an average of 153 seconds before a putative wave would have struck. That is not enough time to get out of a wave’s path. Nor, in the researchers’ view, is reorienting the vessel so that it meets a wave bow first (which would be a natural response to stop a ship rolling and capsizing when hit) of much value in the face of rogues of this magnitude. The system does provide enough time, though, for a crew to batten down the hatches, both literally and metaphorically, and to brace for impact before they are hit, thus increasing the chance that both they and the vessel will survive.
