IN 1971 the fastest car in the world was the Ferrari Daytona, capable of 280kph (174mph). The world’s tallest buildings were New York’s twin towers, at 415 metres (1,362 feet). In November that year Intel launched the first commercial microprocessor chip, the 4004, containing 2,300 tiny transistors, each the size of a red blood cell. Since then chips have improved in line with the prediction of Gordon Moore, Intel’s co-founder. According to his rule of thumb, known as Moore’s law, processing power doubles roughly every two years as smaller transistors are packed ever more tightly onto silicon wafers, boosting performance and reducing costs. A modern Intel Skylake processor contains around 1.75 billion transistors—half a million of them would fit on a single transistor from the 4004—and collectively they deliver about 400,000 times as much computing muscle. This exponential progress is difficult to relate to the physical world. If cars and skyscrapers had improved at such rates since 1971, the fastest car would now be capable of a tenth of the speed of light; the tallest building would reach half way to the Moon. The impact of Moore’s law is visible all around us. Today 3 billion people carry smartphones in their pockets: each one is more powerful than a room-sized supercomputer from the 1980s. Countless industries have been upended by digital disruption. Abundant computing power has even slowed nuclear tests, because atomic weapons are more easily tested using simulated explosions rather than real ones. Moore’s law has become a cultural trope: people inside and outside Silicon Valley expect technology to get better every year. But now, after five decades, the end of Moore’s law is in sight (see Technology Quarterly). Making transistors smaller no longer guarantees that they will be cheaper or faster. This does not mean progress in computing will suddenly stall, but the nature of that progress is changing. Chips will still get better, but at a slower pace (number-crunching power is now doubling only every 2.5 years, says Intel). And the future of computing will be defined by improvements in three other areas, beyond raw hardware performance. Faith no Moore The first is software. This week AlphaGo, a program which plays the ancient game of Go, beat Lee Sedol, one of the best human players, in the first two of five games scheduled in Seoul. Go is of particular interest to computer scientists because of its complexity: there are more possible board positions than there are particles in the universe (see article). As a result, a Go-playing system cannot simply rely on computational brute force, provided by Moore’s law, to prevail. AlphaGo relies instead on “deep learning” technology, modelled partly on the way the human brain works. Its success this week shows that huge performance gains can be achieved through new algorithms. Indeed, slowing progress in hardware will provide stronger incentives to develop cleverer software. The second area of progress is in the “cloud”, the networks of data centres that deliver services over the internet. When computers were stand-alone devices, whether mainframes or desktop PCs, their performance depended above all on the speed of their processor chips. Today computers become more powerful without changes to their hardware. They can draw upon the vast (and flexible) number-crunching resources of the cloud when doing things like searching through e-mails or calculating the best route for a road trip. And interconnectedness adds to their capabilities: smartphone features such as satellite positioning, motion sensors and wireless-payment support now matter as much as processor speed. The third area of improvement lies in new computing architectures—specialised chips optimised for particular jobs, say, and even exotic techniques that exploit quantum-mechanical weirdness to crunch multiple data sets simultaneously. There was less need to pursue these sorts of approaches when generic microprocessors were improving so rapidly, but chips are now being designed specifically for cloud computing, neural-network processing, computer vision and other tasks. Such specialised hardware will be embedded in the cloud, to be called upon when needed. Once again, that suggests the raw performance of end-user devices matters less than it did, because the heavy lifting is done elsewhere. Speed isn’t everything What will this mean in practice? Moore’s law was never a physical law, but a self-fulfilling prophecy—a triumph of central planning by which the technology industry co-ordinated and synchronised its actions. Its demise will make the rate of technological progress less predictable; there are likely to be bumps in the road as new performance-enhancing technologies arrive in fits and starts. But given that most people judge their computing devices on the availability of capabilities and features, rather than processing speed, it may not feel like much of a slowdown to consumers. For companies, the end of Moore’s law will be disguised by the shift to cloud computing. Already, firms are upgrading PCs less often, and have stopped operating their own e-mail servers. This model depends, however, on fast and reliable connectivity. That will strengthen demand for improvements to broadband infrastructure: those with poor connectivity will be less able to benefit as improvements in computing increasingly happen inside cloud providers’ data centres. For the technology industry itself, the decline of Moore’s law strengthens the logic for centralised cloud computing, already dominated by a few big firms: Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Alibaba, Baidu and Tencent. They are working hard to improve the performance of their cloud infrastructure. And they are hunting for startups touting new tricks: Google bought Deepmind, the British firm that built AlphaGo, in 2014. For more than 50 years, the seemingly inexorable shrinking of transistors made computers steadily cheaper and more capable. As Moore’s law fades, progress will be less metronomic. But computers and other devices will continue to become more powerful—just in different and more varied ways.YOU don’t have to be Brazilian to have been astonished by the events of recent days. In the early hours of March 4th police showed up at an apartment block in São Bernardo do Campo, near São Paulo, and took away for questioning a former president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who is beloved by many for his humble origins and his pro-poor policies. They were looking for evidence that Lula and his associates benefited from the gargantuan bribery scandal centred on Petrobras, the state-controlled oil company (see article). Five days later, in a separate case, prosecutors charged the former president with hiding his ownership of a beachfront flat. Dozens of politicians suspected of taking bribes, and businessmen thought to have paid them, have been caught up in the Petrobras scandal. Lula, president from 2003 to 2010, is the most consequential figure among them. He denies wrongdoing. On March 8th Marcelo Odebrecht, former head of Brazil’s biggest construction company, was sentenced to more than 19 years in prison for corrupt dealings with Petrobras. Brazilians take consolation from seeing the rich and powerful held to account. Sérgio Moro, a judge who is leading lava jato (car wash), the main investigation into the scandal, is a hero to many. But the scandal is also the focus of a ferocious political battle between the left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), to which both Lula and his successor as president, Dilma Rousseff, belong, and an opposition composed of disparate political parties and popular movements. Lula’s detention and the filing of charges against him have escalated those hostilities. Anti-government groups are to hold demonstrations on March 13th to renew their demand that Ms Rousseff be impeached. Her allies intend to hold counter-protests on the same day. Both camps are in danger of forgetting that justice is, or ought to be, blind. PT politicians accuse prosecutors of plotting a “coup”. But the opposition’s demands for impeachment have also raced ahead of evidence that would justify such a drastic step. The one charge that has stuck, that Ms Rousseff used accounting tricks to hide the true size of the deficit in 2014, does not provide legal grounds for evicting her from office. Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts Brazilians rarely settle their political differences through violence, but the ferocity on both sides risks damaging the consensus that underpins the country’s admirable democracy. The PT and its allies are the worst offenders. After Lula’s detention the party’s leader in the lower house of Congress declared a “political war”. In a tweet it later erased, the PT called Lula a “political prisoner”. At the same time, in forcibly detaining Lula, rather than asking him to volunteer to be questioned, Mr Moro may also have gone too far. A supreme-court justice accused him of breaking “basic rules”. Keep calm, and carry on investigating The Petrobras scandal could yet fell the government. The electoral court is looking into whether Ms Rousseff’s re-election campaign in 2014 was financed with money siphoned off from the oil company. If so, the court could annul the election and call a new one, which any candidate from the PT would almost certainly lose. A new government would stand a better chance of pulling Brazil out of its morass. Faced with a choice between sane economics and political survival, Ms Rousseff has chosen the latter. She has backpedalled on fiscal reforms, which alone can restore confidence in an economy suffering its worst recession since the 1930s. Her departure would, surely, be cause for celebration—but only if it comes about through the courts or the ballot box, not cynical political machinations. Correction: An earlier version of this leader said that Lula was president from 2003 to 2013. We were too generous. His presidency ended in 2010. This has been corrected.IN DECEMBER an adviser to China’s government predicted that GDP growth would soon rebound. Now was a good time, he said, to buy shares in companies that mined copper, nickel and coal—though even he drew the line at investing in iron ore, whose supply was simply too abundant. The adviser sounded insanely bullish back then; he might now rue his caution. On March 7th the price of iron ore jumped by 19%, a record one-day rise, in a sign of renewed optimism about China’s growth. The spike in the iron-ore price came hard on the heels of a speech by Li Keqiang, China’s prime minister, to the annual National People’s Congress in Beijing. In it, Mr Li announced a punchy GDP growth target of 6.5-7% for 2016, along with the means he hoped would secure it: a bigger budget deficit than had been planned for last year and faster credit growth. With sufficient stimulus China will avoid a sharp economic slowdown. But Mr Li did not simply open the macroeconomic spigots. He hinted that the fiscal boost would be designed to help rebalance the economy: China is aiming for just 3% growth in government revenue this year, suggesting that more of the deficit will come from tax cuts to private firms. He made clear that reforms to reduce overcapacity in low-end and inefficient industries were a priority. And by switching from a single-figure growth target to a range, Mr Li gave himself more flexibility in trading off some GDP growth for more reform. Look closer, though, and there is little sign of any real commitment to reform (see article). Promises to slim industries such as steel and coal sound tough—the government expects nearly 2m workers will be laid off—but the planned reduction would make only a small dent in oversupply. Instead the government seems to be doubling down on its well-worn recipe of debt- and investment-fuelled growth. Reaching the goal of 6.5-7% GDP growth will require either a fudging of the figures or investment in projects of dubious worth. A second train line to remote and mountainous Tibet is planned. Banks are being leant on to juice up the economy. Credit is growing at twice the rate of nominal GDP, in a country already overburdened by private debt. A big increase in the money supply will put downward pressure on China’s currency, which in turn will lead either to a rapid rundown in foreign-exchange reserves or a devaluation. China's debt binge: putting of the inevitable In theory, China’s capital controls can ease the pressure, by making it harder for money to leave the country. And the latest figures suggest they are becoming more effective. Reserves dropped by just $29 billion in February, to $3.2 trillion, after three months of heavier falls. But even if China can successfully police its financial borders, rapid credit growth will fuel asset prices at home. Wary of the stockmarket, investors with cash to spare see property as the safest bet. Unregulated online lenders are helping them pile on leverage, skirting rules requiring minimum down-payments on homes. There are worrying signs of a bubble in several big cities: house prices in Shenzhen have risen by 53% in the past year (see article). Supporting a sagging economy with cheap money and tax cuts is sensible. But China also needs to put in place the structural reforms that will make such stimulus both more effective and less destabilising. INTERACTIVE CHART: China's housing affordability, city by city The mañana strategy The default of a few of the most hopeless state-owned enterprises, something Mr Li again promised in his speech, would set a useful precedent. It might also nudge banks into lending to profitable businesses instead of firms they expect to be bailed out by government. New homes with few ready buyers in lower-tier cities should be turned into social housing; better that than trying to pump up a broader property bubble to clear unsold stocks. In places where house prices are soaring, the government should summon the courage to introduce a long-discussed property tax to cool speculation. And now would be a good time to recapitalise China’s banks in readiness for a write-down of the latent bad debts on their balance-sheets. Yet the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, apparently wishes to avoid even mild turbulence in the economy, at least until he has appointed his own nominees to the Standing Committee of the Politburo, a key decision-making body, in 2017. (Many suspect that reform will remain elusive even after that date.) Mr Xi is scarcely alone among world leaders in setting policy with an eye on the political calendar. But financial markets cannot be relied on to play along with this schedule. At some point, China must deal with its excess debts and industrial overcapacity. By taking bolder steps on reforms now, China would do more to entrench faith in its longer-term economic outlook than stimulus measures ever could.THROUGHOUT the cold war, Turkey was one of Europe’s bastions against Soviet armies. Now it is being turned into Europe’s barrier against the huddled masses of the Middle East. At a summit on March 7th, European leaders and the Turkish prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, agreed on the outline of a strikingly ambitious deal. Turkey will take back all the boat-people setting off from its shores to Greece. In return, Europe is promising lots of things: money; the resettlement of many refugees now in Turkey; visa-free travel for Turks; and a revival of negotiations for Turkey to join the European Union. Every element of the arrangement is politically, legally or morally problematic. To make matters worse, the behaviour of the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, is increasingly autocratic: the weekend before striking the accord with the EU, his government took over a prominent opposition newspaper. But Europe is doing the right thing. The deal’s principles are sound (and have, indeed, been advocated by this newspaper): it would control chaotic mass-migration while preserving a generous European asylum system, and enlist Turkey as a gatekeeper by binding it more closely to Europe. It offers the best prospect of ending the uncontrolled influx that has been feeding anti-immigrant populism and undermining EU integration. And it provides a way for Europe to seek Mr Erdogan’s co-operation without flinching from criticising him. Deal with Erdogan Most of the 1.2m migrants who arrived in the EU last year came via Turkey. Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, had been negotiating a deal whereby asylum-seekers would be sifted on arrival in “hotspots” in Greece and Italy, and those rejected would be sent back to Turkey. The new scheme, championed by the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, is a more ambitious arrangement—all boat-people would be sent back to Turkey and processed there. This would avoid turning Greece into a refugee camp, offer a stronger disincentive to illegal migration and ensure that Europe grants protection to the most deserving, not those most able to pay people-smugglers. But lawyers and UN agencies are already questioning the legality of mass deportation, which would require Europe to declare Turkey a “safe” country for asylum-seekers. For all its generosity to Syrians, Turkey formally applies the 1951 convention on refugees only to those fleeing war or persecution in Europe. Unless Turkey can bring its asylum system up to international norms, the EU may have to fall back on Mr Tusk’s original plan. Either way, Europe will have to be generous to refugees—it has promised to take one Syrian from Turkey for every one that is sent back from Greece—though it still cannot agree how to share them out for resettlement. Visa liberalisation will be contentious, too. Turkey is the only EU candidate country not to enjoy visa-free travel already. The biggest obstacle, a framework for Turkey to take back illegal migrants, would be addressed by the new deal. But Turkey has yet to meet many of the EU’s 70-odd preconditions, including the introduction of biometric passports. And while a deal may limit the influx of Syrians, Afghans and others, freer travel would inevitably increase the migration of Turks into the EU. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers Hardest of all will be any discussion of Turkey’s accession to the EU. Not even Turkey’s closest friends would claim that it meets the democratic standards required to begin EU negotiations, let alone gain membership. Mr Erdogan would dislike the constraints and scrutiny that membership would bring. So Europe should call his bluff by opening the two accession chapters that Mr Erdogan least wants to discuss—chapters 23 and 24, on justice and the rule of law. It should also press Turkey to do more to support talks on the reunification of Cyprus. Ultimately, Europeans must come to terms with two realities. First, they cannot change geography: they need Turkey because it stands between Europe and much of the Eurasian landmass. Second, they cannot seal their borders entirely: the only alternative to chaos is a fair and orderly migration system, which would most benefit Europe—and those fleeing war. This week’s proposed deal is messy, but it is Europe’s best option.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] The Trump revolution You used so much ink trying to convince us that Donald Trump is not fit for office (“Time to fire him”, February 27th). Do you think the type of person who reads your erudite publication would ever consider voting for him? Not likely. The people who will vote for The Donald are the disaffected bitter-clingers whom the last candidate you passionately begged us to vote for—Barack Obama—disparaged in his campaign. Those same disaffected people haven’t been doing well over the past eight years, and in case you haven’t noticed, they are mad as hell. Government isn’t working for us. There are few good jobs, we’ve been stuck with a joke of a health-care system, the few rights we still enjoy are under siege and the future looks dim for our children. We are powerless to foment a revolution while working two part-time jobs to make ends meet, so all we can do is register a protest against the Dickensian nightmare that the elites have created for us by voting. Apparently, nobody listened (Republican or Democrat) to what we were trying to say in 2012. Come November, you’ll be hearing from us again, louder and clearer. MARK KRASCHEL I say we look to Plato, as quoted by Cicero in “On Duties”: keep the good of the people clearly in view and care for the welfare of the whole body politic and not the interests of one party. Mr Trump may not fit your image of what an American president should be, but the American people crave a leader who has the interests of the body politic at heart, not the interests of a party. But, you may wonder, are we another Weimar Republic looking to fill a vacuum of leadership and greatness? PETER ROBERTS Although it may have been true in the past to refer to the Republicans as “one of the world’s great political parties”, this is no longer the case. This is a party which has promoted some of Mr Trump’s more noxious ideas, just in coded language. It has abandoned its responsibility to govern. The prospect of a President Trump is indeed worrying, but after years of nativism and cynically pandering to the baser instincts of the masses, Mr Trump is the candidate the Republican Party deserves. COLE COUTURE Your cover of Donald Trump as Uncle Sam pins very nicely to my dart board. Thank you. DAVE LEWIS The debates and the election have turned into a reality TV show, perfect for a media feeding-frenzy. No wonder Mr Trump is winning. He understands how to entice the media and their fascination with the Kardashians and their ilk. I’m not worried. When President Trump takes on Xi Jinping over the South China Sea, what chance will President Xi have? What does he know of celebrity TV? We’ll destroy them in the ratings. DENNIS MERRITT “From the Tower to the White House” (February 20th) stated that Mr Trump was “sensible enough to get out of casinos in Atlantic City”. With each successive bankruptcy of his casino company (four in total), his ownership interest was diluted down to practically nothing. I’m not sure that this qualifies as a sensible exit, although Mr Trump continues to portray his serial bankruptcies as a brilliant strategy. RICHARD COHEN   An end in sight * Thank you so much for your article highlighting the Global Trachoma Mapping Project (“Now is the time to say ‘goodbye’”, February 27th). The agony of the trachoma infection (dubbed “blinking hell” at Sightsavers) is profound and the blindness it causes impacts both individuals and their communities. Know thyself * You assert that American states “such as South Dakota and Nevada” carry “strong secrecy laws and weak oversight” but fail to provide the substance to back the claim (“The Biggest Loophole of All”, February 20th). Instead you validate the assertion with vague statements derived from Die Zeit, the German newspaper, noting that “Everyone is doing or looking into it.” This is both an intellectual and geographic stretch. What would Tim do? * One question I would like to ask Tim Cook in the dispute between Apple and the FBI (“Code to ruin?”, February 27th) is, if the San Bernardino shootings had happened in China and the Chinese government asked you either to unlock the attacker’s iPhone or have your products banned, what would you do? The situation in the Maldives You suggest that criminal charges against opposition politicians in the Maldives are “overblown” (“Archipelago of ire”, February 20th). In fact, the charge against the former president is very clear: ordering the arrest of a judge for releasing one of his political critics, a crime he has publicly admitted to. Charges against another Islamist politician stem from his call for violence against the police. The current president, Abdulla Yameen, is confronted with political opponents with scant regard for the law, yet he personally wants multiparty talks, under foreign mediation, to reconcile the challenges the Maldives faces. This initiative did not feature in your piece, and neither did the views expressed by British members of Parliament who visited recently: that it is the claims of opposition politicians, from prison numbers to the threat from terrorism and more, that are overblown. Our government was voted into office in an election recognised by the international community as free and fair, another detail that is too often overlooked. HASSAN SHIFAU English commercial law You repeated the canard that commercial law firms benefit from the courts (“Law in a time of austerity”, February 27th). A more nuanced point might be that English law firms have benefited from the long cultural tradition of English law which has allowed them to build immensely successful international practices, but again the point is too simplistic. The partners in the great English commercial law firms started investing their own money in foreign offices and banging the international drum for the use of English law 40 years ago. Without that personal investment, English law, and its courts, judges, barristers and English commercial law firms, would have remained domestic and parochial, irrespective of its long heritage. With that investment, the international practice of law is one of the few British business sectors where we can claim to be a world leader, with commercial firms generating 1% of Britain’s GDP and a trade surplus of over £3 billion ($4.3 billion). ALASDAIR DOUGLAS * You said that “Bodies such as the Law Society and the Bar Council often act as much to protect their members’ interests as to regulate them.” The Bar Council delegated responsibility for regulating barristers to the independent Bar Standards Board in 2006. As the representative body for barristers in England and Wales the Bar Council acts in its members’ interests as well as in the public interest. For example: in relation to challenging proposals to restrict judicial review; supporting the removal of the criminal courts charge; and safeguarding access to justice especially for the poorest and most vulnerable in society. The puck of the Irish The photo you used of Xi Jinping kicking a football, in a story about China’s spending on foreign players, was taken in Dublin’s Croke Park, the headquarters of the Gaelic Athletic Association (“Patriotic goal”, February 27th). The GAA is the governing body for Ireland’s popular indigenous sports of hurling, handball and Gaelic football. Founded in 1884, it has helped heal divisions and nurture community spirit. It would be difficult to overstate the role it continues to play in Irish life. Today, Gaelic games are played throughout the world and GAA clubs support the Irish diaspora. If Mr Xi needs a reminder of the benefits of this spirit he should visit his own local club, Beijing GAA. RONAN MURPHY Mr Xi may dream that China could one day lift the World Cup, but with only 33 teams (31 county teams, and teams from London and New York), it might be more realistic for China to try and win the coveted All-Ireland Gaelic football title. Indeed, one player with Chinese links, Jason Sherlock, who has an Irish mother and a father from Hong Kong, succeeded in winning the title with Dublin in 1995. STEPHEN O’KANE * Letters appear online onlyNOT so long ago Jean Pierre Nzabahimana planted his fields on a hillside in western Rwanda by scattering seed held back from the last harvest. The seedlings grew up in clumps: Mr Nzabahimana, a lean, muscular man, uses his hands to convey a vaguely bushy shape. Harvesting them was not too difficult, since they did not produce much. This year the field nearest to his house has been cultivated with military precision. In February he harvested a good crop of maize (corn, to Americans) from plants that grew in disciplined lines, separated by precise distances which Mr Nzabahimana can recite. He then planted climbing beans in the same field. On this and on four other fields that add up to about half a hectare (one and a quarter acres) Mr Nzabahimana now grows enough to enable him to afford meat twice a month. He owns a cow and has about 180,000 Rwandan francs ($230) in the bank. Although he remains poor by any measure, he has entered the class of poor dreamers. Perhaps he will build a shop in the village, he says. Hopefully one of his four children will become a driver or a mechanic. According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, Rwanda’s farmers produced 792,000 tonnes of grain in 2014—more than three times as much as in 2000. Production of maize, a vital crop in east Africa, jumped sevenfold. Agricultural statistics can be dicey, African ones especially so. But Rwanda’s plunging poverty rate makes these plausible, and so does the view from Gitega. Another farmer, Dative Mukandayisenga, says most of her neighbours are getting much more from their land. Perhaps only one in five persists with the old, scattershot “broadcast” sowing—and most of the holdouts are old people. Rwanda is exceptional. But in this respect it is not all that exceptional. Cereal production tripled in Ethiopia between 2000 and 2014, although a severe drought associated with the current El Niño made for a poor harvest last year. The value of crops grown in Cameroon, Ghana and Zambia has risen by at least 50% in the past decade; Kenya has done almost as well. Millions of African farmers like Mr Nzabahimana have become more secure and better-fed as a result of better-managed, better-fertilised crops grown from hybrid seeds. They are demonstrating that small farmers can benefit from improved techniques. Despite some big, much-publicised land sales to foreign investors, almost two-thirds of African farms are less than a hectare in their extent, so this is good news. Progress need not mean turfing millions of smallholders off the land, as some had feared—though by making them richer it may yet give them and their children the means to move, should they wish. For the time being, though, more than half of the adult workers south of the Sahara are employed in agriculture; in Rwanda, about four-fifths are. With so many farmers and not much heavy industry, boosting agricultural productivity is among the best ways of raising living standards across the continent. And there is a long way to go. Sub-Saharan Africa’s farms remain far less productive than Latin American and Asian ones. The continent as a whole exports less farm produce than Thailand. The revolution will not be broadcast Since 1961 the total value of all agricultural production in Africa has risen fourfold. This is almost exactly the improvement seen in India, which sounds encouraging; after all, India had a “green revolution” during that time. But whereas Indian farmers got far higher grain yields per hectare, in Africa much of the new production just came from new land. In the early 1960s sub-Saharan Africa had 1.5m square kilometres given over to arable farming; now it uses 800,000 square kilometres more. Another thing African farming had more of was people. Even today, when population growth has slowed in rural Asia and Latin America, in rural Africa it is still 2%. More people meant more workers, which can mean more yield from a farm in absolute terms. But it also meant more mouths to feed. Africa’s population grew more steeply than India’s, and as a result production per person fell in much of the continent during the late 20th century. The explanations for Africa’s difficulties begin with geology. Much African bedrock is ancient, dating back to before the continent’s time at the heart of a huge land mass known as Gondwanaland. For hundreds of millions of years Africa has seen little of the tectonic activity that provides fresh rock for the wind and rain to grind into fertile soils. There is some naturally fertile land in the south and around the East African Rift, which runs through Rwanda. But much of the interior is barely worth farming (see map). Only about 4% of arable land south of the Sahara is irrigated, so local weather patterns determine what can be grown. Those patterns vary a lot from time to time and place to place. Variations in time make farmers more inclined to stick with hardy but low-yielding varieties of crop. Variations in space mean that crops and diets differ a lot across the continent. In Rwanda, white maize and beans are the staple foods. In other places millet, teff, sorghum, cassava or sweet potatoes are more important. Asia’s green revolution was a comparatively simple matter, says Donald Larson of the World Bank, because Asia has only two crucial crops: rice and wheat. Provide high-yield varieties of both and much of the technical work is done. African agriculture is so heterogeneous that no leap forward in the farming of a single crop could transform it. The continent needs a dozen green revolutions. Humans have added to these handicaps in all sorts of ways. Beginning in the 1960s, Africa’s newly independent nations—often, thanks to colonial borders, small and landlocked—taxed farm produce heavily to finance industrial ventures which often failed. They did little to improve the colonial era’s scant and inappropriate infrastructure, which tended to concentrate on railways from mines to ports. Africa still has a thin road network; in rural areas the roads are often primitive and impassable after a heavy shower. Governments frequently imposed price controls, reducing what farmers could earn. And in some places, such as Ethiopia, farmers were subjected to oppressive command-and-control regimes that sapped their will to work. “We lost two and a half to three decades,” says Ousmane Badiane of the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). The sorry history of fertiliser subsidies shows the cost of official ineptitude. Worldwide, about 124kg of artificial fertiliser is used per hectare of farmland per year. Many would argue that this is too high. But the 15kg per hectare in sub-Saharan Africa is definitely too low (see chart). Some countries, like Ghana and Malawi, have thrown money at fertiliser subsidies in flush years only to cut back when budgets tighten. Subsidised fertiliser intended for smallholders has often been resold at market rates with middlemen pocketing the profit. Nigeria’s system became so corrupt that in 2012 the agriculture minister, Akinwumi Adesina, estimated that as little as 11% of subsidised fertiliser was actually getting to small farmers at the subsidised price. Like the clumps of earth that African farmers whack with their hand hoes, these natural and human obstacles are stubborn and hard to break down. But bit by bit they can be worn away. African agriculture is improving not because of any single scientific or political breakthrough, but because the things that have retarded productivity for decades, both on the farm and off, are being assailed from many sides. For farmers, perhaps the most potent symbol of change is hybrid seed, often dyed a bright colour and usually burdened with an unlovely name, such as SC719. Joe DeVries of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa, based in Kenya, says that by raising the prospect of higher yields, these seeds persuade farmers to spend money and time on fertiliser, weeding and pesticides. Today AGRA collaborates with more than 100 seed companies, representing about a third of the market. They produced about 125,000 tonnes of improved seed last year—up from 26,000 tonnes in 2010. Many of these seeds are being developed in Africa for Africans. N’Tji Coulibaly of the Institut d’Economie Rurale in Mali has developed six hybrid maize varieties. Because these tolerate drought well, they can be planted north and east of the capital, Bamako, in fields where sorghum is now the dominant crop. As though in retaliation, another nearby team has created a variety of sorghum that yields about 40% more than the indigenous kind even without additional fertiliser. Governments and charities are rushing to teach farmers how to plant the new seeds. In Rwanda, One Acre Fund, a charity, provides its clients seeds, fertiliser, know-how and, crucially, credit. To upgrade to hybrids means changing to a system where new seed has to be bought every year, because the plants that grow from hybrid seed do not produce seed of the same sort. And small farmers are usually starved of credit—one large survey for the World Bank found that only 1% of Nigerian farmers borrowed to buy fertiliser. Last year One Acre Fund’s large network of instructors, farmers themselves, taught some 305,000 more east African smallholders skills such as carefully spacing seeds so as to maximise productivity and measuring fertiliser using bottle caps. Mr Nzabahimana is a client, as are about a third of the farmers thereabouts. In parts of Kenya where One Acre Fund has been operating for at least four years, even the farmers who are not clients get about 10% more maize per hectare than similar farmers in areas where the charity recently arrived. Know-how spreads. Too few trucks, too many tariffs Untouched, if marginal, land used to be plentiful in Africa. Today it is rare, so farmers must work out how to grow more on each plot. And even countries with plenty of land have little to spare near their growing cities; given the difficulties of moving fresh produce over long distances that makes intensification near the big markets particularly attractive. These urban markets can also change what farmers grow. Farmers close to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital, are switching from red teff to fancier white teff because that is what city folk increasingly want. White teff is harder to grow, so the farmers are using more fertiliser and improved seed. Elsewhere, urban hunger for meat and eggs is persuading more farmers to keep cows and chickens. Poor roads are not the only reason it is hard to move farm produce long distances. In 2013 the UN estimated that African businesses that exported goods to other African countries faced average tariffs of 8.7%, compared with 2.5% for those that exported goods beyond Africa. But the tariffs and barriers are gradually coming down. Maximo Torero, a division director at IFPRI, points out that 31% of the food calories exported from African countries went to other African countries in the mid-2000s—a low proportion, but an improvement on the 14% rate ten years earlier. The El Niño droughts of the last few months in Ethiopia and southern Africa have not yet led to widespread bans on food exports. Reform has been slower in another area. African farmers often have few or no rights over the land they work. Insecure farmers tend not to invest much, either because they do not see the point or because they cannot get credit. These problems can be particularly bad for women. One study in Ghana found that women farmers were less likely to let their land lie fallow (a simple way of increasing its fertility). They seem to have feared losing it if they did not plant it continuously. Well-intentioned attempts to entitle farmers have sometimes made things worse for women: as customary rights are replaced with legal ones, men tend to assert control. Still, things are improving in a few countries. In Ethiopia, where land is formally owned by the state, farmers’ rights to cultivate it and rent it out have been clarified. That reform, combined with a change to family law, seems to have increased women’s control. The Rwandan government has changed inheritance law to give women more rights. Few of these benign changes would have taken place without a rash of superior government. Sub-Saharan Africa still has some awful regimes in Equatorial Guinea and Zimbabwe (where agricultural productivity is dropping). It has some failed states such as the Central African Republic, South Sudan and Somalia. Yet some terrible rulers have gone and border wars are rare. In part as a result, the region is more placid than it was. The Centre for Systemic Peace, an American think-tank, tallies civil and ethnic conflicts, assigning them a seriousness score of one to ten. Between 1998 and 2014 the total conflict score in sub-Saharan Africa fell from 55 to 30. More peaceful land is more productive. So is land where the people are healthier. The World Health Organisation estimates that 395,000 Africans died from malaria in 2015, compared with 764,000 in 2000. New HIV infections are down by about two-fifths in the same period. There is still much to do. When Mr Nzabahimana wants to sell food, he simply hawks it around the village or hires a woman to carry it on her head to Rubengera, a tiny market town a few miles away. He does not know in advance what price his crops will fetch. As Africa’s fields grow more productive, such thin, fragmented markets are becoming a bigger problem. Too few agricultural buyers reach villages, and the ones that make it can often dictate prices. “The traders have all the information—they pay the farmers what they want,” says Mr Adesina, who is now head of the African Development Bank. Technology can help, to an extent: in Kenya, where mobile phones are ubiquitous, farmers can subscribe to services that give them price data. But rural roads will have to improve, as well as rural phones, if smallholders are to obtain better prices. So will the ability to store crops somewhere other than in their houses, where the weevils get them. Processing foods near farms, something Mr Adesina is keen on, would help reduce such waste and provide decent paying jobs. A lack of clouds on the horizon Another boost would come from better livestock. Far more of Africa is grazed than is planted, and demand for animal products is rising. Yet there are few meaty analogues to hybrid seeds. African cows are increasingly crossbred with European breeds to create tough animals that produce lots of milk; fodder yields are improving, just like yields of other crops. But animal vaccines remain expensive and are often unavailable, since they need to be kept cold. A pastoral revolution remains in the future. Mr Adesina likes to say that African agriculture is not a way of life or a development activity; it is a business, and it is as a business that it will grow, through investment and access to markets. That said, it will remain a risky business, one in which a vital input, rain, cannot be controlled—as millions of farmers are regretting at the moment. One way to face that risk is to encourage irrigation, especially water-hoarding drip-irrigation. Another is to offer some sort of crop insurance that pays out in particularly bad seasons, as Ethiopia is trying to do. Both are good options. How much they can do in the face of increasing climate change, which is likely to render the dry parts of the continent drier still, and which will do some of its damage just by making peak temperatures even hotter, remains to be seen. Some crops may become impossible to grow in the places where they are grown today. As with hoes and hard soils, there are no easy breakthroughs to be had. But for a long time Mr Adesina’s idea of African agriculture as a business to build up would have seemed alien inside the continent and fantastical beyond it. That it no longer does is as strong a basis for hope as any.
