IN THE Nuvotronics factory in Durham, North Carolina, small is beautiful. The firm, founded in 2008, uses a process resembling 3D printing to make miniaturised radio chips for jets and satellites. Typically, such chips are the size of a chocolate bar; Nuvotronics’s widgets are smaller than a breath-mint. Such innovation is lucrative; every kilogram saved makes a satellite $15,000 cheaper to launch. Nuvotronics is part of a cluster of high-tech firms that have increased Durham’s GDP per person by 28% since 2001. By the same measure, North Carolina as a whole grew by just 3% over the same period. Durham’s success reflects an emerging trend: high-flying cities, and the successful firms they contain, are detaching from the rest of the economy. Cities have long been the most productive places to do business, because they bring firms, customers and workers closer together. A banker in New York is only a taxi ride away from her clients; a new restaurant there immediately has 8.4m potential customers on its doorstep. Where clever people congregate, innovation results. For the most successful cities, these advantages seem to be getting bigger. In 2001 the richest 50 cities and their surroundings produced 27% more per head than America as a whole. Today’s richest cities make 34% more. Measured by total GDP, the decoupling is greater still, because prosperous cities are sucking in disproportionate numbers of urbanising Americans. Between 2010 and 2014 America’s population grew by 3.1%; its cities, by 3.7%. But the 50 richest cities swelled by 9.2%. Durham, whose population grew by about 7% in that period, provides some hints as to what makes a place flourish. The city thrives on its proximity to three leading universities—Duke, North Carolina State and the University of North Carolina. Far-sighted planning in 1959 led Durham and its close neighbours, Raleigh and Chapel Hill, to establish a research park between the three cities. The idea was to coax the universities’ boffins into business ventures. It worked; today 50,000 people work there. Unlike much of America, the area has not shied away from infrastructure investment. Raleigh-Durham airport has been renovated with a helping hand from local businesses. The roads are well maintained, if a little crowded. Bill Bell, the city’s mayor, hopes to develop a light-rail system for the city; in 2011 voters approved a sales-tax increase to help pay for it. Investment has also revitalised a deprived downtown area. For most of its history, Durham made tobacco and textiles. When those industries went into decline in the latter half of the 20th century, they left a vacuum in the city. But over the past decade the gap has been plugged. The tower of the old American Tobacco factory, emblazoned with the “Lucky Strike” logo, still stands—but the factory is now a “campus” featuring bars, restaurants and the kind of tech firms where staff ride around on scooters. The city’s performing-arts centre, across the road, is one of the four best-attended theatres in the country. Mr Bell says public-private partnerships account for much of the investment. Durham is unusual for its failure to drag up state-wide incomes. The state’s labour-force participation rate, at 61%, is grim even by American standards. Elsewhere, the presence—or absence—of rich cities determines economic fortunes. States with one of today’s richest 50 cities have grown 13% in per-person terms since 2001. The 18 (mostly southern and south-western) states without such a city saw growth of just 7%. As a result, inequality between states has risen for most of the past decade-and-a-half (see chart). Rich cities typically attract successful, growing firms. Nuvotronics is young, employing fewer than 100 people, and did not move to Durham until 2013. But the city also plays host to well-established firms like Cree, which makes LED lighting, and giants like Quintiles, a consultancy which works on pharmaceutical trials. Attracting the right companies matters because America’s firms, too, are diverging. In the past two decades returns to investment at the most profitable 10% have more than doubled by one measure. Returns for middling performers have increased only a little (see chart). A recent paper by Jason Furman of the White House and Peter Orszag, a former budget chief, says this could be because the best firms are gaining market power (think of Apple’s dominance of the smartphone market). A report by McKinsey attributes the divergence to the varying pace of digitisation across industries. Highly digitised industries such as technology, media and professional services—all common in successful cities—have benefited from the juiciest increases in margins. Digital laggards, such as health care and offline retailing, are doing less well. This bears directly on the inequality which matters most: that in wages. Two recent studies suggest that most of the increase in inequality over the past four decades is explained by wage gaps between firms rather than within them. A secretary will probably earn more working for Goldman Sachs than working for the local plumber; it is more lucrative to be a programmer at Facebook than in a corporate back-office. This means that bringing highly skilled workers to an area is not enough to guarantee high wages; the right firms must come to town, too. The end of mediocrity In 2013 Tyler Cowen, an economist at George Mason University, predicted in his book “Average is Over” that the fortunes of both people and places would become more polarised. Ambitious and talented workers, he argued, would want to work in a relatively small number of cities and regions. These vibrant clusters would then benefit from increasing returns to scale, cementing their advantages. Mr Cowen’s predictions are already coming true. While successful cities grow, almost 60% of rural counties are losing population. With America’s shale and manufacturing industries suffering, the pull of successful cities is becoming greater still.Wear that ball and chain OF THE shackled, jumpsuited defendants making their first appearance in the New Orleans criminal court, the first to rise in the dock was relatively fortunate. Up for possession of drugs, he was deemed indigent, and the city’s public defender was appointed to represent him. After a brisk back-and-forth of previous convictions and mitigating circumstances (a baby on the way, a job), bail was set at $5,000. The next man’s predicament was grimmer. Barely speaking English, he too was deemed indigent; but because his alleged offence—sexual battery—was more serious, the public defender reluctantly declined to represent him. Which means that, for the time being, no one will. He is not alone. At the last count, 52 people were stuck in jail in New Orleans without representation; a further 27 lacked counsel but are out on bail. The problem is that, while these defendants can’t afford lawyers, the lawyers say that, after drastic budget cuts, a hiring freeze and a spate of resignations, they can’t afford to act for the defendants. In 2010 the public defender’s office of Orleans Parish (coterminous with the city) employed 78 lawyers; since its budget fell by a third, it has 42, for an annual caseload of 22,000. In January the office began to refuse new clients accused of serious crimes, such as armed robbery and murder (capital cases are an exception). The rationale is that these graver accusations require resources the office cannot provide. In a city where 85% of felony defendants are considered indigent, the numbers are rising fast. “It’s terrible,” acknowledges Derwyn Bunton, the parish’s chief public defender. Mr Bunton grew up in poverty; several of his relatives have been through the courts. Like most of the clients his team serves, he is black. Yet he decided he was “not going to be complicit in the injustice” of providing inadequate defence. The tipping-point was the story of a man arrested for a multiple shooting in a city park. The man hired a private lawyer, who hired an investigator, who unearthed videotape proving he was in Houston when the crime was committed. Mr Bunton was “not sure we would have made it” before the tape was erased. The issue at stake, he says, is “Do poor people deserve equal justice? Do poor people deserve justice at all?” It isn’t only New Orleans. Jay Dixon, the state public defender, says offices in 13 districts have imposed restrictions on their services; the one in Plaquemines Parish temporarily closed altogether. G. Paul Marx, a veteran defender whose office covers Acadia, Lafayette and Vermilion Parishes, says his payroll has declined from 62 lawyers in early December to 16 now. He estimates the number of defendants without representation at a whopping 2,300, rising by 300-400 a month (most are out on bail). Mr Marx calls the situation a “man-made disaster”. The cause of this widespread denial of basic rights—the sort of derogation which, if it happened abroad, would be denounced by American diplomats—is the volatile and eccentric way those rights are subsidised. Louisiana is broke. Its legislature and new governor, John Bel Edwards, are struggling to repair its ruined finances, a mess many attribute to the doomed presidential ambitions and concomitant tax-cutting of Mr Edwards’s predecessor, Bobby Jindal. Like that for other essential services, state funding for public defenders is set to be severely squeezed. That will exacerbate the malaise, but is not its main cause, since roughly two-thirds of their income comes from a different source: punitive court fees and fines, including those for traffic offences. For various reasons—revised police priorities, pre-trial diversion programmes—in some parishes, such as Orleans, this revenue has crashed, though it has held up in places with lucrative stretches of highway. The state’s contribution was already too measly to compensate. The trouble with these funding arrangements is not just that they are unreliable. They are also ridden with conflicts of interest, even or especially when the cash is flowing. Not just public defenders but Louisiana’s sheriffs and prosecutors, and the courts themselves, subsist partly on fees, fines and bonds imposed largely at judges’ discretion, mostly on defendants who plead or are found guilty. Thus, in a perverse reversal of the usual formula, public defenders routinely work on a “No lose, no fee” basis. Hurrying through cases benefits everyone. The risks were highlighted by a still-rumbling scandal over the judicial expense fund of the Orleans criminal court, meant to cover overheads using the court’s share of the revenues. An auditor’s report in 2012 found judges had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars from the fund on medical bills and insurance. The district attorney who blew the whistle recused himself from investigating, since he had enjoyed similar perks when he was on the bench. The system bears an unfortunate resemblance to an extortion racket. Payments are often made on a schedule; people who miss them are liable to be locked up, alternatives known as “pay or stay”. Ashton Brown, for example, owed $500 arising from a theft conviction in 2013; he was also liable for probation-service fees. Arrested last year for possessing drugs, he was detained for an extra two weeks because of the old debt. The constitutional requirement to assess his ability to pay was ignored. Eventually his friends and grandmother came up with $100 to get him out. “It’s crazy,” says Mr Brown, who has yet to clear the debt (his record makes it hard to find work). He is among the plaintiffs in a suit filed by Equal Justice Under Law, a pressure group, alleging that Orleans Parish maintains an “unjust modern debtors’ prison” and that its officials “fund themselves off the backs of New Orleans’s poorest.” A court, says EJUL’s Alec Karakatsanis, “is supposed to be where justice is done, not where revenues are generated.” Habeas corpse In its criminal-justice excesses, as in other things, Louisiana is an outlier. Its incarceration and murder rates are the highest in America. In New Orleans, where malpractice has discredited both the police and prisons, both the violent-crime and imprisonment rates are double the national average. Yet these problems, while extreme, are also typical. Although no other state relies predominantly on court revenue to fund public defenders, many are overburdened; in the past, lawyers in Florida and Missouri have turned away clients, too. Unethical punishments are not uncommon: a judge in Alabama was recently suspended for ordering defendants to donate blood in lieu of money. The milking of poor communities by police and the courts, and enforcement of debts with jail time, were a factor in the unrest in Ferguson. The underlying causes are typical, too. Chief among them is an old imbalance between, on the one hand, a fearsome appetite for prosecuting and jailing people, and, on the other, a reluctance to foot the bill. At least, to foot it up-front: shortchanging public defence, like some other seeming economies, is actually expensive, leading as it does to miscarriages of justice (Louisiana’s exoneration rate is the country’s second highest), longer sentences and so a higher, pricier prison population. Underneath that, says Jim Craig of the Roderick & Solange MacArthur Justice Centre in New Orleans, lies an “unAmerican belief that people who are charged with crime are a lower breed of human beings.” In the South, that view has a racial tinge. Mr Bunton ascribes the state’s stinginess in part to a hunch that indigent defence is “only a right that poor people of colour need.” For now, in Louisiana, some of the slack is being taken up by private lawyers, whom some judges are ordering to defend cases pro bono. This fix has two obvious drawbacks: many of the lawyers don’t like it; and many are ill-qualified. Jack Bailey, who runs a personal-injury firm in Caddo Parish, says five felony cases were foisted on it last year, even though his three colleagues have no expertise in criminal law. He worries not only about the “expropriation” of his property in the form of their time, but also—after he exonerated two defendants—that innocent people will be failed by less assiduous lawyers, who may be inclined to prioritise paying customers. “Nobody cares about this”, Mr Bailey laments, “until it’s them.” It is absurd, he thinks, that this constitutional duty “should be inflicted on a small number of people who happen to have law licences.” “If the right to counsel means anything,” says Marjorie Esman of the ACLU, a lobby group, “it means the right to a lawyer who knows what they’re doing.” The ACLU is suing Mr Bunton and Mr Dixon in a federal court, with the aim of having the situation in Orleans Parish declared unconstitutional. That manoeuvre suggests one possible outcome to this crisis, since such a ruling could eventually lead to remedial action by the state or federal government. Another is that a court finds Mr Bunton in contempt (some judges have threatened as much); the unserved defendants get lawyers, albeit in name only; and Mr Bunton winds up in jail himself. There is a third possibility. Without lawyers, the cases of those languishing in prison will not be able to proceed. Sooner or later someone will file motions for their release; judges may have little choice but to comply. Legions of alleged killers and rapists walking free might just be embarrassing enough to galvanise reform.FOR Hillary Clinton, losing Michigan’s Democratic primary to Bernie Sanders was a nuisance. For pollsters, in contrast, the election was Armageddon. Eight different firms had surveyed the state in the previous month, and every one gave Mrs Clinton a double-digit lead. According FiveThirtyEight, a data-journalism website that had put Mrs Clinton’s chances of victory at greater than 99%, the 23-percentage-point gap between her average lead in the polls and the final result was the biggest error since Gary Hart’s victory in the 1984 New Hampshire Democratic primary. What went wrong? To produce a misfire of this magnitude, just about everything. Pollsters both underestimated how favourable the electorate would be to Mr Sanders—according to the exit poll, it was younger, more male and included more independents than expected—and how big a share of each group he would capture. He lost black voters by merely a 2.4-to-one margin, half as big as his shortfalls among African-Americans in the South. And he limited his deficit among voters who earn more than $100,000 to three percentage points (it was 36 in Virginia). Projecting the composition of the Michigan electorate was always going to be tough, since it was the first state in the rustbelt to vote this year, and it has not had a competitive Democratic primary since 1992. No live-interview surveys were conducted after a TV debate, preventing any measurement of its impact. Unseasonably warm weather could have boosted turnout and increased the share of less-reliable, Sanders-loving young voters. And complacent supporters of Mrs Clinton, expecting an easy victory, may have switched sides to meddle with their general-election opponents instead: 7% of voters in the Republican primary were self-identified Democrats. Now that the pollsters—who had previously performed fairly well this year by volatile primary standards (see chart), and did get Michigan’s Republican vote spot-on—have some egg on their faces, they are likely to pay extra attention to these factors before the upcoming votes in nearby Illinois and Ohio. On the other hand, some red flags could have been spotted in advance. One-third of the polling average published by RealClearPolitics, and one-quarter of FiveThirtyEight’s, came from automated, fixed-line-phone surveys conducted by Mitchell, a Michigan firm. The sample’s demographic sub-groups were re-weighted to match targets provided by Mark Grebner, a consultant whose main business is selling voter lists in local elections. Mr Grebner foresaw an electorate resembling a retirement community, with 88% of voters aged 40 or older and 76% at least 50. Since elderly Democrats adore Mrs Clinton, the two Mitchell polls taken shortly before the vote duly estimated her lead at 27 and 37 percentage points, boosting her average. However, the assumptions underlying the Mitchell numbers were inconsistent with exit-polls from northern states. Around half of Democratic voters were under 50 in each of Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Vermont. (The final number in the Michigan exit poll was 53%.) Had Mitchell simply copied the New England ratios, its forecast lead for Mrs Clinton’s would have shrunk to the mid-teens, the same range calculated by its competitors like Marist, YouGov and Monmouth. Such figures still would have left Mr Sanders a big underdog, but not a hopeless one.Honest Don“I can be more presidential than anybody […] other than the great Abe Lincoln. He was very presidential.” Mittens has kittens“He gets a free ride to the White House and all we get is a lousy hat.” Don-inatrix“I could have said ‘Mitt, drop to your knees.’ He would have dropped to his knees.” Oh, Christopher“No, I wasn’t being held hostage. No, I wasn’t sitting up there thinking, ‘Oh my God, what have I done?’” Values voting“[Marco Rubio] referred to my hands, if they are small, something else must be small. I guarantee you there is no problem. I guarantee.” Mencken’s heirs“You are the most dishonest human beings on Earth.” Primal colours“The scream you hear, the howl that comes from Washington, DC, is utter terror at what we the people are doing together.” Bye bye, Ben“You know there’s a lot of people who love me, they just won’t vote for me.” Electorus!“I’m with Harry Potter, we’re not going to the dark side.” The withdrawal method“[M]y candidacy could lead to the election of Donald Trump or Senator Ted Cruz. That is not a risk I can take in good conscience.”FOR Donald Trump to get his mitts (which are of a decent size, he claims) on the White House, two things must happen. First, he needs to win the Republican nomination; second, he would need a colossal share of white votes to compensate for the disdain in which he is held by Hispanics and blacks. After the results came in from Mississippi and Michigan, the biggest of four states to hold primary votes on March 8th, both scenarios looked likelier. Mr Trump won handsomely, despite having had the worst week of his campaign. He had caused disgust by talking up the size of his penis and alarm by leading a crowd in Orlando in a pledge of allegiance to himself, accompanied by a fascist-style salute. He had been castigated by Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee in 2012, as “a phony, a fraud”. On March 5th he was trounced by Ted Cruz in Kansas and Maine, where he had been predicted to win. It seemed Peak Trump had passed; Michigan and Mississippi showed it has not. Mr Trump bagged more than the 59 delegates he needed to stay on track for the nomination there and in Idaho, where he came second to Mr Cruz—even before the results came in from Hawaii, which he also won. And he saw two possible obstacles, Florida and Ohio, where a total of 165 delegates are up for grabs on March 15th, shrivel with the fortunes of their local champions, Marco Rubio and John Kasich. The senator from Florida failed to win any delegate, leaving him with two poxy wins, in Puerto Rico and Minnesota, from 24. Mr Trump has won 15 states; Mr Cruz seven; Mr Kasich, the governor of Ohio, has yet to win any. He says he will quit if he fails to win Ohio; his third-place finish in Michigan, where he campaigned hard, was another blow to that ambition. Winnowing the field to a two-man fight between Mr Trump and Mr Cruz should, in theory, help Mr Cruz. Yet, if Mr Trump wins Florida and Ohio, it may be too late to stop him. Mr Trump’s hope of sweeping the white vote in a general election was buoyed by a bigger upset, among the Democrats. Confounding the pollsters—who had given her a big lead in the state—Hillary Clinton lost Michigan to Bernie Sanders. She will probably still win her party’s ticket: she has a lead of more than 200 delegates. Yet the manner of her stumble suggests Mrs Clinton could be just the opponent Mr Trump needs. Her dozen primary wins, including in Mississippi, were mainly founded on huge support from African-Americans. Elsewhere, Mrs Clinton has found the going harder, with Mr Sanders’s excoriations of Wall Street and globalisation winning the love of younger and white voters in most states outside the South. Exit polls in Michigan suggested he won 81% of its youngsters. Yet he also cut deep into Mrs Clinton’s lead among blacks, apparently, in a state that has lost thousands of factory jobs in recent decades, with his anti-globalisation message. He had sought to make this the defining difference between himself and Mrs Clinton, whom he has castigated for supporting trade deals. Mr Sanders duly won majorities of voters worried about the economy and who think international trade has cost America jobs. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar This suggests he could win again in a looming series of Midwestern states, including Illinois, Ohio and Wisconsin, prolonging the Democratic contest. More important, Mrs Clinton’s vulnerability in these states, and on this issue, signals Mr Trump’s likeliest path to the presidency. All Democratic-leaning states, they contain the rump of the party’s unionised, white working-class support; and Mr Trump, who is as protectionist as Mr Sanders, could conceivably storm that bastion. Mrs Clinton needs a better answer to the economic discontentment Mr Sanders and Mr Trump are drawing on. At this late stage in the contest, it will be hard to find without resorting to populism herself. Free traders could be in for a wretched few months. Yet Mr Trump gave little thought to that encouragement in the bizarre victory speech he delivered in Florida, at one of his golf clubs. Stung by criticism of his business record, he took the opportunity to showcase some of the many products he has hawked: Trump wine, Trump vodka, Trump water and Trump steaks. “Trump steaks. Where are the steaks? Do we have steak? We have Trump steak,” rambled Mr Trump, sounding like a presenter on The Shopping Channel. Strangely, his meat business seems to have been non-functioning since 2007. So if the beef was his, it was unfit for consumption. For Mr Trump and America, it seems, the steaks have never been higher.THE odds of becoming an American astronaut have always been slim. But this year the competition will be cosmically difficult: over 18,300 people have applied to join NASA’s next astronaut class, over double the previous record in 1978 and almost three times the number that applied for the most recent class, in 2012. The would-be starmen and women will jockey for up to 14 spots. Stephanie Schierholz of NASA cites two main reasons for the spike. Collaborations with two commercial groups, SpaceX and Virgin Galactic, have boosted interest, as has the development of the Orion spacecraft, which will (in theory, at least) shuttle humans deeper into the solar system than ever before—perhaps even to Mars. To examine what kind of health problems astronauts might develop during a 30-month mission to the red planet, NASA sent American astronaut Scott Kelly to the International Space Station for almost a year; his physical data will now be compared with those of his twin brother Mark, a retired astronaut who stayed at home. Scott returned on March 1st after 340 days in orbit, exceeding the previous NASA record of 215 days but well short of Russian and Soviet records. Astronauts who previously went on long-term missions endured changes to their vision, muscle atrophy and bone loss. On the bright side, NASA reports that while in space Mr Kelly’s excretions burnt up when entering the atmosphere. “Your faeces will not be shooting stars,” NASA’s website taunts readers who will never make it into space. As if the promise of flaming poop were not enticement enough, NASA has also become cleverer at broadcasting new opportunities. To coax more women to apply, a group of female NASA astronauts answered questions for Glamour magazine’s website. “A lot of people who are qualified to be astronauts don’t realise it,” Ms Schierholz says, explaining that the only requirements are a bachelor’s degree in science, technology, engineering or maths, three or more years of related work experience or study (or 1,000 hours as a jet pilot, which it is easy to imagine might come in handy) and the capacity to pass a gruelling physical. On Reddit, an online discussion forum, Shannon Walker, another astronaut, fielded questions about such requirements, as well as from users wondering how children who aspire to be astronauts can work towards their dream. Do well in school, was the predictable response. When one person inquired how many “parsecs it would take [for a NASA team] to make the Kessel Run”, a hyperspace trading route mentioned in “Star Wars”, Ms Walker replied that “NASA is not going to be using their technology to smuggle spice.” It may not be a requirement but, for long flights in tight quarters, a sense of humour surely helps too.WERE Angel Rosabal Valdivia not Cuban, he might now be languishing in an immigration cell. In early March the 31-year-old computer technician crossed a bridge over the Rio Grande between Mexico and Texas without a visa and presented himself to border guards. Because Mr Rosabal is Cuban, he was swiftly granted leave to remain. Under a series of laws dating back to the cold war, notably the Cuban Adjustment Act of 1966, most arrivals from his island are welcomed as if they are political refugees, then granted permanent residency after a year and a day. Lexington met Mr Rosabal in Miami on March 7th in the offices of Church World Service (CWS), a refugee-assistance ministry. He was one of a throng of new arrivals being processed into the Cuban-Haitian Entrant Programme, under a 1980 law that makes Cubans instantly eligible for public assistance that most immigrants wait years to receive. Fresh-faced, and proudly sporting a watch that he had refused to give to people-smugglers during a ten-month trek to America via Ecuador, Colombia, Panama and Mexico, Mr Rosabal said the journey cost him $3,000. He was robbed twice—Colombia is “so bad”, he shuddered. Drawing on government grants and private fundraising, CWS (run by a coalition of Protestant and Orthodox churches) was about to put him up in a hotel and help him apply for a work permit. Within a week the ministry would fly him to one of six cities where it works with churches and employers to resettle new arrivals, from Lancaster, Pennsylvania to Louisville, Kentucky. After six months, 90% of CWS’s resettled Cuban clients are self-sufficient. Mr Rosabal was told that within a fortnight he can expect to be working, perhaps in a hotel or egg-packing plant. He looked cheerful but a little dazed, after arriving at dawn on a minibus from Texas. He had been in Florida seven hours.   During his trek, other Latin Americans often asked Mr Rosabal why America offers special privileges to Cubans. Mr Rosabal would reply that back home with two jobs—working with computers by day and as a security guard by night—he earned $62 a month. Venezuelan or Colombian companions would gasp, asking: “How can you survive?” But Mr Rosabal misjudges his new American homeland. The special status of Cubans owes more to politics than to pity, and the politics is changing fast. Cuban-Americans have long enjoyed outsize clout, thanks in part to their concentration in Florida, a presidential battleground state. But the Cuban-American vote is evolving. Once, conservative exiles could halt Miami traffic with vast anti-Castro protests. Now their grandchildren are more likely to support lifting the embargo imposed on the island 55 years ago. When Republicans hold a presidential primary in Florida on March 15th, two of the four candidates will be Cuban-American senators, an astonishing feat for a community of about 2m people, or 0.6% of the national population. Both are supporters of the embargo. One of them, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, introduced a bill in January that would end welfare payments and public assistance for Cuban arrivals unless they can prove that they faced political persecution back home—though he stopped short of suggesting changes to the entry privileges in the Cuban Adjustment Act. Campaigning in snowy New Hampshire, Mr Rubio cited reports of “outrageous abuse”, such as Cubans who claim American pensions while living on the island. His bill matches one introduced in the House of Representatives by Carlos Curbelo, a Miami-area Republican, who scolds what he calls “non-refugee Cubans” for abusing American goodwill. The longest-serving Cuban-American in Congress, Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Miami, said late last year that “it wouldn’t break my heart” if the Cuban Adjustment Act itself were repealed. Cubans sense the changes. Arrivals from the island have surged since December 2014, when President Barack Obama announced his plans to restore many diplomatic and economic ties. More than 43,000 Cubans applied for entry to America in 2015, a 78% increase on the previous year, some after perilous sea-crossings. Republicans blame Mr Obama. Ahead of his visit to Cuba on March 21st and 22nd, the first by a sitting president since 1928, Cuban-American members of Congress accused him of triggering “desperation” among Cubans with his policy of “unconditional engagement with the Castro dictatorship”. Openness v isolation Democrats blame Republicans for stoking fears on the island that the Cuba Adjustment Act will be scrapped. Annette Taddeo, a (Colombian-American) Democrat running for Mr Curbelo’s House district, accuses her Republican opponent of playing on resentments within their heavily Hispanic corner of south Florida. “The electoral calculation is to divide Cubans from non-Cubans, and older exiles from newer arrivals,” she charges. Ms Taddeo would preserve Cuban entry privileges until a broader immigration reform is achieved: a tough call in a year when voters are tingling at talk of border walls. At root, today’s fights about Cuban migration turn on old arguments about whether the island is best liberated by openness or isolation. Bruno Barreiro is the Miami-Dade county commissioner for Little Havana, a bastion of anti-Castro fervour. He says the Cuban Adjustment Act was a mistake: if Cubans had been bottled up on the island, they would have exploded long ago. The act saved lots of lives, Mr Barreiro concedes: “Unfortunately, it also permitted the Castro regime to stay in place.” Not every anti-Castro politician goes that far, though the logic of isolation underpins politicians’ growling about Cuban-Americans showing disloyalty by returning to the island to visit their families. In the end, the only sustainable Cuban immigration policy involves a free and prosperous island, 90 miles off Florida. Cubans’ entry privileges may be a relic of the cold war. But so is the failed embargo. Scrap both at the same time, and bet on openness.THE Speaker of Congress’s lower house indicted for corruption; the country’s most revered politician detained by the police and then charged; a billionaire sentenced to two decades behind bars. All this happened in Brazil this month. In 2014, when investigators made the first arrests linked to a bribery scandal at Petrobras, the state-controlled energy giant, few imagined that courts and the police would reach so deeply into the country’s elites. The fearlessness of law-enforcers cheers Brazilians, who are fed up with high-level impunity. But their recent successes deepen the country’s political paralysis and do nothing to alleviate its economic crisis. The giant-killing began on March 3rd, when the supreme court voted to charge Eduardo Cunha, Speaker of the federal Chamber of Deputies, with accepting bribes linked to the award by Petrobras of contracts for building two oil-drilling ships. The chief prosecutor accuses him of managing the Petrobras “bribe pipeline”, which channelled billions of reais from construction firms to executives and politicians in the ruling coalition in exchange for padded contracts. Mr Cunha denies wrongdoing. On March 8th a federal court sentenced Marcelo Odebrecht, the former boss of Brazil’s largest construction conglomerate, which bears his family name, to more than 19 years in prison for corruption and money-laundering. The biggest shock was the brief detention for questioning by police on March 4th of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s former president and the mentor of its current one, Dilma Rousseff (pictured with him above). The bribery scheme appears to have started while Lula, as he is universally known, was in office from 2003 to 2010. Prosecutors say they have evidence that Lula, members of his family and the Lula Institute, an NGO he heads, received “undue advantages” worth 30m reais ($8m) after he left office from building firms embroiled in the affair. Lula was “one of the principal beneficiaries of the crimes” committed at the oil company, prosecutors allege. He denies any wrongdoing. After being released without charge, he fulminated against “persecution” and intimated that he would run for president again in 2018. On March 9th, in a separate investigation, São Paulo state prosecutors charged him with failing to declare ownership of a sea-side property. He says he is not the owner. Where this leaves the country is uncertain. The real interrupted its recent slide, and São Paulo’s stockmarket surged by 18%, following Lula’s detention. The markets are hoping that, as the Petrobras investigations progress, Ms Rousseff will eventually be forced out of office and a new government will take charge of the economy, which is in the midst of the worst recession in decades. But uglier scenarios seem at least as likely. Survival mode After Lula’s detention, Gilberto Carvalho, a leading light of his (and Ms Rousseff’s) left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), warned investigators in a newspaper interview against “playing with fire”. José Guimarães, the PT’s leader in the lower house of Congress, urged supporters to wage “political war” against “coup-mongers”. A journalist covering the events at the former president’s flat in São Bernardo do Campo, on the outskirts of São Paulo, was roughed up for representing “fascist media”. Feelings are likely to rise still higher on March 13th, when anti-government groups plan to hold demonstrations across the country to renew their demands for Ms Rousseff’s impeachment. The organisers, a hotchpotch of social movements ranging in ideology from centrist to loonily right-wing, hope to bring out more than the record 1m people, disproportionately from the middle class, who protested a year ago. The government’s supporters plan counter-demonstrations on the same day. The threats to Ms Rousseff are growing. One motion to impeach her, on the grounds that she used accounting trickery to hide the true size of the budget deficit in 2015, is being debated in the lower house of Congress. To that charge her foes want to add fresh allegations that she tried to interfere with the Petrobras probes, which she denies. Brazil’s electoral tribunal is investigating whether Petrobras money helped finance her re-election campaign in 2014; its mastermind, João Santana, was arrested last month. If the tribunal concludes that the campaign was tainted, it could annul the election and call a new one. The president’s survival strategy relies on mobilising her left-wing base. That is one reason she has failed to tackle the budget deficit, which widened to 10.8% of GDP in January. This has sapped confidence in the economy, which contracted by 3.8% in 2015 and is expected to shrink by as much this year. The PT’s opposition to austerity is likely to harden after the detention of Lula, who is still lionised by the left for his pro-poor policies. Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts But Ms Rousseff’s embrace of the PT risks alienating her centrist allies, whom she also needs. It is hard to impeach a president: both houses of Congress must vote in favour by two-thirds majorities. But that hurdle is not insurmountable. Just 100 left-wing deputies in the 513-seat lower house would never vote for impeachment, reckons João Castro Neves of Eurasia Group, a consultancy. In addition, Ms Rousseff needs 70-odd centrists to avoid the threat. As the economy worsens and the president’s approval ratings remain barely above 10%, some are likely to waver. Members of the Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB), the centrist party of the vice-president, Michel Temer, are likely to call for a break with the government at a convention on March 12th. The indictment of Mr Cunha, also a member of the PMDB, may weaken the president still further. He was a leading champion of impeachment and a big obstacle to Ms Rousseff’s (half-hearted) efforts to rein in the budget deficit. But the threat of a Petrobras-related indictment limited his effectiveness. Anti-government forces may now find a less encumbered leader. Ms Rousseff may yet survive until the end of her term in 2018. The demonstrations against her take place on Sundays, which limits their impact. The electoral authority will not annul her election without clear proof of wrongdoing, which has yet to surface. The PMDB may stick to its tactic of supporting Ms Rousseff in exchange for patronage. The party may not want to burden Mr Temer, who would succeed her if she is impeached, with responsibility for dealing with political paralysis and a stricken economy. But this month’s turbulence leaves the president weaker, Brazil less governable and policy adrift.
