“FREEDOM! We want freedom!” cried inmates of the Camp Street prison in Guyana’s capital, Georgetown. But in three days of unrest that began on March 2nd, 17 of them burnt to death. The rioting started after guards seized drugs and mobile phones from prisoners awaiting trial for violent crimes. The prisoners set fires; on March 3rd one flared out of control. Trouble continued the next day, with prisoners knocking down wooden cell-block walls and the authorities firing tear gas. That highly public tragedy is the consequence of a hidden one. Of the 50 countries with the highest incarceration rates, 15 are, like Guyana, former British Caribbean colonies or current ones. High levels of violence are partly to blame. So are the criminalisation of cannabis use and harsh sentencing laws. Last November Guyana’s former national football coach was sentenced to three years in prison, the minimum penalty for possessing more than 15 grams of cannabis. In most of the English-speaking Caribbean, at least a third of prisoners are suspects awaiting trial. One inmate who died in Camp Street had been waiting eight years to be tried for murder. Suspects exploit pre-trial delays to have witnesses killed or silenced. Once trials begin, they drag on; Guyanese judges painstakingly record each word of evidence in longhand. Conditions inside are often horrendous. Antigua’s prison, known as 1735 from the construction date carved above its entrance, was built to hold 150 inmates. It now houses around 400. Some are jammed 15 at a time into cells that are furnished with two bunk beds and two slop buckets. The government plans to install modern sanitation and convert a former nurses’ hostel into a remand prison. It may release 100 prisoners on parole to ease overcrowding. When such overcrowding is not dealt with, rebellions can get out of control. In 2005 Glendairy prison in Barbados, then 150 years old, was burnt down by prisoners. Its replacement took two years to build, at a cost of $144m. Guyana’s government, in office since May last year, reacted quickly to the Camp Street disaster. The public-security minister, Khemraj Ramjattan, met a group of prisoners during the protest and promised better meals and additional telephone calls. A public inquiry, chaired by a former judge, is to report within a month on what went wrong and what should be done to prevent a repeat of the violence. Mr Ramjattan wants to build a new prison, but says the government cannot afford it now. He argues for judicial reforms to unclog the courts and prisons, including making it easier for young first offenders to be released on bail. Before the riot, backbench parliamentarians had proposed more lenient drug-sentencing laws. Last September Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, offered Jamaica $40m to help build a new prison to house both local inmates and some of the 600 Jamaicans serving time in British jails. The Jamaican government of the time, which lost an election last month, was cool to the idea, and many Jamaicans were outraged. There is, to be sure, something tin-eared about a political leader offering to pay to lock people up in a former colony. But dirty, crowded prisons add to the misery of inmates, many of whom were impoverished before they turned to crime. If Jamaica does not want Mr Cameron’s money, perhaps he should offer it to Guyana and Antigua instead.An old-fashioned demand for restitution THE basement of a petrol station is not an obvious place to display some 6,000 pre-Columbian ceramics. The shelves of the Cassinelli Museum are crammed with feline gods, copulating animals and vessels shaped like human faces. Many were made by the Moche and Chimú cultures, which peopled Peru’s northern coast for 1,400 years before the arrival of the Incas in the 15th century. The artefacts are safer here, argued the museum’s late founder, José Luis Cassinelli, than in tombs that dot the desert or beneath the adobe city of Chan Chan. There, they were prey to huaqueros, poor relic-hunters who sold them on to smugglers. Many ended up in American and European private collections. But some were carted off to countries closer to home. Lately, it has become fashionable to return antiquities to their countries of origin, as Yale University recently did with thousands of items taken from Machu Picchu in Peru. Latin American countries are starting to return artefacts, both ancient and modern, to their neighbours. The motives are often political. In January, Argentina gave 4,500 artefacts back to Peru and Ecuador, many probably looted by huaqueros from northern Peru. Argentina’s former president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who arranged the restitution before she left office, used the occasion to lambast European and American museums for having snatched “chunks” of Greece and Egypt. Last May, Chile returned 189 pre-Columbian items to Peru and Ecuador. Some of the returned objects are less ancient but more politically symbolic. Throughout last year, Paraguay and Bolivia exchanged church bells and weapons carried off by one another’s soldiers during the Chaco war of 1932-35. Bolivia hailed one such swap as an “indisputable sign of fraternity” between historical enemies. Decades ago Brazil returned some of the archives it took from Paraguay in the war of the Triple Alliance of 1864-70. Such gestures are a low-cost way to improve relations, and can pave the way for political and economic deals, says Donna Yates, an expert in antiquities trafficking at the University of Glasgow. Bolivia and Paraguay followed up their swaps by signing agreements to increase economic co-operation. Holding on to other countries’ relics can be a sign of continuing tensions. Chile, which has a lingering border dispute with Peru, still has the Huáscar, a British-built ironclad captured from Peru during the war of the Pacific of 1879-83. Although Brazil has returned some documents to Paraguay, Rio’s Historical Museum still houses the captured ten-tonne “Christian” cannon. Vicenta Miranda, whose father built a museum to house cannonballs, bullets and other treasures from swampy battlefields around the fortress of Humaitá, thinks the unreturned Brazilian archives contain “explosive” accounts of atrocities committed by Brazilian troops. Countries such as Peru and Bolivia have reduced the outflow of antique contraband. But few governments have protected the colonial-era art to be found in churches in all but the smallest Andean pueblos. The time of the huaqueros is not yet over, and conservationists like Cassinelli are rare.OLDER Latin Americans still have vivid memories of hyperinflation. Bello recalls changing money in dark doorways in the mid-1980s in Bolivia and being handed a truncheon of greasy banknotes secured by rubber bands. Peru went through a futile currency reform in which the sol lost three zeros and was briefly renamed the inti, which promptly racked up more zeroes. Hyperinflation destroys businesses, undermines political systems and hits the poor especially hard. Latin America should have learned this painful lesson. So when in Caracas recently Bello was given a large shoebox packed tightly with banknotes in return for a few hundred dollars, he received it with an eerie sense of déjà vu and dismay. Official statistics put the rise in the consumer-price index in Venezuela last year at 181%, the world’s highest; the IMF forecasts 720% this year. Venezuela is extreme in its economic mismanagement. But while the rest of the world worries about deflation, across Latin America prices are rising. In Argentina, inflation is forecast to spike from 27% to 33% at an annual rate; in Brazil it stands at around 10.5%; in Uruguay, it is only one point lower, and in Colombia it has climbed to 7.6%. In Chile, Peru and Mexico it has also ticked up. The reasons vary somewhat. In Venezuela and Argentina, inflation is mainly the result of printing money to finance indiscriminate subsidies. Ironically, it is rising now in Argentina partly because the new government of Mauricio Macri is cutting those subsidies. In Brazil, too, the government cut subsidies on electricity and petrol in 2015. But the main reason inflation is so high there, even though the economy is in deep recession, is price indexation, according to Edmar Bacha, an economist who helped tame chronic inflation in the 1990s. By law, the minimum wage was raised in January by 11.6%; it in turn has a big influence on other wages and the prices of services, as well as on pensions. And that, plus past fiscal laxity, has made a mockery of the Central Bank’s (unambitious) inflation target of 2.5-6.5%. Elsewhere the rise in inflation is the result of currency depreciation, which is driving up the price of imports (see chart). This is also a factor in Brazil and Argentina. Though very large, these depreciations are healthy: they are the way that Latin America’s economies are adjusting to sharply lower prices for their commodity exports. But they pose a dilemma for central banks that are committed to inflation targeting. In Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru central bankers began raising interest rates last year even as their economies slowed or were stagnant. Argentina, too, put up its interest rate last month. The good news is that the rate at which currency depreciation in Latin America is passed through into domestic price increases is much lower than in the past, according to Alejandro Werner of the IMF. The Fund’s research shows that before 1999, when several Latin American countries floated their previously fixed currencies and adopted inflation targeting, large depreciations were associated with very high rates of inflation. Now the average pass-through in these countries is below 10% (ie, if the currency depreciates by 10%, domestic prices will rise by less than 1%). Mexico’s central bank also raised its interest rate last month even though inflation is below its target. The peso has been clobbered by the fall in the oil price and by the weakness of manufacturing in the United States, to which Mexico’s economy is closely linked. Because the peso is very liquid and trades round the clock offshore, betting against it seems to be “the path of least resistance” for currency traders, says Luis Arcentales of Morgan Stanley, a bank. Mexico’s central bank also announced that it would start intervening at its discretion in the currency market. So is it now targeting the exchange rate, rather than inflation? Not really: it was worried that the speed of peso depreciation would feed expectations of higher inflation down the road. “By acting forcefully today it will probably need to tighten less later on,” says Mr Arcentales. The currency depreciations of the past two years are the first big test for inflation targeting in Latin America. One can argue whether individual central banks should have tightened monetary policy earlier or later. The big picture is that those countries that have been serious about inflation targeting are adapting to a tougher external environment at much less cost than those that have not been. They, at least, have learned the lessons of the 1980s.FOR decades political instability, a boom-and-bust economy and endemic corruption earned the Philippines the moniker of the “sick man of Asia”. But during the six years that Benigno Aquino has been president the country’s prospects have markedly improved. The economy has zipped along at an average growth rate of 6% a year, while foreign investment has more than tripled, with manufacturing, agribusiness and call centres all showing particular strength. Mr Aquino, whose family, huge landowners, is not short of a bob, has made a stand against corruption, and his approval ratings are high. But presidents may serve only one term, and an election for his successor takes place on May 9th. The question is whether Mr Aquino’s successor can keep the Philippines on the upswing. Five presidential candidates want to have a go. In America, a vice-president might present himself as the candidate for continuity. But in the Philippines voters elect the vice-president separately, and Mr Aquino has long been at odds with his number two, Jejomar Binay, now a leading prospect to replace him. Until 2010 Mr Binay was mayor of Makati, the wealthy business and financial district of Manila. It is home to the country’s stock exchange and the biggest banks and corporations; it also has the capital’s least-awful traffic. Over the past year Mr Binay has faced a stream of corruption allegations from his time running Makati, including not declaring properties, city contracts awarded to family members, the existence of bogus charities and hundreds of ghost employees on the government payroll. But the allegations seem hardly to dent his standing. Ordinary Filipinos care more about their own poverty and about lower-level graft: sticky-fingered bureaucrats and policemen. In Mr Binay they see less a corrupt politician than one who gets things done: he makes much of having got Makati residents free health care and better schools. In a televised election debate last month Mr Binay slammed the government for underspending on development and poverty alleviation (you could for a moment pretend that he was not part of the government he was railing against). One of the candidates jostling with Mr Binay for pole position is Grace Poe (pictured), a 47-year-old senator with a thin record but a compelling back story. She is said to have been abandoned at a cathedral as a baby, and was adopted by a popular film star, Fernando Poe, himself a presidential candidate in 2004. With bags of charm, in 2013 she won the highest ever number of votes for a Senate candidate. She shone when handling a congressional hearing into a botched raid against terrorists last year in which 44 policemen died. For some months Ms Poe’s candidacy had been in doubt. In December the election commission disqualified her, claiming that, as a foundling, she could not prove that she was a natural-born Filipina and that, as a former American resident, she had not lived in the Philippines for ten years—both constitutional requirements. Ms Poe appealed, and on March 8th the Supreme Court ruled in her favour. Though an independent, Ms Poe has backed Mr Aquino in the Senate. Now the president may be backing her behind the scenes, even though he has formally endorsed Manuel “Mar” Roxas, an old family ally. A former banker and interior minister, and the grandson of an earlier president, Mr Roxas has promised to carry on along Mr Aquino’s “straight path” fighting corruption. But he struggles to connect with ordinary Filipinos. Ms Poe, all sparkle, stands a better chance of winning. The other candidate with a chance is Rodrigo Duterte, or “Dirty Harry”, the crime-busting mayor of Davao, the largest city on the southern island of Mindanao. Though Muslims in western Mindanao have long waged a separatist battle, Davao is among the country’s safest cities, though the methods are dubious: vigilante execution squads that the mayor has endorsed. Mr Duterte speaks his mind. When a visit to Davao by Pope Francis last year caused traffic mayhem, Mr Duterte spluttered: “Pope, you son of a bitch, go home.” Asked about his womanising, he admitted to having two girlfriends, but complained that “without Viagra, I have a difficult time”. He appeals to people who want a strong leader. Others worry about how his rough edges will go down abroad. In the end, the race may come down to Ms Poe’s star power versus Mr Binay’s support from his party and business, and his strong links with local governments. No candidate promises to upend Mr Aquino’s programme, but then policy has never figured strongly in Philippine politics. For all of the country’s robust economy and its growing middle class, politics is driven by personalities and dominated by a few powerful families. Whoever wins in May, that will not change.A tide in the affairs of Kiribati LOUNGING under a thatch-roofed pavilion in the village of Abaokoro, a retired seaman, Tiree Tepenea, points at the turquoise lagoon that stops a few steps from his door. Flooding from the sea has become more common during his lifetime, he says, and dramatically eroded the coastline. Seawalls built with manual labour are of limited use against the restless tides. “Maybe in a few years the floods will cover this island,” Mr Tepenea says of Tarawa, one of Kiribati’s 33 wafer-thin islands and atolls. The country’s people “are just waiting for the problems that may come” as the climate changes. Kiribati (pronounced “kiribass” and derived from the British colonial name for the islands, the Gilberts) is not close to much. Its total land area, about a third of tiny Luxembourg’s, is home to just 111,000 people. Yet in diplomatic terms it punches above its weight because many of its atolls, rising just 2 metres (6.6 feet) above sea level, could someday be consumed by rising waters. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts a mean global rise in sea levels of up to nearly a metre by 2100. A 195-nation deal in December to keep an increase in global temperatures to below 2°C may not be enough to save Kiribati or other low-lying atoll nations from rising waters. The people of Kiribati, which declared independence in 1979, have long lived with the spectre of environmental catastrophe. In the 1950s drought forced colonial authorities to relocate hundreds to the Solomon Islands. The exhaustion of phosphate reserves on Banaba Island led to hundreds more being settled in Fiji. The El Niño weather system caused heavy rains and flooding on Kiritimati, or Christmas Island, in 1997. Severe overcrowding on South Tarawa is depleting fresh-water reserves. Now comes the threat of more-violent storms and rising sea levels. Anote Tong, a charismatic leader who stepped down as president this week after reaching his three-term limit, has frequently lectured rich countries about the human impact of rising carbon emissions. He has also developed contingency plans in the event that the world’s biggest emitters do not change their habits. In 2014 he used nearly $7m of government money to buy 6,000 acres of land in Fiji. It was, Mr Tong says, partly a property investment aimed at making money for the state. But since it is a potential site for farming, there was also a food-security dimension. And in the worst case, he says, it could be used for relocating Kiribati’s population. Mr Tong has also championed programmes for vocational training, to ensure that Kiribati’s people can eventually migrate with “dignity” and not as “climate refugees”. Mr Tong’s intense focus on climate change has made him a star on the international circuit, but his popularity is weaker at home. Tobwaan Kiribati (“Embracing Kiribati”), the lone opposition party, contends that Mr Tong has built an international brand while failing to deal adequately with alarmingly high rates of unemployment and infant mortality at home. Mr Tong’s predecessor, Tebururo Tito, even claims—with no evidence—that Mr Tong has deliberately left some villages vulnerable to dangerous floods in order to stoke international perceptions of Kiribati’s climate vulnerability. Mr Tito also says that Mr Tong’s faith in climate science is a brazen challenge to divine authority. (The country is fervently Christian, and churches hold enormous sway over public opinion.) Mr Tong bats away the charges as groundless. On March 9th the opposition’s candidate, Taaneti Mamau, a former secretary of finance, won the presidential election. He is from one of the drought-afflicted southern islands of Kiribati, whose population has fallen by a quarter since 1995. The question is whether Mr Mamau will continue to beat the drum on climate change, at home and abroad, and how this will go over. Educated young in Kiribati seemed especially receptive to Mr Tong’s migration-with-dignity mantra. “But the old ones, they’re not interested,” Teneti Bakarereua, a Catholic nun in South Tawara, says over a church breakfast. They mean to live and die where they were born.“ITS time to charge yourself!” So, ungrammatically, the shiny wrappers of Lov Charger cream wafers declare. It is not just the peppy slogan and a pretty price (two rupees, or around three American cents) that make the biscuits sell. Their maker is a firm called MSG, letters that stand not for a flavour enhancer but—take your pick—either for Messenger of God or for the initials of the three gurus who have led Dera Sacha Sauda, a north Indian sect, since its founding in 1948. MSG and MSG2 are also the names of two films that star the sect’s current leader as a brawny, sequin-studded superhero who swats down goons and gangsters like flies while bursting into such lyrics as “I am so lucky because/You are my love charger.” The talented writer of that song is none other than Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh Insan, the star himself (pictured, above). Mr Singh is far from the first religious leader in India to make money or a spectacle of himself. But his self-promotion via Bollywood-style films, music, gatherings like rock concerts and, since February, a line of some 150 consumer products, marks an important change. Mr Singh is one of a new, more sophisticated crop of godmen, as India’s press calls the country’s proliferation of spiritual entrepreneurs. They are seeking corporate-style synergies between religious messaging, personal celebrity, commercial success and political influence. An early mover is Ramdev, a teacher of yoga whose television lessons are credited with popularising the discipline among India’s fast-growing middle class. Ten years ago he launched a range of “ayurvedic” drugs and beauty products. More recently Ramdev’s brands have expanded aggressively into foods and detergents, competing directly with big multinationals. When India last year slapped a ban on instant noodles produced by Nestlé, a global food giant, after a health inspection raised alarms, Ramdev quickly stepped in with a version of his own. His next venture is a line of yoga sportswear that he says will be made from khadi, the homespun cotton that became an emblem of India’s independence movement. Advertising for the godman’s brands is not subtle. A recent newspaper spot suggests that most competing hair oil is “carcinogenic for every human being and may cause cancer”. Fine print urges customers to buy Indian so as to realise Mahatma Gandhi’s dream of self-reliance. Another product, a medicinal herb said to promote fertility, has stirred controversy. Some say its ancient name, which means “son’s life seed”, hints unethically at particular effectiveness in spawning male offspring. Nor are Ramdev’s promotion campaigns small affairs. During one week in January his Patanjali brand was the top spender in Indian television advertising, beating such consumer giants as Unilever and Cadbury with a blitz of 17,000 showings. Annual sales have reportedly doubled in the past year, to nearly $750m. Such success clearly buys clout, too. Patanjali’s factory complex was recently granted protection by a crack anti-terrorist police unit. The only other private facilities in India with such a privilege are strategic installations such as oil refineries, steel mills and internet hubs. Another of India’s god-magnates and a purveyor of traditional medicines is Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. He wields huge influence through his Art of Living foundation, a worldwide meditation franchise. When he decided to hold what is being billed as the world’s biggest arts fair on the banks of the Yamuna river, which flows through Delhi, a score of government agencies chose to overlook the fact that the river’s flood plain, a vital catchment area for drinking water, is meant to be protected from any encroachment. The prime minister, Narendra Modi, will even appear on a seven-acre stage along with the world’s biggest orchestra. Even the Indian army has chipped in, erecting a pair of pontoon bridges to carry what Art of Living says will be 3.5m visitors across the Yamuna. Environmentalists have made a fuss, and India’s figurehead president has called off his planned visit. Delhi’s police, not known for their delicacy, declared it dangerous for big crowds to gather by a river that is inky black, infested with mosquitoes and reeks of sewage. But after much fluster and a hasty investigation, the authorities decided that the show, which runs from March 11th to 13th, must go on.CHINA claims Taiwan as its own and has long attempted to stop the hapless country from joining international organisations or maintaining official ties with all but a tiny handful of states. So Taiwan has to employ other means to raise its standing. With the recent opening in Chiayi county of a southern branch of the vast National Palace Museum, “museum diplomacy” is becoming a part of that—a way not just to boost tourism but to assert Taiwan’s sense of its own history as distinct from China’s. The main National Palace Museum in Taipei, the capital, which over 5m people visit a year, is an astounding receptacle for artefacts from imperial China. They were originally from Beijing’s Forbidden City and were brought by Chiang Kai-shek to Taiwan before his Kuomintang forces fled China from the all-conquering Communists in 1949. To Chiang and his followers, the collections of ancient works, imperial regalia and international treaties were a source of Chinese legitimacy. But a democratic Taiwan has developed a sense of identity rooted in something broader than a confining Sinosphere. The Chiayi extension is billed as a museum of Asian art and culture. The focus is on historical interactions among Asian cultures. “Taiwan’s identity comes from Asia and the sea,” says Shieh Jyh-wey, a member of the government that commissioned the branch 15 years ago.  Some Chinese imperial artefacts from the Taipei collection are on display in Chiayi, but they are part of exhibitions with a pan-Asian theme. Exquisite silk wrappings used to cover Tibetan Buddhist texts, commissioned by the concubine of an early Qing emperor, are being shown for the first time; they illustrate the spread of Buddhist art across Asia. Another display of Islamic jade derives from a little-known collection of the Qing emperors. A permanent exhibition on Asian tea culture shows how Taiwanese culture stands increasingly on its own terms. It elevates Taiwan’s tea-taking practices, introduced by Fujianese immigrants, to the level of the formal rituals of Japanese tea ceremonies or those from China’s Song and Ming dynasties. For Hans-Martin Hinz, president of the International Council of Museums, the stress on international perspectives rather than narrow nationalism makes the new museum a “trendsetter” in Asia.WHEN Shinzo Abe last called a snap general election, just two years after coming to power in 2012, Japan’s prime minister saw an opposition in disarray and a chance to consolidate seats in the Diet. Yet he presented the election as a matter of high principle: in the face of a sluggish economy he had chosen to delay a long-agreed rise in Japan’s consumption (value-added) tax, and such a portentous decision required the people’s approval. Mr Abe won handily. Now, principle appears to demand yet another election soon. That is because, with an economy refusing to show any bounce, Mr Abe may well announce that he is putting off the tax hike (from 8% to 10% and promised for April 2017) a second time. Perhaps he will do so after he hosts a summit for G7 leaders in May. Precedent would make it very hard for him not to dissolve the Diet and announce a general election over the matter. The betting is that he would fix the election for the same time as a scheduled poll in June or July for half of the seats in the upper house. Some of his colleagues want Mr Abe to hurry up and call a general election sooner, before his luck runs out. There are challenges on various fronts. The economy is the biggest worry: it shrank by an annualised 1.1% in the final three months of 2015, as consumer spending slowed. To boost demand the central bank announced a policy of negative interest rates in January. But the market reaction—a lower stockmarket and a higher yen—has been just the opposite of what was hoped for. Sooner or later, voters will want to blame Mr Abe for an economy he promised to fix. And there are other policies that are unpopular but for which he has not yet been punished. They include attempts to get Japan’s nuclear power plants working again after all were shut down following the catastrophic meltdown at Fukushima Dai-ichi five years ago this week. And new security laws passed last year, allowing Japan to take a more robust stance overseas, appear, according to many experts, to be unconstitutional. They certainly make many Japanese uncomfortable. Adding to the mood of discontent are the political scandals within the ruling party. In January the economy minister, Akira Amari, one of the prime minister’s key allies, resigned over a dodgy political donation. And a lawmaker in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) who had made much of his being the first Diet member to take paternity leave turned out to have been having affairs during his wife’s pregnancy. Since then the prime minister’s approval rating has fallen to below 50%. As for the consumption tax, a first increase, from 5% to 8% in April 2014, knocked consumer spending. A key economic adviser to the prime minister, Etsuro Honda, now says that postponing the next hike is essential if people are not to lose faith in Mr Abe’s broader efforts to boost the economy. As it is, after three years of radical monetary easing, core inflation remains around zero, a long way from the central bank’s target of 2%. Not even Japan’s trade-union leaders are calling for big wage increases. And banks’ lending margins remain under pressure. It all threatens Mr Abe’s promises of a virtuous circle of higher wages, consumption and investment—and raises questions about how the Japanese might vote in the summer. Plenty of people think that Mr Abe should redouble his efforts to liberalise the economy, including by introducing sweeping reforms to the labour market. He could push much harder to ensure that part-time workers, whose low wages are a drag on consumption, are treated better. But no menu of deeper reforms is about to be revealed, a government official says. Meanwhile, however, though the opposition Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) is working hard to ready candidates for a general election, it is unlikely to gain much ground. It still has miserable levels of popular support: only a tenth of voters back the centre-left party, according to opinion polls, compared with two-fifths for the LDP. The DPJ would highlight a second postponement in the consumption tax hike as a sign that Mr Abe’s economic plans have failed. But it is unlikely to oppose a postponement, especially if ordinary households are suffering. In weighing whether or not to call a double election, Mr Abe will consider the chances of a victory large enough to carry through his dream, that of rewriting Japan’s constitution in ways that erode the pacifist promises, laid down by the American occupiers in the late 1940s, that lie at the heart of it. He says that such a revision is necessary because, seven decades after a disastrous war, Japan no longer deserves to have its hands tied by an outdated pacifism when it lives in an increasingly dangerous neighbourhood. Abe likes a sound constitution Changing the constitution would require a two-thirds majority in both houses of the Diet, and a plain majority in a national referendum. The LDP and its coalition partner, Komeito, have more than two-thirds of the lower house, with 325 out of 475 seats, but a narrower majority, of 136 out of 242 seats, in the upper chamber. Mr Abe might pick up seats in the upper house, and also be able to rely on the help of a small right-wing party called Osaka Ishin no Kai. Yet attempting to revise the constitution would still cause deep alarm among the many Japanese who remain enormously proud of their country’s pacifism. In short, the main risk to Mr Abe’s hopes of securing electoral victory is his inclination to speak lovingly of his plans for constitutional change.
