SOMETIMES leaders protest too much that all is well. Once a year, the 3,000 or so delegates of the National People’s Congress (NPC), China’s parliament, meet in Beijing to rubber-stamp decisions that have already been made in secret by leaders of the ruling Communist Party. At the session’s opening on March 5th (tea mugs, pictured, at the ready), the prime minister, Li Keqiang, announced that China had met all of the main targets that it set five years ago for completion by this year. A senior state-planning official told reporters covering the congress that the economy would “absolutely not” suffer a hard landing. The NPC’s chief said the government would act in full compliance with the constitution (which enshrines freedom of speech and assembly), and President Xi Jinping told delegates that capable, honest officials would be promoted. Few will be reassured by the congress’s relentlessly upbeat tone (that the media are being cleansed of sceptical voices with more than usual vigour will not help either). Commodity markets perked up a bit in response to Mr Li’s speech, which gave hints of more stimulus measures in the offing to prop up growth. But bearish sentiment about the country’s economic prospects for the rest of the decade remains rife at home and abroad. It is compounded by a growing perception that the country’s leaders—once widely praised for their management of a prolonged and spectacular run of economic growth—are now floundering as it slows. For the current year, Mr Li sensibly avoided the previous practice of declaring a specific aim for GDP growth. Instead he gave himself some wiggle-room by announcing a target range, of between 6.5% and 7%. By global standards, such a rate would be more than respectable. For China, it would be about the same as last year (see chart). But it will be difficult to achieve without more stimulus. And if China’s recent record is any guide, pump-priming may result in wasteful projects and even bigger piles of bad debt that could end up throttling the economy. Mr Li gave hints that, to hit its growth target, China would lean more heavily on both the central government’s fiscal and monetary policy, rather than binge spending on construction projects by local governments. He said the budget deficit would reach 3% of GDP, up from last year’s 2.3% target, and M2 (a broad gauge of the money supply) would grow by 13%, compared with last year’s target of 12%. Those may sound like modest adjustments, but they should help to boost growth, at least in the short term. Monetary policy is already easing. In January new lending by Chinese banks was 2.51 trillion yuan ($385 billion)—the most ever in a single month. The longer term looks more worrisome. One of the NPC’s duties during its ten-day session will be to approve China’s 13th five-year economic plan, the drafting of which was led by President Xi Jinping (see article). As expected, Mr Li said the government was aiming for average annual growth of 6.5% during the plan’s time-frame, which is from this year to 2020. But he acknowledged this would not be easy, thanks to problems such as an “extremely complicated and challenging international environment” and declining global trade. The superstitious in the party will be nervous, not because the number 13 suggests misfortune in China—it doesn’t—but because the progenitor of five-year plans, the Soviet Union, had barely embarked on its 13th one when it collapsed. The full text of the plan had not been published as The Economist went to press. But snippets released so far suggest it will at least sustain the party’s rhetorical commitment to badly needed economic reforms. Mr Li restated the government’s belief in a “decisive role” for market forces, and in the necessity of “supply-side reforms” (implying a need for deep structural changes, such as reducing the dominance of inefficient state-owned firms in vital areas of the economy). But leaders’ attempts at reform have failed to impress so far, and Mr Li gave no indication that he intends to launch any important new measures soon. He did not even mention the possibility of a property tax, a long-mulled measure that would help to reduce rampant speculation (see article). The plan includes some capital projects of questionable value, such as 50 new airports by 2020 and a second train line to remote Tibet. It even proposes to build, by 2030, a 126km (80-mile) high-speed rail link between China and Taiwan. That would be the world’s longest rail tunnel if it ever happens. It is highly unlikely to, if Taiwan has a say. Instead of focusing on economic reform, Mr Xi appears more preoccupied with tightening his political grip. Only days before the NPC opened, the authorities closed a social-media account with 38m followers operated by Ren Zhiqiang, a former property developer and party member. Mr Ren had used it to criticise Mr Xi’s recent efforts to tighten the party’s control over the media. During the NPC censors removed an online article published by Caixin, a business magazine in Beijing. It was accused of posting “illegal content”, apparently by quoting an adviser to the NPC as saying “the right to speak freely must be protected”. Optimists had once thought that Mr Xi, having secured political control, would eventually get around to using his power to attack foot-draggers on reform. Those hopes have not been entirely extinguished. But it is difficult to tell whether Mr Xi has gained the power he wants and now has little interest in reform, or whether he still does not feel politically secure. His strenuous efforts to crush opposition, more than three years after he took over as party chief, do not suggest that he has enormous confidence. Either way, it may be hard to square the party’s five-year plan with Mr Xi’s own personal one.A psychedelic plan LAST year a kitschy animated video about the drafting of China’s new five-year economic plan, probably commissioned by the government, attempted to sell the country’s road map to English speakers (see first video, below). “Every five years in China, man; They make a new development plan,” goes the country-style ditty. As the National People’s Congress (NPC), China’s parliament, prepares to approve that document, a new video aimed at audiences at home seeks to instil love for the plan’s drafter-in-chief, President Xi Jinping, or Uncle Xi as state media often call him. “If you marry someone, marry someone like Uncle Xi; Swift and decisive, conscientious in everything he does,” belts out a woman in the folk-bombast style beloved of China’s propagandists (the second video, below). Such attempts to harness popular culture in the adulation of Mr Xi and his works are increasingly common. The latest fawning hit praises Mr Xi’s “heroism” and “unyielding spirit”, and lauds his war on corruption: “No matter whether it’s flies or tigers, monsters or freaks, he will fight them all down.” Accompanying footage shows goose-stepping soldiers and ballistic missiles at a parade last year celebrating the end of the second world war. Since taking office in 2012 Mr Xi has been fostering a public image of himself as a staunch defender of the Communist Party and its Maoist traditions. Signs of a growing personality cult abound. Tibetan delegates to the NPC were spotted wearing badges with Mr Xi’s picture on them, a form of leader-worship that fell out of fashion in China in the 1970s. A new (big yellow) book called “Xi Jinping: Wit and Vision” will soon be in bookshops. When Mr Xi visited America last year, the party’s main mouthpiece, the People’s Daily, released a video in which foreign students in China called the solidly built leader “super-charismatic” and “so cute”; one hoped her future husband would resemble him. Mao would have loved it. In parks across the country people still sing and dance to the hymns of his era; Mr Xi is reviving and remoulding a remarkably tenacious culture. The Xi ballads also echo Russian odes to President Vladimir Putin (“I want a man like Putin, who won’t be a drunk,” goes one). One song, “Uncle Xi loves Mama Peng”, praises a “manly” Mr Xi for his “fairy-tale” love for his wife, Peng Liyuan. “Xi Dada versus horrified corrupt officials” is a catchy hit about graft. Another one in the style of Peking Opera recounts Mr Xi’s visit to a pork-bun restaurant in Beijing in 2013. There is also a song praising Mr Xi for: “Always caring about what migrant workers need; Always thinking about how laid-off workers are doing.” Some are probably the spontaneous work of amateurs; others are made at the behest of government officials, either to propagate Mr Xi’s message or impress him. They reflect a growing politicisation of the arts and media (last year the party banned 17 songs by a rap trio called In3, whose lyrics rail against high medical costs, Beijing’s traffic and officials who dine out on state funds). Mr Xi would like to teach China to sing in perfect harmony with him.ONCE an environmental sluggard, China now pursues green policies with gusto. Last September it announced plans to launch a national carbon-trading scheme in 2017 aimed at reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. It also played an important role in December in securing a global deal in Paris on combating climate change. On March 5th China announced that its new five-year economic plan would include a target to cap annual energy consumption at a tough-sounding 5 billion tonnes of coal equivalent by 2020, up from 4.3 billion now. It is beginning to make greenness sound all too easy. A study by two researchers in Britain—Lord Nicholas Stern, a prominent environmental economist, and Fergus Green, an expert on climate policy—suggests it may indeed be relatively easy for China, because of the modest targets that it is setting for itself. The country says its emissions of carbon dioxide (CO²) will peak by 2030. But the academics’ paper, due to be published on the website of the journal Climate Policy later this month, shows that achieving this will pose little challenge. The country’s coal consumption almost trebled between 2000 and 2013, the government says. But Lord Stern and Mr Green say it is possible that the highest peak of China’s CO² emissions may have been reached by 2014. Even if not, they are not going to rise anything like as fast as before, and are almost certain to begin falling by 2025. That assumes that GDP growth is in line with official targets of 6.5% a year on average for the rest of the decade, and 5.5% in the following five years. There are many who doubt such growth can be achieved. In any case, the decline of manufacturing as a source of growth will result in a diminishing need to burn fossil fuels to keep factories going. China may have been deliberately underestimating the rate at which this shift will happen. Recent improvements in the way that China gathers coal-related statistics give the researchers greater confidence in their projections. Official figures show that coal production fell 2.5% in 2014 and that imports dropped by 10.9%; in the first three quarters of 2015 production sank 4.3%. This suggests that China’s emissions intensity—the amount of CO² it emits per unit of GDP—has already started falling. Lord Stern and Mr Green say the numbers showing falls in coal production and imports correspond with trends seen in the generation of thermal power (which are relatively easy to monitor, because related data come directly from meters) as well as in manufacturing output. At the same time, the proportion of China’s energy generated by renewable sources, such as wind and the sun, is rising. The country already invests more in exploiting these than America and Japan combined. China believes its security might be threatened if it becomes overly dependent on imported fossil fuels, and it wants to reduce the smog created by coal-burning because it is causing public anger and many premature deaths. Between 2010 and 2014, non-fossil energy generation capacity increased by 73%. But using such infrastructure effectively is not so simple. Within the energy industry, disputes are rampant over which generators should have priority in dispatching electricity to grids. Wind and solar farms often lose out. And coal-fired plants are still being built apace as local officials find the short-term economic benefits of such projects hard to resist. But many analysts still think it is likely that China is underselling its emissions-reducing abilities. In 2020, when signatories to the Paris accord on climate change are due to set themselves new carbon-cutting goals, the world’s biggest emitter may come under pressure to be more ambitious.From China, with gritted teeth ONLY a few hundred metres separate the small but lively Chinese city of Dandong from Sinuiju, its drab North Korean counterpart on the opposite bank of the Yalu River. There are two iron-truss bridges in the city centre, built by Japanese who were then occupying the area: one in 1911 and the other in 1943. Both were badly damaged by American bombers during the Korean war of the 1950s. A surviving stretch of the older one, renamed “Broken Bridge”, is now a tourist attraction (on the right of the picture). The newer one (on the left) still carries road and rail traffic across the river, a vital conduit for North Korea’s trade with China.   In theory, that may now be disrupted by sweeping sanctions imposed by the UN, with China’s backing, on March 2nd. They ban trade in luxury items and call for (potentially time-consuming and costly) inspections of cargo going into, and coming out of, North Korea. China is by far the biggest trading partner of the North; if these sanctions are being applied rigorously, it should be evident in Dandong, which handles an estimated 70% of the trade between the two countries. It is not, yet. The first reported case of sanctions being enforced involved the impounding of a North Korean cargo ship at a commercial port in the Philippines a few hours after the UN voted to impose fresh sanctions in response to tests by North Korea earlier this year of a nuclear device and a long-range ballistic missile (dressed up as a rocket carrying a satellite into space). But there has been no report of trade between North Korea and China being affected. On March 9th your correspondent saw a sporadic flow of lorries travelling in both directions across the bridge. Locals said the volume looked normal. A foreign observer familiar with the area says it may be that the details of the new enforcement regime “have not yet trickled down to the person wearing the hat at the border”. Traders in the city say they have yet to feel the impact of sanctions. At a riverfront shop selling North Korean alcohol, cigarettes and ginseng, the owner shows no concern. He says the goods he sells will not be affected (he is right that they are not banned, unlike watches, snowmobiles and jet-skis). It would certainly be a bother for traders if Chinese customs officials were to inspect every shipment for items prohibited by the UN, including anything that could be used to help the country’s nuclear and missile programmes. But it is far from clear that that is what China intends. The latest UN sanctions allow for less rigorous inspections in the case of goods needed for humanitarian purposes. China could argue that much of its trade with North Korea falls in that category: it is the main supplier of food and oil. Since the latest sanctions were imposed, Chinese officials have continued to sound lukewarm about them. China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, said this week that “blind faith” in sanctions was not a “responsible” approach. Peninsula of provocation: A timeline of clashes between North and South Korea South Korean press reports have said, however, that China had already begun restricting some North Korean transactions at Chinese banks and barring North Korean vessels at Chinese ports by late February, before the latest sanctions. China’s agreement to the tougher regime is certainly a sign of its frustration with its dangerously capricious neighbour, whose leader, Kim Jong Un, said this week that North Korea had developed miniaturised nuclear warheads that could be mounted on ballistic missiles. He even threatened a nuclear attack in response to large-scale South Korean and American military exercises now under way. Some observers are sceptical that the North has acquired such technology. Most discount its bellicose bombast. If he wants to curry favour with China, Mr Kim could try holding up his end of a deal for building a new bridge in Dandong. Gleaming but still idle, it was built by China at a cost of more than $325m. China has publicly blamed North Korean foot-dragging: in North Korea, the bridge ends in an empty field, connected to nothing.WHEN Hind Al-Otaibi went to the Riyadh Personal Status Court to have her father struck out as her wali, or guardian, the judges seemed sympathetic. Her father had raped and bruised her, Ms Otaibi, who was a teenager at the time, told the court. He refused to let her travel abroad, even to her mother’s funeral, and when she escaped from home had persuaded social services to send her back. After consideration, the judges determined last year that her father, an imam from the Saudi interior of Nejd, remained her legal guardian; but that a guardian only had powers to approve his ward’s marriage. If upheld on appeal, the ruling could topple the legal edifice of male control, depriving walis of their power over whether their women can study, work, travel or open bank accounts. “Emancipation from slavery,” says Ms Otaibi. In recent years, the lot of Saudi women has improved. An increasing number of malls, gated communities and even private beaches, where women swap burqinis (the all-enveloping swimwear Saudi women must wear) for bikinis, were put off-limits to the prying eyes of the religious police. The government sent tens of thousands of women abroad to study in Western universities, where they could experience the freedom of moving, dressing and driving as they pleased. Those left behind could gawp at the gap between their own world and the virtual one to which many Saudis escape for hours every day. Armed with doctorates, many have returned to prize open the job market. In 2012 the courts licensed their first female lawyer. Last December women for the first time stood for election to local councils. Bayan al-Zahran, a lawyer in Jeddah, has set up the first female-led law firm, and law faculties in women’s colleges churn out fresh attorneys. The numbers, though, remain paltry. Only 18% of working-age Saudi women work (against 65% of men), one of the world’s lowest rates. And for all the headlines, the kingdom has only 67 female lawyers (out of 3,400), and 21 female councillors (out of 3,150). Female lawyers say they have to contend with judges who tell them to sit down when they stand up to represent clients. But over time the taboos on women in public life seem to fraying. “Women are better at representing other women because women natter more than men, and women understand them better,” says Judge Faisal Orani, fresh from sentencing a whisky-drinker to 80 lashes. He opposes the introduction of female judges, he says, “but over time, anything can change. Maybe I’ll change too.” The kingdom’s joyless gender segregation persists. Banks maintain separate entrances for men and women, Starbucks restricts women from its open-air balcony and McDonald’s makes men and women queue separately for its burgers. In Riyadh and in Jeddah, though not in a few more liberal places such as Qatif, the clerics—who always opposed female participation in the elections—have stopped the new female local councillors from sitting in the council chambers with men. But to clerical consternation, (veiled) women now operate the tills in Ikea, a Swedish furniture outlet, in a poorer part of Riyadh, and men and women queue in mixed aisles. At the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology outside Jeddah, male and female students attend the same lectures and mingle freely. Architects of new office blocks locate male and female toilets on the same floor. Most Saudi women have yet to take the liberties their Iranian counterparts do with the veil. “Parents would object if I didn’t cover my face,” says a primary school headmistress who longs to remove it. But growing numbers of high-school girls are donning headscarves only, no matter that their elders consider that scandalous. In Jeddah, a more liberal port city, seamstresses design abayas with bright colours and women smoke water-pipes out of doors. But worryingly, King Abdullah’s incremental reforms seem to be stalling and even going to reverse under his successor, King Salman. His young son, Muhammad, who operates most of the levers of power, says he is anxious to increase Saudi productivity, and to lower birth-rates, by getting women out of the home and into the workplace. But even so he seems nervous of confronting the religious establishment, on whom the Al Saud rulers depend for legitimacy. Many of Abdullah’s reformers have been shifted; and a host of hardliners are back. The only female minister, in the education ministry, was dismissed soon after Salman took the throne. Four women who publicly defied the still unreformed ban on female driving were barred from contesting local elections. Shoppers in Jeddah report that the religious police are back, demanding that department stores black out any glimpse of unveiled women on their packaging. One executive at an international financial-services firm says that the snoops carried out three spot-checks on her office last year to check for signs of the sexes mingling. She is once again being forced to enter through side-entrances when visiting clients, while her male counterparts go through the front door; and they have to travel to meetings in separate cars. In the new, more conservative environment, perhaps the best hope for women is that the country might rediscover its own traditions. A senior official admires footage of the Saudi state’s founder, Abdulaziz, holding court in 1930s Mecca, while women riding on horseback bring their wares to market. At Jeddah’s annual festival, the organisers display the colourful costumes women used to wear before the puritans imposed the black abaya of the central desert on the whole country. Most striking of all is the Prophet Muhammad’s own requirement that women and men perform the pilgrimage to Mecca together; and that when women go round the Kaaba, Islam’s holiest place, they show their face. Saudi Arabia’s new rulers might take note.Cairo needs a better metro RIYADH, the Saudi capital, is no easy place to navigate. It sprawls over 1,500 square kilometres (580 square miles) and, but for a few exceptions, its drab, low-rise buildings all look much the same. For most of the year it is far too hot and dusty to walk anywhere. Little wonder the kingdom is touting a new 85-station metro, which is due to open in 2018, as a revolution for the city (it is expected that women will travel in separate carriages). Public-transport systems are in vogue across the region. Doha, the capital of tiny Qatar, will open its metro a year after Saudi Arabia. Oman is building railways. And it is not just the Gulf: Algeria is also constructing railways. Morocco is interested in trams. Lebanon is looking into a rapid bus system—a bus and metro hybrid with its own lanes—for the areas around Beirut. This trend is relatively new. Many Middle Eastern countries started to invest in buses only around a decade ago, but public networks are still limited; private minibuses abound. Dubai was the first place to operate a mass transit system when it opened its metro in 2009. In the few countries with railways, they are often out of use. Instead, governments have tended to build new roads. Amman and Beirut have no transport other than buses. Metro systems in Cairo and Tehran have failed to keep pace with urban expansion. Mostly, public transport in the region remains “really very bad”, says Ziad Nakat of the World Bank. Demand for ways to get around has grown rapidly since the 1970s. Populations have exploded. The region is one of the most urbanised in the world: some 60% of Middle Eastern people live in cities. Poor urban planning means towns often sprawl in every direction. Greater Cairo boasts a population of some 20m people. The lack of good public transport, coupled with rising incomes in some places, has pushed up the use of cars. Pew, an American research outfit, reckons 81% of Lebanese households have a car, not far off America’s 88%. Between 2012 and 2022, car ownership in the region is set to grow more quickly than any other, according to Carmudi, a car classifieds site. Meanwhile in poorer countries, such as Egypt, where cars are beyond measly pay packets, people struggle to get from A to B. Donkeys and carts endure. Tuk-tuks ply the streets in shanty towns and rural areas. People hang out of minibuses or are forced to squash up, faces against windows. The ensuing mess makes for nasty air and grumpy people, not to mention some of the world’s highest rates of road fatalities. A World Bank study estimated (conservatively) that 4% of Egypt’s GDP was lost each year because of time wasted in traffic in Cairo, its capital and the Arab world’s megacity. Part of the reason is that tailbacks encourage people to move into cities rather than commute. This adds to the stresses on cities already struggling to provide services to their people, such as Beirut, whose 2m inhabitants do not receive 24-hour power and water. The old solution of simply building more roads is unsustainable. For one thing, land has become too expensive to tarmac over. But shiny buses and trains—one of Riyadh’s stations is being designed by the architect Zaha Hadid—will not be enough on their own, either. People must be tempted to get out of the cool comfort of their car. Many governments, from Egypt to Iran, have started to remove fuel subsidies, causing the price of petrol to rise. But it is still only 20 cents per litre in Kuwait, compared with $1.40 in Britain. Road tolls, which exist in Dubai, and higher parking charges are needed across the region. The biggest barrier to public transport, though, is the expense. Metros can cost millions of dollars per kilometre of track. At a time of low oil prices, even the oil-producing states are cutting back. The United Arab Emirates has stopped tenders for the second part of Etihad, a new 1,200km national railway that is costing 40 billion dirhams ($11 billion). But a day navigating Cairo’s roads is enough to show that inaction now will lead to higher costs in the future.TEODORO OBIANG, the president of Equatorial Guinea, and Teodorín, the most influential of his 42 recognised children, have expensive tastes. While most of his citizens live on less than $2 a day, the older Mr Obiang once shelled out $55 million for a Boeing 737 with gold-plated lavatory fittings. His son had at one point amassed $300m in assets, including 32 sports cars, a Malibu mansion and nearly $2m in Michael Jackson memorabilia. The past few years have been less kind to the Obiang clan. In 2014 the United States Department of Justice forced Teodorín Obiang to sell off a Ferrari, his Los Angeles abode and six life-size Michael Jackson statues in a money-laundering settlement. (He was allowed to keep one of the King of Pop’s crystal-encrusted gloves.) His father, who enjoys the distinction of being the longest-serving president in the world (36 years), has seen his pockets increasingly pinched as oil prices have crashed. While prices were favourable the country boomed. According to the IMF, its GDP expanded by an average of almost 40% per year between 1996 and 2006. But little wealth trickled down to the population. Though its GDP per head is the highest in Africa, over three-quarters of its population lives below the World Bank’s poverty line. Government spending on education and health lags far behind the sub-Saharan African average. Tutu Alicante, the executive director of EG Justice, an advocacy group, compares visiting a public hospital to “signing your own death sentence”. Patients must bring their own sheets and share their rooms with rats. Mr Obiang has instead channelled Equatorial Guinea’s petrodollars into grand projects such as Oyala, a new city he is building deep in the jungle. He hopes to move his capital there to avoid seaborne coup attempts, such as the one he suffered in 2009. The area currently consists of a new 450-room luxury hotel and a warren of empty buildings intended to become an international university. Such endeavours are becoming increasingly difficult to fund. Declining oil production, coupled with lower prices, have led Equatorial Guinea’s economy to shrivel since 2013. Last year was especially grim: GDP shrank by an estimated 10.2%. The great majority of citizens never reaped the benefits of their country’s upturn, so their experience of its downturn has been muted, but work is getting scarcer. Mr Obiang, who overthrew his uncle to become president, has a deplorable human-rights record; dissidents who anger him sometimes end up in prison where guards have been known to shock, beat and carve up their wards with knives. Nobody would be surprised if the economic crunch results in even greater repression. In January, two members of an opposition party, Convergence for Social Democracy, were arrested for the crime of handing out leaflets announcing a future meeting. As the 73-year-old Mr Obiang becomes frailer, his sons, including the prodigal Teodorín, have begun jockeying to succeed him. But in November, when Equatorial Guinea is scheduled to hold a presidential election, there is no doubt about who will prevail—whatever the price of oil.AT SIX in the evening, as the streets start to throng with motorcycle taxis taking people home, a senior civil servant in Rwanda’s ministry of infrastructure sits back at his desk with a large flask of tea. The security officers on the entrance may have already left, but on the second floor officials are settling in for several more hours of work. Glance at their targets—more than doubling the amount of electricity generated in the country, providing infrastructure in cities to accommodate an urban population twice its current level, and all by 2018—and you can see why they are still at their desks. This is a country in a hurry. Twenty-two years since the start of a genocidal civil war that killed about a fifth of the population (and 70% of the minority Tutsis) and saw a third of the survivors fleeing across its borders, Rwanda is still racing to rebuild itself. And the sternest taskmaster is its president, Paul Kagame, who led the rebel forces that ended the genocide and has since shaped the country. The country he liberated had suffered not just an unimaginable human disaster; it was also left wrecked at the end of the civil war. Soldiers and militias loyal to the genocidal Hutu regime had systematically destroyed power plants and factories as they retreated. Hospitals and universities were devastated, their staff butchered or in exile. “We lost a lot of scientists,” Gerardine Mukeshimana, the minister of agriculture, says matter-of-factly, when explaining why the country has only limited capacity for agricultural research. It was also still dangerous, as forces from the former government attacked across the border from bases in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), to the west, killing civilians and soldiers. “The hills were alive with the sounds of bazookas,” recalls Praveen Moman, a British businessman who runs a string of eco-lodges in the region, of his visits in the late 1990s, years after the war had officially ended. “Now visitors get off the plane and think they’ve arrived in the Switzerland of Africa.” By almost all social and economic measures Rwanda has proved to be the developing world’s shining star. Income per capita has doubled since 2000 and, unlike most other countries in the region, it has managed to grow quickly while also reducing inequality. One reason is that its Tutsi-dominated government (it would contest this designation, since talk of ethnicity is firmly suppressed) has bucked the trend of many of its neighbours. Instead of crafting policies aimed at benefiting the kin of those in power, many of its resources have gone to improving the lives of the rural poor, who are largely Hutu. The UN Human Development Index shows that Rwanda had improved by more than any other country over the past 25 years. These achievements are the more impressive since Rwanda is small, hilly, overcrowded and landlocked. Yet with few natural resources other than its fertile soil and a few mines, it has cranked out average growth of 7.5% over the past 10 years. Much of its success is due to effective government. It has clamped down on corruption—Transparency international, a Berlin-based organisation, ranks it as the fourth-least corrupt country in Africa, and well above places such as Greece and Italy. It is also because its government is both disciplined and technocratic. Officials and ministers are expected to work hard and are held accountable through performance contracts that extend right down to local mayors and other community leaders. Those who fail to meet targets (or who fiddle the numbers) are swiftly fired. A third reason is that it has embraced economic policies that are friendly to investment, growth and trade with great vigour; it is rated by the World Bank as the easiest place in continental Africa to do business. Many of its policies read as if they could have been written by the IMF, or this newspaper. Take power, for instance. Instead of trying to boost supply by pouring money into a state-owned utility it has encouraged private investment. That has spurred a wave of projects including extracting gas from Lake Kivu (see article). “Rwanda is an absolute pleasure to do business in compared with a lot of other countries in Africa,” says Paul Hinks, the CEO of Symbion Power, an American firm that is building one of them. Because of its relatively competent administrators and its commitment to the poor it has become the darling of Western governments and NGOs. More than a third of government revenues (and a tenth of GDP) come from aid. The fecund soils of its green capital, Kigali, sprout aid-agency offices like grass after the rains. The downside Yet those pouring money into Rwanda are confronted by a dilemma. As much as Rwanda has progressed on the economic front, its record is badly blotted when it comes to human rights. Domestic opponents of Mr Kagame have a nasty habit of getting locked up or being murdered, even once they have fled into exile. Another stain was Rwanda’s destabilisation of the DRC in the late 1990s after Rwandan troops invaded to stop cross-border raids by forces of the former government. The subsequent violence led to more than 5m deaths and contributed to the disintegration of the DRC. Fear of Mr Kagame runs so deep that in Kigali’s drinking holes people glance left and right, and drop their voices to a whisper, when venturing an opinion on him. With almost no opposition, and no obvious successor, Mr Kagame recently won an overwhelming mandate for changes to the constitution that will allow him to run for a third term in office in 2017 (and two more after that, potentially leaving him in power until 2034, when he will be only 76). The dilemma facing the West is whether to keep giving money to an authoritarian government with such scant regard for human rights and little more than the trappings of democracy. A consensus among aid and development workers in Kigali seems to be that it should; for in few other countries does assistance go so effectively to helping the poor. A broader conundrum facing the country’s benefactors is whether they ought to press Mr Kagame not to run in 2017. Yet aside from limp statements of disapproval (America said it was “disappointed” by his decision) from a few countries, many diplomats privately question whether anyone else could hold the country together. They point to its neighbour, Burundi, which is falling towards a civil war that is already being marked by ethnic killings. Without Mr Kagame’s firm hand, they argue, the miracle wrought in Rwanda could quickly be reversed.
