Could it explode? THE breathtaking beauty of the Lake Kivu region, resting between the volcanoes and steep hills of the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda, is exceeded only by its mercurial temperament. A clear sunny day can turn to a tropical downpour in minutes, before the sun beats down again. The lake’s still waters also hide another face: dissolved within are billions of cubic meters of flammable methane and more still of carbon dioxide, the result of volcanic gases seeping in. Two other lakes, in Cameroon, are filled with deadly carbon dioxide. One of them, Lake Nyos, belched out a huge bubble of it in 1986, asphyxiating about 1,700 people. But Lake Kivu is the only lake anywhere also to contain methane. The mix of gases, held tight by pressure like bubbles in a bottle of fizzy drink, presents both a source of power and a danger to hundreds of thousands of people living around the lake. If it were to froth over, as scientists think it has in the distant past, it could generate huge explosions and smother towns and villages in dense clouds of carbon dioxide. Now several firms are working to harness the energy and mitigate the dangers by gingerly extracting the methane from the lake. Among them is Contour Global, an American firm with power projects across Africa. In December it started producing power from its KivuWatt project. Below a huge barge is a pipe that sucks up water, from which it extracts and purifies the methane before pumping the less-fizzy water back down. In time the project will be expanded to produce about 100 megawatts of energy. That is more than half of Rwanda’s current, inadequate, generating capacity. Other firms are racing to catch up. Symbion Power, another American company, recently signed an agreement with the Rwandan government to build a 50MW power plant that will also run off methane tapped from the lake’s waters. The technology being used to tap the lake’s gas is cutting-edge; but this generation of wildcatters is not the first to see power beneath its placid waters. In 1963 an intrepid businessman sent down a small pipe that he used to power a brewery to produce Primus, a light lager with bubbles altogether more palatable than those used to make it.  A DEAL born of political desperation and fraught with practical, legal and ethical difficulties. That would seem to be a fair description of the agreement hammered out between Germany and Turkey to tackle the refugee crisis, which was endorsed by European Union leaders and Turkey’s beaming prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, on March 7th. Last year 1.2m people entered Europe from Syria, Afghanistan and elsewhere. Without concerted action at least as many are expected to try to follow them this year. The idea behind the agreement is to smash the business model of the people-smugglers. Any migrants landing on a Greek island after making the short but perilous voyage across the Aegean Sea will automatically be sent back to Turkey, where they will be put at the back of the queue of those seeking asylum. To relieve the pressure on Turkey, which has taken in 2.7m refugees since Syria’s civil war began five years ago, for each Syrian returned another whose asylum application has been properly processed will be allowed to enter the EU under an official resettlement scheme. If all goes to plan, migrants may be more reluctant to hand over their life savings to criminal networks and risk their lives making the crossing in capsize-prone inflatable boats. Despite a recent slight drop, the number of people crossing the Aegean remains high (see chart). According to the International Organisation for Migration, more than 320 people have already drowned this year. Last week 25 died off the Turkish coast, including 13 children. For those who do make it across, conditions along the land part of the route have worsened. On the border of Macedonia, which has been closed to refugees since March 9th, thousands are waiting in squalid camps. Stemming the flow is of utmost urgency. For Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, faced with important state elections, the political stakes have become much higher (see article). Mrs Merkel’s welcoming stance to refugees, which at first caught the national mood, has since strengthened opponents in her own party and dented her popularity. Turkey’s government has made the most of the EU’s predicament. On March 4th a court placed the country’s largest-circulation newspaper, Zaman, under state control; its real crime, it seems, was to have links to Fethullah Gulen, a Muslim leader based in America—once an ally of the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, but now a rival. This latest authoritarian excess elicited only the mildest murmur of concern from the EU’s diplomatic service. The terms extracted by Mr Davutoglu in his negotiations with Mrs Merkel are generous. They include the speeding up of a $3.3 billion payment pledged in October, with the sum eventually being doubled, to help pay for better conditions in Turkey’s refugee camps over the next three years; the opening of five new “chapters” in long-stalled discussions about Turkey’s bid to become a member of the EU; and the relaxation of visa requirements for Turkish citizens entering the EU. All this has attracted plenty of criticism, though the deal could still be amended by European leaders next week before it is finalised at another summit on March 17th. Many are shocked that the EU has made such a lavish offer when Mr Erdogan has nothing but contempt for Europe’s values and is undermining the independence of Turkey’s courts and media. Some EU members, particularly those with strong right-wing parties, regard visa-free travel as “very sensitive and problematic”, says Camino Mortera-Martinez of the Centre for European Reform, a think-tank. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers The legality of the proposal has also been questioned. Filippo Grandi, the head of the UN refugee agency, told the European Parliament he was “deeply concerned about any arrangement that would involve the blanket return of anyone from one country to another without spelling out the refugee protection safeguards under international law.” Lawyers are bound to challenge whether Turkey can be declared a safe third country. Under Turkish law, only those fleeing from Europe are granted refugee status, although temporary protection has been given to Syrians. Turkey has deportation agreements with some countries, including Afghanistan, that others consider to be war zones. It is also far from clear whether the deal, if it is indeed agreed upon, can be implemented. The forcible deportation of many thousands of people from Greece will be a logistical nightmare. Much is made of the increasing NATO naval presence in the Aegean since February. The alliance’s mission, though, is not to turn back refugee-laden boats, but to provide real-time intelligence to Frontex, Europe’s struggling border agency, and to Turkish and Greek coastguards which, for long-standing historical reasons, find co-operation difficult. It is also unclear who will decide who gets into Europe. Will that be left to Turkey or will EU officials set up shop in the refugee camps? Finally, an equitable quota-based system for distributing refugees around Europe remains as far away as ever. Yet for all the unease and scepticism, this rather tawdry agreement may be Europe’s last chance of regaining some control over the crisis. Somehow, it will have to be made to work.LOCAL topics usually dominate regional elections. Improving schools and boosting infrastructure are normally the most hotly-contested topics of debate. But when three of Germany’s 16 federal states go to the polls on March 13th the elections will be dominated by one issue: Germany’s refugee policy. The results will be seen as the first big test for Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, since she opened the borders to refugees last year. Currently Mrs Merkel seems to be doing relatively well in the polls, despite a backlash against her refugee policy from parts of the German public and several conservative politicians. In a poll in late February for ARD, a German television station, 54% said they were happy with her work, compared with 46% a few weeks earlier. The prospect of a deal between the European Union and Turkey could boost her standing further. Even so the results look likely to be tricky for Mrs Merkel and her party. There are big regional differences between the three states (see map). Baden-Württemberg is an industrial powerhouse in the south-west; its neighbour, Rhineland-Palatinate, makes some of Germany’s best wines; Saxony-Anhalt is a much poorer state in what used to be East Germany. Only Saxony-Anhalt is governed by a Christian Democrat. Baden-Württemberg is currently run by Winfried Kretschmann, a popular premier from the Green party, while Rhineland-Palatinate’s incumbent is Malu Dreyer, a well-liked Social Democrat. Part of the difficulty is that, despite the support for Mrs Merkel, the Christian Democrats have been faring less well in the polls. Many conservatives have defected to Alternative for Germany, a right-wing party founded in 2013, which is at about 10% in the two western states and an astonishing 19% in Saxony-Anhalt, ahead of the Social Democrats. In response the local Christian Democratic big-wigs, Guido Wolf in Baden-Württemberg and Julia Klöckner in Rhineland-Palatinate, have contorted themselves into campaigning with Mrs Merkel while simultaneously distancing themselves from her refugee policy. Ms Klöckner has even proposed a plan which resembles the daily refugee quotas recently adopted by Austria—an idea which Mrs Merkel opposes. This helps the incumbents, especially Mr Kretschmann. People in Baden-Württemberg are a generally conservative bunch, but with an ecological bent. They like Mr Kretschmann because he is not like the leftist Greens in northern Germany, but rather prides himself on being pragmatic, pro-business and fiscally conservative. On refugees, moreover, Mr Kretschmann is closer to Mrs Merkel than to the Christian Democrats in the state. “I support the chancellor’s course with all my strength and passion,” he boasted at a campaign event in Stuttgart. That is awkward for the chancellor. In a television interview, she had to clarify that people who support her should vote Christian Democrat, not Green. Something similar is taking place in Rhineland-Palatinate. Mrs Dreyer is so popular that the Social Democrats’s slogan is simply her first name, “Malu”. Suffering from multiple sclerosis, she campaigns with the aid of an electric tricycle, the “Malumobil”, and has a winning charm. This makes it hard for any of her opponents to find fault with her. She, too, supports Mrs Merkel’s refugee policy, making Ms Klöckner appear isolated on the matter. Still, the outcome will be read as a signal of whether most Germans are still behind Mrs Merkel’s welcoming stance towards refugees. A vigorous showing by the centre-left parties would indicate that it is. Likewise a strong finish by the Alternative for Germany would point to a dangerous polarisation in German politics. But the outcome will also hint at how loyally the Christian Democrats will stand by their own chancellor. That is what will ultimately decide Mrs Merkel’s fate.A defiant Nadia Savchenko UKRAINIAN historians may yet be grateful to Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. His war against the country has given it a rallying cause. He has also provided it with a national hero, a Ukrainian Joan of Arc. She is Nadia Savchenko, a 34-year-old military pilot who served in Iraq. In July 2014 Ms Savchenko was captured by pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine, smuggled by Russian security services across the border and put on trial for allegedly directing artillery fire that resulted in the death of two Russian television journalists. Prosecutors are demanding that she be sentenced to 23 years in jail and fined 100,000 roubles ($1,400). The fact that she was captured at least an hour before the journalists were killed did not seem to interest the court. Ms Savchenko’s trial, which has been under way for nearly two years, has also turned into a prosecution of the Russian legal system. She has been made a member of Ukraine’s parliament and appointed to the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe. Western and Russian intellectuals have signed petitions in her support. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, called for her immediate release, as did Federica Mogherini, the EU’s high representative for foreign policy. She has several admirers among prominent Russian liberals. Not since Soviet times has a case of a political prisoner in Russia caused such furore. On March 9th Ms Savchenko, who has been held in prison in the small town of Donetsk, in southern Russia, made a closing statement in her trial: “I accept neither guilt, nor the verdict, nor the Russian court…I want the whole democratic civilised world to realise that Russia is a third-world country, with a totalitarian regime and a petty tyrant-dictator, where human rights and international law are spat upon.” She then leapt onto a bench inside a cage and showed her middle finger to the court’s three judges. She finished off by singing the Ukrainian national anthem. Since her trial began Ms Savchenko has posed a direct challenge to the Kremlin: either it returns her to Ukraine or she dies in jail. Ms Savchenko is not bluffing: she has been on several hunger strikes, including one that lasted 82 days. On March 4th she refused to take water or food and said she would continue her fast until her verdict. But the court said this would not happen until March 21st. On March 10th she agreed to take water. Ms Savchenko would not have become a martyr if she had not been abducted. She was one of the activists of the Kiev revolution in early 2014. After Russia’s annexation of Crimea she joined Aidar, one of the most controversial “voluntary” battalions fighting the separatists in the east of Ukraine. Amnesty International, an NGO, claims that Aidar was involved in several human-rights violations, including abductions and unlawful detentions. But Ms Savchenko may turn out to pose as much of a threat to the Ukrainian government, which has been mired in corruption scandals and internal squabbling, as she does to the Kremlin. If and when she returns to Ukraine she will be given a hero’s welcome. She could well turn into a populist leader who could rally the people against the government.Virginia Raggi, a sharp contender EVEN fans of the Five Star Movement, an Italian political group often described as populist, maverick and anti-establishment, would never have credited it with slickness. So when the campaign video for Virginia Raggi, a 37-year-old running for mayor of Rome as the Five Star candidate, appeared online in late February, it came as a shock. Mute the soundtrack on Ms Raggi’s video, in which she declares that “we can again be a world city”, and her sharp suit and on-message presentation might be those of an aspiring Democratic congresswoman in America or Tory politician in Britain. A talented debater, Ms Raggi illustrates how Italy’s second-biggest political group is increasingly coming to resemble a normal party. Polls are continuing to give the Five Star Movement a quarter of the electorate: about eight percentage points behind the governing centre-left Democratic Party (PD), but ten percentage points ahead of the right-wing Northern League. In Rome, a city that has long suffered from neglect and corruption at the hands of mainstream parties, Ms Raggi stands a fair chance of success when the vote is held, most likely in June. That she should have a video ready before her rivals hints at both the importance the Five Star Movement attaches to her campaign, and to its growing professionalism. The enduring popularity of the group is all the more remarkable in view of recent setbacks and upheavals. In different ways, it is the most and least democratic of Italian political movements. Disdainful of conventional democracy, its leaders believe the internet offers a chance to return to an Athenian-style, direct democracy in which every major political issue would be submitted to an online referendum. Within the movement, online ballots are used to set policy and select candidates (and also to expel elected representatives who fail to abide by its strict rules). But the really big decisions, over whether or not Italy should stay in the eurozone and the like, have always been taken by its two unelected co-founders: Beppe Grillo, a satirical comedian, and Gianroberto Casaleggio, a political activist and entrepreneur. Although since last year Mr Grillo has started to concentrate more on his stage career, his influence is still decisive. Last month, as the Senate debated a bill to legalise civil unions, including same-sex partnerships, Mr Grillo unexpectedly announced he would give Five Star Movement senators a free vote on a clause that would allow gay partners to adopt each other’s biological offspring. Many Catholics and conservatives feared the provision would encourage surrogate births. The Movement subsequently withdrew its support for a motion that would have allowed the clause to go through unchallenged. That wrong-footed the PD, which had assumed the movement would not antagonise gay people. The PD had to turn to the centre-right for support. The measure went through without its contentious clause. Commentators accused Mr Grillo of cynically pitching for right-wing votes in preparation for the election in Rome. But Mr Casaleggio said the decision was partly due to “different sensibilities” in the Movement. It is far less radical than Greece’s Syriza government or Spain’s Podemos. United by a loathing for Italy’s tainted mainstream parties, Five Star activists are a heterogeneous bunch, often disagreeing on issues such as privatisation or abortion. Most are progressive, some distinctly conservative. Mr Grillo is critical of the euro and happy to hobnob with Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence Party, which is trying to get Britain out of the EU. If it is to become a mainstream party of government, such differences will need to be settled.THE Mausoleum of Augustus in Rome is a sad place: fenced off and closed to visitors. In most other countries this huge tomb in the city centre would be a treasured national monument. Yet for years the only use Romans made of it was to take their dogs to relieve themselves in the encircling weeds. The latest plans to restore it were approved in 2007. But it was only last month that some of the funding was set aside. With a new mayor due to be elected soon, the money might yet be diverted elsewhere. The plight of the final resting place of Rome’s first emperor illustrates an irony. The European states with the greatest ancient cultural heritage, Italy and Greece, are those whose governments spend least on the preservation of that heritage and promotion of the arts. In 2013 spending on culture accounted for 0.2% of public expenditure in Greece, the lowest share of any EU country, and a measly 0.6% in Italy, the second-lowest, jointly with Portugal and Britain. Culture’s most avid patrons were the Renaissance men and women of the government of Latvia, who gave it 3.2% of their budget.   The parsimony of Italy and Greece is partly connected with their economic difficulties. They are the member states with the heaviest public debts (133% and 179% of GDP respectively). Some of the severest cuts prompted by the euro-zone crisis were made in their culture budgets. But even before the upheaval, Italy and Greece had a propensity for low official spending on culture, which was all the more damaging since private funding has traditionally been scorned in both countries. Culture has special relevance at a moment when Europeans are questioning their common identity more intensely than at any time since the second world war. There are two arguments for the claim that Europeans have more in common than base economic self-interest. One, promoted by the former pope, Benedict XVI, emphasises the continent’s Christian heritage. But many Europeans are understandably wary of defining themselves in terms of religion when Europe is secularising rapidly, and when many of its enemies use religion as a badge of identity. An alternative argument reaches back to classical times and finds in the Roman empire and Greek philosophy the continent’s earliest unification and common beliefs, most notably in democracy. Like other founding myths, this one contains a fair measure of wishful thinking: Plato was no fan of democracy. Even so, the classical narrative that weaves through history from ancient Athens by way of the Renaissance to the Enlightenment and beyond offers an identity for Europe rooted in cultural and intellectual, as well as religious, values. Culture is frequently cited by Greek and Italian officials as an implied reproach to uncouth northerners obsessed with rules: kicking either state out of the euro zone would be tantamount to Europe ripping out its heart. Recently, however, the two countries’ approaches have diverged markedly. The most dramatic evidence was provided by Matteo Renzi, Italy’s prime minister. Soon after jihadists from Islamic State attacked Paris last year he declared that Italy would counter terrorism with €1 billion ($1.1 billion) to be spent on culture, to match €1 billion on extra security. As with many of Mr Renzi’s announcements, there was small print: his finance minister later explained the extra spending was dependent on the European Commission’s agreement to more budget flexibility. Even so, it was still a touching act of defiance against the murderously irrational and faith in the role culture can play in resisting it. With or without the blessing of the commission, this year Mr Renzi has approved a 27% increase in the culture ministry’s budget, to €2 billion (though it falls thereafter). Its energetic minister, Dario Franceschini, is trying to boost the involvement of the private sector and increase the interest of youngsters in their heritage. A tax break for cultural sponsorship is to be extended indefinitely. The government plans to give a card worth €500 to every 18-year-old for spending only at theatres, museums, bookshops and archaeological sites. In Greece the situation is radically different. Over 800,000 refugees arrived there in 2015. Trying to deal with this crisis, as well as pushing through pension reforms and bringing down national debt, has absorbed much of the government’s time and energy. But another reason why so little cash is available for culture is a view that Greece’s heritage is solely a matter of national concern. “Greece exists because of its heritage: other Europeans decided that, because of that heritage, it should be freed from Ottoman rule,” says Evangelos Kyriakidis of the Initiative for Heritage Conservation, a research organisation. The state lays claim to total ownership of the past: take a metal detector to hunt for ancient coins, as you can in many countries, and in Greece you could wind up in jail. Private cultural initiatives, even those funded by Greeks, are often met with disdain. Wine-dark seas Yet the state can no longer afford to protect all of the nation’s treasures. The archaeological service is overwhelmed. Of more than 10,000 formally recognised sites, fewer than 200 are open. Just as greater European involvement is needed to resolve the migration crisis, so there could be a case for closer European co-operation in cultural matters. The inauguration in June of an excavated site on Crete will make the point well. The EU provided more than 90% of the funds for one of the few on-site museums in Greece. Nikos Stampolidis, a professor of archaeology at the University of Crete who has made the excavation his life’s work, says the museum at Eleftherna will “shine a light into what archaeologists have chosen to call the Greek Dark Ages, before the Classical period.” That encompasses the time when Homer wrote. As Europe appears to fall into its own, darker period, what better way to celebrate shared, but increasingly questioned values than a museum that illuminates the times of its first great writer?IT WAS not meant to be like this. The plan had been that David Cameron would return in triumph from Brussels, having won reforms of Britain’s status in the EU, and throw his full weight behind the campaign to remain in. Most Tory MPs and voters would swing, albeit reluctantly, behind the prime minister. With strong backing from Labour and the Liberal Democrats, and from business and trade unions, the result would be a large majority in the referendum on June 23rd. It could still happen. Most polls, and even more strongly the bookmakers, put the Remain camp in the lead, though there was little of the hoped-for bounce after Mr Cameron came back from Brussels. Remainers believe that, when the debate is about jobs, they have the edge: this week’s claim by Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, that Brexit was the biggest domestic risk to the economy reinforces that view. Yet the early weeks of the campaign have not gone smoothly. There have been cock-ups: a pro-EU round-robin from leaders of FTSE-100 companies was signed by only 36; a letter from military bigwigs saying the EU mattered for national security went awry when one signatory said he had not seen it; the ousting of the pro-Brexit boss of the British Chambers of Commerce was blamed on Downing Street. Lord Rose, chairman of Britain Stronger In Europe, the pro-EU campaign, has often seemed ineffectual. More troubling was the response to Mr Cameron’s deal. The government had hoped only 80 or so Tory MPs would vote Leave, and it was confident that Michael Gove, the justice secretary, and Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, would not be among them. In fact 140 Tory MPs have now declared for Leave, including Mr Gove and Mr Johnson, more than even the most optimistic in the Leave campaign expected. Local Conservative associations are still heavily Eurosceptic. The party’s squabbles over Brexit have also become inextricably linked to speculation about its next leader, since Mr Cameron has said he will not run again in 2020. The newspapers have also been unexpectedly strident, with even pro-EU titles joining Eurosceptics in rubbishing Mr Cameron’s deal as not producing a fundamental change in Britain’s EU relationship. Most have presented the arguments of both sides as finely balanced. The Leave campaign has proved aggressive and well financed. It has skirted past a lack of clarity over alternatives to membership, instead playing up concerns over migration and sovereignty lost to Brussels. It has denounced critics as scaremongers engaged in “Project Fear” and portrayed those doubting if Britain would do better outside the EU as unpatriotic. The Sun newspaper has even claimed that the queen backs Brexit (untrue, says the palace). Worse, Mr Cameron has received little help from other parties. The Scottish National Party is for Remain, but will not campaign with the Tories; it knows that a vote for Brexit could be an excuse for another independence referendum. Above all, Labour has been largely silent. Its leader, Jeremy Corbyn, claims to support Remain, but is a long-standing Eurosceptic. He has failed to raise Brexit, the most urgent issue of this parliament, in any recent session of questions to the prime minister. Alan Johnson, a former cabinet minister who is chairman of Labour in Europe, insists that his group will turn out the voters on the day. But some in the party recall that Labour was badly burnt after it campaigned with the coalition government against Scottish independence in 2014. Like Mr Corbyn, Mr Johnson is unwilling to appear on platforms with Mr Cameron. There is an underlying weakness in the prime minister’s position. Unlike Labour’s Harold Wilson before the in/out referendum in 1975, he has spent years attacking the EU and suggesting that, without substantial reforms, he would favour Brexit. Yet it is hard even for the prime minister to pretend that the deal he secured in Brussels, however worthwhile, makes a huge difference. Recent government statements have focused almost entirely on the benefits of membership and the dangers of Brexit, not on the terms of the new deal. If the benefits are so clear, some may ask, how could Mr Cameron have ever thought of arguing for leaving? In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union A final worry for the Remain campaign is the referendum’s timing. A date in June was favoured because it gave less time to the Leave campaign, was close to Mr Cameron’s unexpected election win last May and would come before the summer inrush of migrants to Europe. Yet June may now prove a bad choice. The global economy is stuttering. The euro zone is again weak, with growth slowing sharply in Italy and France, and a renewed dispute over Greece’s debts. And far from diminishing in the winter, the EU’s migrant and refugee crisis has only grown (see article). The saving grace for Mr Cameron may lie within the Leave campaigns. Leavers are vulnerable not just to uncertainty over what alternative they would secure, but to their own disagreements. Grassroots Out and Vote Leave, the rivals to be designated as official campaigners, are bitterly divided. The first includes Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence Party, who has a little-Englander view and would make immigration the main issue. The second includes UKIP’s only MP, Douglas Carswell, who prefers a more libertarian, pro-globalisation message. The way the two groupings now pour more vitriol on each other than on their opponents is comically reminiscent of the rival popular fronts to liberate Judaea in the film “The Life of Brian”. The odds are still that the vote will be to Remain. The weight of business and union opinion in favour of staying in is likely to tell in the end. A preference among don’t-knows for the status quo will help. In talking up Project Fear, the Leave camp may only draw more attention to the dangers of Brexit. But the risk of an opinion-shifting event—terrorist attack, euro crisis, migration meltdown—is high. Mr Cameron must sometimes regret the promise of a referendum he made three long years ago.There has been a twelvefold increase in clandestine attempts to enter Britain via European ports and train tunnels since 2012, according to figures obtained by The Economist under freedom of information laws. Lorries are X-rayed for stowaways and sniffer dogs patrol regularly, making the obstacle course harder than ever. Yet this has done little to deter migrants—nor to soothe the fears of Eurosceptic voters ahead of the June 23rd referendum.
