FEW countries are as adept at making luxury cars as Britain. Plutocrats and footballers queue to buy Rolls-Royces and Bentleys. Speed freaks in want of a sports car are also well served. At the Geneva Motor Show, which opened on March 1st, two leading British supercar firms launched pricey new models to compete with the likes of Ferrari and Lamborghini: Aston Martin unveiled the DB11 (pictured) while McLaren showed off its 570GT. The two brands offer similarly expensive toys, yet under the bonnet are very different firms. The pair are alike in some respects. Both make only a handful of vehicles. McLaren turned out just 1,650 last year; Aston around double that. An entry-level Aston costs nearly £100,000 ($140,000), whereas the cheapest McLaren costs another £30,000, but their flagship models cost around £150,000-200,000. Each firm has built hypercars that sold for around £1m. And both have recently announced expansion plans, to take advantage of a sales boom at the top end of the car market (IHS, a consulting firm, reckons that global sales of the priciest cars will triple between 2010 and 2020). Aston will open a new factory in Wales to make SUVs; McLaren plans to spend £1 billion over six years to widen its range to 15 models and 4,000 cars a year. The two have taken different routes to this destination. Aston, 103 years old, is well known thanks to the James Bond films but has struggled of late. It was a “basket case” which limped from one car to the next, losing money, according to its boss, Andy Palmer. Since taking over in 2014 Mr Palmer has won backing from private-equity firms to launch four new models and struck a deal to use Mercedes engines. By contrast, McLaren’s sports-car business took off only six years ago. Though it had made road cars in small numbers it was mostly known as a Formula 1 motor-racing team. McLaren diverted its British engineers, good at the speedy innovation and advanced manufacturing needed for racing, to making sports cars. A glance at the cars gives a clue that they do things differently. McLarens are wild-looking mid-engined sports machines that harness the firm’s skills in engineering to adapt racetrack materials, such as carbon fibre, and high-tech gizmos to make a car as at home on the circuit as the open road. Aston’s DB11 is more conventional. An aluminium body and engine at the front are typical of a “grand tourer”, designed to whisk drivers in comfort over long distances on public roads. Aston is first a “design company”, says Mr Palmer. Performance and handling are important but the aim is to make the “most beautiful car on the road”. To do so Aston has remodelled itself as a luxury-goods firm, emphasising design and craftsmanship that are a British speciality, while trying to extend the brand. The Welsh factory will make the DBX, an SUV that Aston hopes will broaden its appeal, especially among women, who buy few of its cars. McLaren, meanwhile, strives to make its cars the most technically advanced. Last year the firm renamed itself the McLaren Technology Group to emphasise the importance of innovation. Although racing and supercars will remain important, Ron Dennis, the firm’s boss, is convinced that its tech business will be its biggest and most important part in years to come. It already serves oil-and-gas, health-care and financial-services firms. Using skills honed in analysing the vast quantities of data generated by motor racing, it is developing analytics software for the likes of GlaxoSmithKline and KPMG. Both carmakers are in the business of hurtling drivers towards 200mph. Yet with their respective focus on luxury and advanced engineering, they are relying on contrasting British strengths.A COMMON (sometimes exasperated) question from abroad is: why is Britain having a referendum on its EU membership? The simple answer is that David Cameron promised one in the Conservative Party manifesto for last May’s election. But the deeper one is to be found in the rise and rise of British Euroscepticism. The origins of today’s EU lie in the ashes of post-war Europe. Reconciliation between France and Germany, urged by Winston Churchill in 1946, led to the creation of the six-member European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 and the European Economic Community in 1957. But a wary Britain, keen to preserve links with the Commonwealth and America, stood aside from both. Only in the 1960s did the British, impressed by the continent’s stronger economy, try to join, eventually doing so in 1973. What this history shows is that Britain has an essentially transactional relationship with the club. Membership has been evaluated in terms of costs and benefits, not as an emotional commitment. Moreover, as a latecomer, Britain has often found the EU’s organisation and policies uncongenial. This was reflected in Margaret Thatcher’s battles in the 1980s to cut the outsized British budget contribution. Over the years the political base of British Euroscepticism has moved from left to right. In the early years Labour was the more suspicious party. In 1962 its leader, Hugh Gaitskell, warned that joining the common market would end 1,000 years of history. In 1975 Harold Wilson dealt with Labour splits over Europe by staging a renegotiation and putting the result to a referendum—a tactic remarkably similar to Mr Cameron’s today. In the early 1980s, Labour was once again set on withdrawal. The pivotal moment came in 1988, when the European Commission’s president, Jacques Delors, promised the Trades Union Congress that Europe’s single market would be buttressed by tougher labour and social regulations. This reinforced Thatcher’s growing Euroscepticism, and led directly to her Bruges speech attacking excessive EU interference in the same year. Her political downfall two years later was triggered by her denunciation of Mr Delors’s plans for closer EU integration and a single currency. This marked the point when the Tories replaced Labour as the party of Euroscepticism. Mr Cameron not only inherited this as party leader in 2005 but also, as prime minister after 2010, had to deal with a growing threat from the even more Eurosceptic UK Independence Party (UKIP). His response, in his Bloomberg speech in January 2013, was, like Wilson’s 40 years earlier, to promise a renegotiation and referendum. Yet today’s shrill debate over Brexit reflects mainly internal Tory party politics. Most voters are less excited. Opinion polls suggest that they see Europe as a relatively unimportant issue. Moreover, in most elections since Britain joined the club in 1973, voters have delivered majorities to the more pro-EU of the two main parties. Even so, the roots of British Euroscepticism are deep. Matthew Goodwin of the University of Kent, who has studied the phenomenon and written a history of UKIP, reckons they are cultural as much as political. Britain, he says, forged its identity against perceived threats from across the Channel. He adds that, although the young and better educated tend to be less Eurosceptic, the popular notion that it is only older working-class voters who favour Brexit is not correct. Nor is it right to argue that British-style Euroscepticism is oozing all over the continent. Certainly there is growing disillusion with the EU, especially over migration and the euro’s woes. This has fostered a form of soft Euroscepticism (see chart). Unlike in Britain, it is young people who are most susceptible, because they suffer the most from high unemployment. Yet there is no serious debate anywhere but Britain about leaving the EU. Only if a post-Brexit Britain were a big success might that change—which is one reason why the EU will not want to help bring that about.Rowing against the current THE University of Liverpool is growing fast. Since 2011 it has invested nearly £250m ($360m) in new student accommodation, across three different sites, to house 4,500 students. “We have seen a dramatic increase in interest over the past couple of years,” says Gavin Brown, a university official. That it has been able to respond to the increased demand is partly due to an unheralded reform of student admissions. In 2012 restrictions on the number of students that universities were allowed to recruit (in place to control government spending) were relaxed in England to allow them to accept as many students with good grades at A-level, the exams taken at 18, as they wished. The following year George Osborne, the chancellor, surprised universities by going further, declaring that from 2015 the limit on the number of students they were allowed to recruit would be lifted entirely. The government hoped the change would enable universities to expand, creating more skilled workers and widening access to higher education. Another effect would be to increase competition between universities for students—a process encouraged by the trebling of tuition fees to a maximum of £9,000 in 2012, which means more funding now follows students. “It was a much bigger shift than many people in higher education initially realised,” says Nick Hillman, a former government adviser who now runs the Higher Education Policy Institute, a think-tank. A demographic dip in the number of 18- to 24-year-olds, an improving job market and a sluggish response from some universities mean that student numbers are yet to grow much, and are unlikely to do so for the next few years. Nevertheless, many universities are changing their approach to admissions. Early signs suggest that growth is concentrated in older, research-focused universities. In 2015 the English members of the prestigious Russell Group of universities accepted 6.7% more students than in the previous year. Meanwhile, acceptances by the English members of the Million+ group of newer, less fancy universities fell by 0.6%. This cannot be explained solely by the lifting of the cap. Some low-ranked universities have chosen to focus on increasing the academic ability rather than the number of students they take in. Many high-ranked universities have benefited from being able to expand under the earlier, partial lifting of the cap; others, including Oxford and Cambridge, have chosen not to take on more students. But it may also show that stronger institutions—new as well as old—are growing at the expense of weaker ones, says Emran Mian, director of the Social Market Foundation, a think-tank. Indeed, many successful new universities, including Coventry and Manchester Metropolitan, are expanding faster than older establishments. Although universities can compete on price, students have shown little sign of favouring institutions with lower fees (which partly explains why these days most charge the maximum). As a result, universities must now compete on quality, says Chris Husbands, vice-chancellor of Sheffield Hallam University. Some reckon that the higher-education market will diversify, with more institutions concentrating on niche or work-focused courses in order to attract students. A few universities will suffer at first. The question is whether the pain will be worth it in the long term, says Andy Westwood of Manchester University. Critics of the uncapping policy argue that some low- and mid-ranked universities are being punished unfairly by students’ preference for institutions that look good on a CV, rather than those with the best lecturers. Others complain that uncertainty over student numbers makes long-term planning hard. But much of the angst will be forgotten if student numbers begin to grow more quickly. When a similar cap was lifted in Australia in 2012, the proportion of youngsters going to university increased in every social group. Demographic trends mean the number of British 18- to 24-year-olds will pick up in the early 2020s. And all universities will benefit from more EU students: some 14% more were accepted this academic year than last. But funding the extra places will not be cheap: the policy will require the support of future governments. Unfortunately for those universities that are hoping to expand, that is far from guaranteed.A FEW years ago Britain was in a panic about youth unemployment. As the economy sank, companies stopped hiring and let go of workers with the least bargaining power. The unemployment rate among 16- to 24-year-olds therefore soared (see chart). In many rich countries, the rise in youth unemployment has proved to be long-lasting: across the EU it has fallen by a mere 1.3 percentage points since 2011 and in countries like the Netherlands and Norway it has risen, raising fears that swathes of youngsters are structurally excluded from the labour market. Yet in Britain it has nosedived. The employment rate of young people not in full-time education is now at its highest since 2004. Why? The government credits its “long-term economic plan”. True, it helpfully raised the age at which people leave education to 18 last year, thus moving youngsters off the dole and into the classroom. Yet many programmes have fallen flat. A £300m ($425m) scheme whereby employers received a payment of up to £2,275 for hiring an unemployed young person closed in 2014 after low take-up. A £30m “Innovation Fund”, announced in 2011, rewarded investors who funded programmes to improve youngsters’ skills. It too closed to new entrants in November; the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) has released no quantitative analysis of the scheme’s value for money. The DWP has even gone in search of young people online, setting up a page on the BuzzFeed news site with articles such as “7 most obscure excuses given by benefit fraudsters”. The target audience seems unimpressed (“Why don’t you give the ten worst reasons for stopping a person’s benefit and leaving them destitute?” asks one). Still, other welfare reforms have inadvertently helped the young. Since 2011 private providers of support for unemployed people have been paid according to how many of their clients move into work. In 2011-15 one-third of 18- to 24-year-olds in the programme moved into a job for a “sustained” period (meaning at least three or six months, depending on the person), compared with one-quarter of 25- to 49-year-olds. The difference may be partly down to this payment-by-results model, says Laura Gardiner of the Resolution Foundation, a think-tank: targeting youngsters, who may pick up skills quicker, has proved more lucrative to the contractors than focusing on harder-to-help claimants, particularly the over-50s and those with disabilities. Other policies will make young workers more attractive still to employers. In April a “national living wage” comes into force, under which the minimum wage will rise from its current level of £6.70 an hour to around £9 an hour (equal to 60% of median earnings) by 2020. But it does not cover those under 25, and Len Shackleton of Buckingham University says that this may have already created a bias among employers towards hiring youngsters. So has a policy introduced last April under which employers do not pay certain types of national-insurance contributions for workers under 21. Tech-literate youngsters are also well suited to the “gig” economy, in which short-term employment is arranged online or through apps. Gigs are proliferating: the number of “private hire” vehicles in London, a category that includes Uber taxis, has risen by 26% in the past two years. Uber claims that, in America, its drivers are twice as likely as conventional cabbies to be under 30. With such a decline in youth unemployment, it is no wonder that wages are buoyant. In 2015 those aged 18-21 saw a 2.8% rise in median hourly pay, compared with a national average increase of 1.6%. Nonetheless, such was the turmoil experienced during the crisis that the inflation-adjusted hourly pay of those aged 22-29 is still 12% below what it was in 2008, a worse performance than any age group above it. Young Britons may be back in work, but they are not yet back in the money.SINCE its return to power last May, Britain’s Conservative government has made clear its intention to loosen the laws on Sunday trading by devolving decisions over shops’ opening hours to local councils. Its attempt to do so on March 9th was defeated in the House of Commons by an unlikely alliance of churchgoing Tories, left-wing Labourites and opportunistic Scottish nationalists. In England and Wales shops larger than 3,000 square feet (280 square metres) are allowed to open on Sundays for a maximum of six hours, between 10am and 6pm. The government says loosening the regulations would help stores that are struggling to compete with online retailers that trade seven days a week. Labour opposed the plan on the ground that employees could be forced to work when they do not want to. Tory traditionalists said Sunday should remain a day of rest. If that is dubious, the opposition of the Scottish National Party (SNP) is odder still. First, the bill would have affected only England and Wales, making it doubtful whether Scottish MPs should have had a say. Second, in Scotland—where the SNP is in power—there are no such restrictions on Sunday trading. The SNP says that if the law changed in England, retailers might reduce the weekend wages of Scots, some of whom by convention enjoy a “Sunday premium” worth roughly 150% of hourly pay. Scottish Labour claims that Scottish shopworkers could lose £1,400 ($2,000) per year if the premium were cut. By some estimates about 60,000 retail employees get this premium. In reality there is little reason to believe that slightly longer Sunday hours in England would prompt shops in Scotland to reduce wages. Even if they did, there would be winners as well as losers: shops would hire more workers if wages were lower, something the £1,400 figure does not account for. The SNP had a clearer motive for killing the bill. Outvoting the government in Westminster—its second Commons defeat so far this Parliament—was a coup, coming just before Scottish parliamentary elections in May. And it helped to distract from Scotland’s woeful fiscal performance, data for which were also released on March 9th. With the collapse in the oil price, tax revenues have dwindled; Scotland’s budget deficit is now almost 10% of GDP, twice Britain’s overall level. Whatever the merits of Sunday trading, it is being put on hold in England and Wales for the worst possible reasons. Correction: A previous version of the headline said that the bill would allow shops in Britain to trade longer in Sunday. In fact, the bill applied only to England. AT FIRST “Gogglebox” did not look like a winner. TV executives responded to Tania Alexander, the programme’s creator, with bafflement: who would want to watch other people watching television? They got their answer: 700,000 viewers, rising to 5m. Today the format—featuring couples, friends and families commenting on and discussing clips from popular dramas, game shows, documentaries and the news—has been exported to 16 countries and counts David Cameron among its fans.   The secret is in the casting. Unlike reality shows predicated on conflict and the grotesque (all shouting and slicks of fake tan) Gogglebox mobilises the wit and warmth of recognisable tribes: the grandparents in Liverpool, the minority middle-class family from Derby, the woman vicar in Nottingham, the bohemians in Cambridge. Most facets of modern British life are there. The gay friends? That would be Stephen and Chris, a pair of catty Brighton hairdressers. The city-dwellers? Sandy and Sandra, Brixton loudmouths who roar with laughter and outrage, slurping pots of instant noodles. The poshos? Steph and Dom, who run a hotel in Kent and issue cut-glass sardonics when not guzzling oceans of booze and falling off their sofa. The result is a compelling barometer of the national mood. During last year’s election campaign, the Goggleboxers had their political leaders sussed: accurately identifying Nigel Farage’s anxiously frenetic attention-seeking (“He thinks with his mouth”), Ed Miliband’s lurking self-doubt (“He doesn’t quite know what he is doing”) and Boris Johnson’s faux-bumbling opportunism (“Beware the fool, because in all Shakespeare plays, the fool is actually the clever one”). Long before commentators had stopped sagely musing about the Liberal Democrats’ hidden local strengths, two of the show’s best-loved families—the Michaels and the Siddiquis—predicted the party’s rout and its leader’s resignation. Occasionally the chatter offers glimpses of the roiling, evolving country beyond the net curtains: “I’d say about a third of my mates are migrants, or second-generation,” George, a 30-year-old from Essex, tells his surprised parents. To be sure, the show is not meant as anthropology. Its subjects are selected for their spark and spontaneity (it only takes five seconds to tell whether a prospective family or pair is right, Ms Alexander says). Each 60-minute episode is a compilation of golden moments culled from 200 hours of footage. In a typical gem, one of the Siddiqui boys, watching a televised debate about immigration, wonders how he would evade border controls. “I’d swim the Channel,” replies his brother and, chortling, turns to his father: “How did we sneak in last time, Dad?” Reality-television gigs, newspaper profiles and even a chat show have duly rolled in. The programme-makers thus watch out for, and cut, anything that looks fake: the families must be relatable. Psychiatrist’s-couch potatoes Still, the show owes some of its success to the atypical nature of what it captures. For when historians write the story of British society in the first decades of the 21st century, their organising theme will surely be that of fragmentation. The gap between the booming, worldly cities and the declining, post-industrial towns increasingly shows up in Britain’s politics (witness its current divide on the EU). Intersecting this widening spectrum is the generational split between the liberal young and their conservative elders. As the spread of daily experiences and outlooks becomes broader, occasions on which the country comes together get rarer. Where once a handful of newspapers and television channels commanded the nation’s attention, the media’s fragmentation and the rise of more individualistic competitors (social media the prime example) mean ever fewer common reference points. The audience for the biggest programme shown on Christmas Day has fallen from 20.3m in 2001 to 6.6m in 2015. As Britain’s nations, regions, classes and age groups drift apart, a similar pattern is evident within neighbourhoods. The country leads the rich world in indicators associated with solitary lifestyles: gym-going (as opposed to team sports), divorce, smartphone and tablet adoption (replacing the family television set), self-employment, online shopping, eating alone, meal-skipping and the declines of both the pub and the nuclear family. Clubs of all sorts, from churches and political parties to golf clubs and trade unions, are shrinking. The proportion of single-person households has doubled over the past four decades. Nothing about this is inherently regrettable—indeed, Britons must be one of the most unstifled, diverse and emotionally self-sufficient peoples in Europe—but these trends have negative side-effects. The Office for National Statistics claims that Britain is the loneliest country in the EU (the sense of isolation especially acute among its young adults). Politicians seemingly discern in voters a yearning for connection, from Labour’s recent talk of “one nation” to Mr Cameron’s “big society” push for more volunteering and civic cohesion. “Gogglebox” leans against these shifts in two ways. It conjures up a half-remembered Britain of universal experiences and references; of families of all stations sitting down together and watching the same shows. And every Friday night, it brings that nostalgic ideal to life by commanding an audience that spans the generations (about 10% of potential viewers in each age group from 16 to 64 tune in) and the classes (its viewership, like the population as a whole, splits into four roughly equal groups: upper-middle, lower-middle, skilled-working and unskilled-working). The programme’s contradictions—camp and sincere, profound and silly, slapstick and mundane—enable it to transcend differences of geography, income and generation like few others. To a country whose citizens, voluntarily or otherwise, appear to be going their separate ways, “Gogglebox” offers the fleeting tonic of togetherness. In retrospect, it was always going to be a hit. Economist.com/blogs/bagehot“WANTED: people of promise”, proclaimed ads for America’s Federal Service Entrance Examination, introduced in 1955. Applicants faced posers on grammar and arithmetic—as well as the Battle of the Bulge and why presidential aides deserve anonymity (answer: “they relieve the president of many burdens and should not be subjected to a great deal of personal criticism”). But little more than two decades later, such exams had come under fire. Some said they tested knowledge rather than talent, thereby discriminating against black and Latino applicants. More broadly, their usefulness for picking tax-collectors and the like was questioned. In 1981 they were ditched. Last year the tests were resurrected, tweaked to be fairer and more useful. Growth in the number of university graduates, together with the popularity of a safe job in difficult economic times, had left many branches of government struggling to cope with a flood of applications. Federal agencies are now assessing candidates with USA Hire, an online quiz more relevant to the work to be done. America is not the only country where more young people have been going to university in recent years. And as governments and aid donors seek to cut graft, the original, meritocratic aim of civil-service exams seems increasingly relevant. Sure enough, says Vivek Srivastava of the World Bank, during the past quarter-century more countries have started using assessments to dole out government jobs. Of the 62 countries tracked in 2010-11 by Global Integrity, an NGO, 55 had rules against “nepotism, cronyism and patronage”. Last year Cyprus and Pakistan, among others, announced reforms intended to ensure that applicants are chosen on the basis of what they know, not whom. Countries such as Germany, Portugal and Spain pledge in their constitutions to recruit government staff based on skills. Prodded by aid donors, Afghanistan and Sudan recently promised to do likewise. Applicants can face daunting odds. The Fast Stream programme, a graduate scheme for British officials, admits about one in 20 after a series of tests, role-play exercises and interviews. Of the roughly 500,000 applicants for elite civil-service jobs in India each year, only about 1,000 make the grade. Last year there were 27,817 roles for the 930,000 takers of the Chinese civil-service exam (the picture above shows candidates at a test centre). Beancounters v boondoggles Hiring civil servants according to calibre has been rare throughout history. Most jobs have been inherited, bought or bestowed as patronage. Although China tested for grasp of classical texts as long ago as 134BC, officials in the West only began to be properly vetted in the 19th century. In Britain, the Northcote-Trevelyan report of 1854 called for exams to weed out hereditary incompetence. In the years following, anger at America’s “spoils system”, which saw jobs given to party hacks, also led to reform: an 1868 report to Congress found a sculptor and a washerwoman among the political allies on the Treasury’s staff. The best-known proponent of a new-model, meritocratic civil service was Max Weber, a German sociologist who died in 1920. He envisioned a closed, rigid hierarchy staffed by bureaucrats who entered by examination and enjoyed protected careers. This, he argued, would foster esprit de corps and curb cronyism. There is a fair bit of evidence in favour of the meritocracy Weber championed. Research published in 2011 by Victor Lapuente and Carl Dahlstrom of the University of Gothenburg, and Jan Teorell, of Lund University, looked at which features of a civil service cut jobbery. They found that corruption across 52 countries was correlated with neither civil-service pay levels nor whether jobs were for life. Merit-based hiring was the only aspect of bureaucracies that consistently reduced graft. The connection held in countries at different stages of development, and with different political systems. Meritocracy, more broadly conceived, also saves money and seems to promote economic growth. A forthcoming paper co-authored by Mr Lapuente analyses 1.4m procurement contracts in 212 regions of the European Union, and finds that the regions whose own public employees rate them as meritocratic pay less for roads, bridges and the like. The researchers estimate that if every region were as meritocratic as Baden-Württemberg, in Germany, EU governments could save €13 billion-20 billion ($14 billion-22 billion) a year. Separate work by Peter Evans and James Rauch, of the universities of California Berkeley and San Diego respectively, finds that in poorer countries meritocratic hiring and promotion are associated with faster growth. But some countries make the elementary mistake of setting a silly test. It is not obvious why applicants in Spain, for example, have to memorise swathes of the legal code; nor why Indian candidates must know which ancient kingdom was associated with the life of the Buddha. Others fail to maintain meritocratic principles through civil servants’ entire careers. Some of the most closed administrations, including those of Greece, Italy and Spain, are in reality highly politicised, since promotion often depends on being in favour with the government of the day. There are even worrying hints that independent hiring and promotion systems that should shield civil servants from shifts in political fortunes are somehow being subverted. A gap between law and practice is opening in eastern European countries such as Hungary, says Gyorgy Gajduschek of the Institute for Legal Studies, in Budapest. Across the OECD club of mostly rich countries, the number of bureaucrats replaced after elections seems to have risen since the 1980s, notes Mr Dahlstrom. Global Integrity, an NGO, says that though 43 of 54 African countries it follows have rules against cronyism, only Botswana tends to appoint bureaucrats based on “professional criteria”. Some development wonks naively promoted the Weberian model, without building up capacity to implement it. “We went into countries and said you need to be more like Denmark,” says Mr Srivastava. “So countries changed their laws to look like Denmark’s—but then nothing would happen.” Past papers The century-old notion that a bureaucracy should be a cadre of lifers is now facing more fundamental criticisms. The first is of the idea that civil servants should be unsackable. The intention was to ensure their independence and protect them from being fired by meddling politicians; in some places, though, it means that once they have made it through the entrance exam they need never do a tap of work. Some of Brazil’s most coveted jobs, for example, are in well-paid corners of the public sector, often mocked as places where applicants who make it through a stiff exam can hang their jackets over their chairs—and never show up again. The second problem is that the tasks civil servants must perform are becoming ever more complicated. Closed-shop bureaucracies can be short of essential skills, such as the ability to analyse data, manage big projects or write contracts for outsourced public services. In poorly governed, graft-prone countries, this may be a price worth paying for keeping politicians’ grubby hands off government jobs. But better-governed ones may be able to open up hiring without returning to nepotism. According to the Quality of Government Survey Report, an international assessment of bureaucracies by independent experts, some countries that frequently bring outsiders into their civil services without examination, such as New Zealand, are highly meritocratic. In a recent paper looking only at rich countries, where graft is less common, Anders Sundell of the University of Gothenburg finds no connection between entrance exams and levels of corruption. In much of the rich world, says Agnès Audier of BCG, a consultancy, a civil-service recruitment crisis looms. A third of government workers in the OECD are aged over 50; in America about 60% of senior federal employees are eligible to retire. In normal times, it would therefore be an excellent moment to tweak hiring rules, since a flood of new talent would quickly stir up stagnant bureaucracies. But many governments are squeezing staffing budgets or imposing hiring freezes to get their budgets back in balance after the financial crisis. The smart ones will be rethinking the way they recruit in preparation for the thaw.Feeling the pressure “WE TURN coal into diamonds,” says Pieush Agrawal, the head of Edge Academy, a coaching centre in Kota, Rajasthan. Since its opening six years ago Mr Agrawal has helped 106 students pass exams for the National Defence Academy (NDA) or other elite military schools. He has defied long odds: only one in 1,126 applicants makes it to the NDA. Students cram seven days a week, with CCTV cameras monitoring whether they (or their teachers) are slacking. “The backdrop of all learning is discipline,” Mr Agrawal says. “That’s what the army taught me.” Every year 125,000 students come to Kota to study. Across the bustling city billboards portray stern professors promising test success. Most incomers are swotting for university-entrance exams. But an increasing number are preparing for government jobs—a sign of growing competition for secure and well-paid official posts. Robin Singh Bamel, an 18-year-old who wants to follow his father and grandfather into the army, is one of Edge Academy’s hopefuls. He takes two coaching classes a day and reads three newspapers to brush up for general-knowledge questions. After failing the NDA exam last year, he has taken a year out from his normal school to prepare, and feels more confident. “To be an officer, you have to act like one,” he says. Similar discipline is required to win a place in the Rajasthan Administrative Service. Amrita Soni, aged 29, dreams of the day she can drive in one of the service’s white cars with a blue light on top. She is not the only one: around 100,000 students apply each year for a handful of jobs. She has passed the preliminary stage but a harder second test looms. To boost her chances she has signed up to Vidhi Classes, a self-proclaimed “result-generating machine”. Naveen Gehlot, its boss, spends up to 12 hours a day drilling students in history, politics, economics, sociology, maths and English. The questions can be detailed—and of little relevance to the job being sought. For example: “Explain the Rajput policy of Akbar, a Mughal emperor, during his reign from 1556 to 1605.” After the exams comes a notoriously tough interview. Unsurprisingly, given the high stakes, cheating is a problem. Papers are often leaked and on exam day students are forbidden from wearing shirts with long sleeves or pockets. Rings and necklaces must stay outside the exam room in case answers are hidden on the jewellery. Last year demand was so strong that Mr Gehlot had to book a cinema hall for his classes. Mr Agrawal is also expanding: next month he will move to bigger premises. Unlike other tutors around Kota, though, he has not yet sought to lure new students by plastering his face around town. “I don’t want my face on billboards, but in their hearts.”
