FOR the French left, SOS Racisme, an anti-discrimination group founded in the 1980s, is a cherished treasure. With its rock concerts and slogans, it was a training ground for Socialist politicians, and remains a nostalgic reminder of multi-racial aspiration. But today, as France marks the first anniversary of the Charlie Hebdo terrorist attacks, SOS Racisme has turned its protests on its old Socialist friends: President François Hollande’s government and its latest counter-terrorism measures. As part of a package that will go before parliament next month, Mr Hollande plans to write into the constitution the power to strip nationality from French-born dual citizens convicted of terrorism. French law already allows this for dual citizens who have acquired French nationality. And some other European countries, such as Britain, can deprive even native-born dual citizens of nationality on grounds of national security. But France’s tradition of droit du sol, or the right to citizenship for those born on its soil, makes such a measure particularly sensitive. “It’s a huge betrayal,” says Marouane Zaki, an official at SOS Racisme, who has dual French and Moroccan citizenship. “It gives the impression that dual citizens are not really French, and that terrorism is not a problem among the children of the French republic, only those who come from somewhere else.” Over a third of French-born citizens with North African origins have dual nationality, according to the National Institute of Demographic Studies. This week SOS Racisme staged a protest outside the Socialist Party’s headquarters in Paris, accusing the government of trying to “write discrimination into the heart of the constitution”. Until now, Mr Hollande’s hard-line security policy has drawn broad cross-party support, which will only grow after police foiled an apparent terror attempt in Paris on January 7th. After the attacks in Paris on November 13th, the president stepped up bombing in Syria and adopted a muscular counter-terrorism approach. A state of emergency, which gives the police sweeping powers to make house arrests and raid premises, lasts until February 26th. Yet the citizenship-stripping proposal, backed by 85% of French people and long defended by the xenophobic National Front (FN), is seen by many on the left as a step too far. Revolt of the foreign-born Anne Hidalgo, the (Spanish-born) Socialist mayor of Paris, tweeted her “firm opposition” to the proposal. “There cannot be different categories of French citizens,” argued Samia Ghali, a Socialist senator born to Algerian parents. Perhaps the most crushing reproach came from Thomas Piketty, a left-wing economist and best-selling author, who accused the government of “running after the National Front”. The prospect of losing a French passport is unlikely to deter suicide-bombers. Better intelligence and policing, which the French are also strengthening, matter far more. Manuel Valls, the (Spanish-born) Socialist prime minister, has acknowledged that the proposal is a “symbolic measure”. France’s opposition broadly supports it, but Alain Juppé, a centre-right former prime minister, described its likely effectiveness as “feeble, if not zero”. In charts: Terror in western Europe The political outcry exposes the fragility of Mr Hollande’s standing on the left. Elected in 2012 to squeeze the rich and end austerity, Mr Hollande has shifted to a more business-friendly economic policy, to the dismay of his party’s left wing. He has presided over a painful three-year increase in joblessness. But his bellicose rhetoric after the November 13th attacks, in which 130 people were killed, earned Mr Hollande a big bounce in the polls. Now he seems to hope that public opinion will lend him the legitimacy to face down dissent on the civil-liberties left. As Europe grapples with the terrorist threat, the row may also reflect a new centre of gravity on matters of national security. The French have been remarkably tolerant of the constraints imposed by the state of emergency, even though few of the 2,700 police raids carried out so far have uncovered evidence that might thwart terrorists. Under Marine Le Pen, the FN has surfed a wave of fear. “The rise of the FN weighs heavily on the political debate,” says Augustin Grosdoy of the Movement against Racism and for Friendship between People, a watchdog, “and the left is not immune.” A year after Charlie Hebdo, France may be better patrolled and more alert. But the fleeting unity of “Je suis Charlie” feels a long time ago.Please direct your complaints to my colleague NOMINALLY they are allies. But Angela Merkel, the German chancellor and leader of the centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU), and Horst Seehofer, the premier of Bavaria and boss of the conservative Christian Social Union (CSU), have been at loggerheads for months over the refugee crisis. Mr Seehofer demands fixed “upper limits” on the number of migrants that Germany admits. Mrs Merkel, given the 1.1m refugees who arrived in 2015, agrees that a “reduction” is desirable but rules out limits as unconstitutional. At an annual CSU gathering on January 6th-8th, Mr Seehofer expanded his attack. With Mrs Merkel present as an uncomfortable guest, he put a low-ball number on his “limit”: no more than 200,000 a year. The refugee crisis strains not only Germany’s governing coalition (which also includes the centre-left Social Democrats) but also the “Union”, as the CDU and CSU are jointly called because they form one group in parliament. Yet their fight must be seen in context. The CSU has always been prone to elaborate displays of dissent—without which it would have no reason to exist as a separate party from the CDU. Start with the setting. The latest showdown took place at Wildbad Kreuth, a historic former spa near an Alpine lake where guests once included emperors and tsars. Every winter for four decades the CSU’s members of parliament have gathered there against a picture-perfect Bavarian backdrop. One meeting in 1976 took place amid a power struggle between two swaggering silverbacks, the CSU’s Franz Josef Strauss and the CDU’s Helmut Kohl. It was in Kreuth that Mr Strauss declared war, when the CSU formally abandoned its partnership with the Christian Democrats. The split was mended only a month later—but with appropriate utterances from both sides about the CSU’s prized autonomy. Ever since, the CSU’s attitude towards its sister party has been described as “the spirit of Kreuth”. The party thus has three jobs. The first is to rule Bavaria, which it does competently. The second is to ensure, as Mr Strauss put it, that “there must never be a legitimate democratic party to the right of the CSU”: the party must be populist enough to appeal to conservative voters and keep them from drifting to the extreme right. The third job is to make enough trouble in national politics, especially for the CDU, for Bavarians to feel important—but without actually toppling a Christian Democrat chancellor (without whom the CSU would also be powerless).    By this definition, as of last summer Mr Seehofer was looking weak. The CSU appeared irrelevant in the governing coalition, and was widely ridiculed for both its signature policies. (One is to subsidise parents who keep their toddlers at home rather than sending them to a crèche. The other is to introduce a road toll which, cunningly, would hit only foreign drivers.) Meanwhile, a new xenophobic party, the Alternative for Germany (AfD), was growing to the right of the CSU, making Mr Strauss turn in his grave. The refugee crisis has allowed Mr Seehofer to tap into the spirit of Kreuth again. Since September he has been needling Mrs Merkel for her liberal asylum policy. That does not mean he wants to oust her. He only wants to signal to Bavarians that the CSU remains the conservative backstop inside the Union. This also applies when the topic is Brussels. In terms of Euroscepticism, the “Bavarians are the Brits of Germany”, as one analyst puts it. To get that message out, Mr Seehofer also invited David Cameron to attend this year’s meeting at the spa in Kreuth. All in the spirit.AS THE New Year’s fireworks went up in German cities, a brief panic seized Munich, which had information about planned terrorist attacks at two railway stations. Those never occurred. But, much less noticed at first, a different sort of crime was occurring in Cologne and, to a lesser extent, in Hamburg and Stuttgart. While partiers gathered on the square between Cologne’s cathedral and railway station, a large group of young men, later described by the police as “looking North African or Arabic”, also massed there. Some threw fireworks into the crowd to cause panic. Then the men formed rings around individual women, so that police and onlookers could not see inside each huddle. According to over 100 women who subsequently filed complaints, the men groped the women sexually, while others stole their mobile phones, wallets or purses. One woman was raped. Oddly, the Cologne police reported the following day that the festivities had been relaxed and peaceful. Only after scores of women came forward did the country react with rage. The interior and justice ministers promised to bring down the full force of the law—even as the police had to admit that they as yet had no information to make individual arrests. Angela Merkel, the chancellor, called the assaults “disgusting” and demanded justice “without regard to origin or background”. The assaults tapped into deep fears at a tense time, as Germany struggles with record numbers of refugees—more than 1m in 2015, largely from Arab countries. Populist politicians were quick to infer a connection. Frauke Petry, boss of the xenophobic Alternative for Germany, blamed the outrage on the “terrible consequences of a catastrophic asylum and migration policy”. There is no evidence yet that any of the criminals were refugees, as Cologne’s mayor, Henriette Reker, emphasised. Ms Reker personifies the conflicts straining German society. She ran for office as a non-partisan candidate with a liberal and welcoming stance toward migrants. For that, a neo-Nazi extremist stabbed her at a campaign event in October. (She was elected the next day, while still in a coma.) If it is confirmed that some of the muggers, molesters and rapists were asylum-seekers, the damage to what is left of Germany’s Willkommenskultur could be severe.IT SEEMS that some PIIGS can fly. During the euro crisis Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece and Spain looked wobbly and, because of their initials, earned an unflattering porcine label. Yet three of the five grew robustly in 2015 (see chart). The laggard was Greece, still labouring under the terms of its bail-out. Italy, too, performed disappointingly. In December the bosses’ association Confindustria downgraded its estimate of growth in 2015 to 0.8%. No one is expecting a big surge in 2016. The EU expects Italian GDP to rise 1.5%, but last year’s quarter-on-quarter figures suggested growth was slowing (from 0.3% in the first two quarters to 0.2% in the third). “There is a recovery,” the finance minister, Pier Carlo Padoan, told business leaders in December. “But it is weak.” Advisers to the prime minister, Matteo Renzi, worry that the world economy will enter a cyclical downturn before Italy regains the ground it lost in the financial and euro crises. Confindustria’s researchers called Italy’s lacklustre recovery “a real puzzle”. The prime minister is energetic and reform-minded. His left-right coalition has done good things. It has begun to reform the civil-justice system and the bureaucracy; the sluggishness of the first and the complexity of the second are long-standing obstacles to investment. It has overhauled labour laws, offsetting easier dismissal with gradually enhanced job security and welfare entitlements for newly hired workers. Francesco Giavazzi, a professor at the Bocconi University in Milan who has fiercely criticised previous governments on free-market grounds, calls it “the most important reform in this country in the past 50 years”. Unemployment has shrunk encouragingly since June. There has also been a modest improvement in private consumption. Traditionally, however, it has been surging exports that have pulled Italy out of recessions. Despite a weak euro, export growth this time has been disappointing. That is due in part to the slowdown in emerging markets and the mediocre performance of German industry, which absorbs more than a sixth of Italy’s exports. But it is also consistent with low competitiveness. On that score, Italy’s performance since the euro crisis has been unimpressive when compared with that of other former porkers (see chart). So far, the government’s main response has been to insert tax breaks in the budget for 2016, aimed at encouraging corporate investment. The budget also includes €3.6 billion ($3.9 billion) of cuts to taxes on primary homes. These are more likely to win votes than to stimulate growth. And Mr Renzi’s largesse may be short-lived. The budget deficit, though shrinking, is still forecast to be around 2.4% of GDP, prompting a warning from European fiscal authorities in Brussels, who had expected a faster decline. Luigi Zingales, an Italian economist at Chicago’s Booth business school, notes that slow growth plagued Italy long before the euro crisis. He fears the latest slowdown may show how little the economy has responded to the challenges it faced when it joined the euro and lost the ability to boost exports by devaluing its currency. “When I go to a young entrepreneurs’ group in America, I meet young entrepreneurs,” he says. “In Italy, I primarily meet trust-fund kids who are there thanks to their parents, not their accomplishments. We need a change of mentality.”AT HALF past two in the morning a dozen people queue in the freezing cold to get in to Tresor, a night club in a former power station in Berlin. In the sweaty, dimly lit interior, about 100 people are dancing to repetitive beats. Others sprawl on seats near the bar, clutching drinks or other people. The club, one of the first places in Germany to play techno music, seems as popular as when it was launched in 1991. But clubbing itself is on the wane. After the fall of the Berlin Wall night clubs sprang up in that city in a moment of “cultural anarchy”, says Dimitri Hegemann, one of Tresor’s founders. They took over disused banks, warehouses and power plants. In the rest of Europe several “superclubs” had already opened in the 1980s, and more followed. In London, Fabric opened in 1999 in a former cold store; in Amsterdam, one started in a former print works. Smaller venues proliferated, too. Since then, however, the party seems to be winding down. Between 2001 and 2011 the number of discotheken in the Netherlands fell by 38%. In Britain there were 3,144 clubs in 2005 but only 1,733 ten years later, says the Association of Licensed Multiple Retailers; in 2015 revenues were £1.2 billion ($1.7 billion), down from £1.5 billion in 2010. In Berlin, although the number of music venues has been stable at about 350 (120 of which are clubs), several long-established night spots have closed their doors. Partly this is because most European cities are becoming nicer to live in. “Even in Berlin it is harder to find an unused space in the inner city,” sighs Sven von Thülen, a DJ who has compiled an oral history of clubbing. Clubs are being pushed farther out. Increasing rents are also a problem, says Lutz Leichsenring of the Club Commission, a German industry body, especially in places such as London where property values have soared. Gentrification can muffle the high-decibel economy. “If there’s one complaint, then the whole circus starts,” says Eelko Anceaux of De Marktkantine, one of the handful of clubs that bucked the trend and opened in Amsterdam in 2014. It is possible to build good relations with neighbours, he says; his night club, like many new ones, doubles as a restaurant and hosts vintage markets, which makes it more acceptable to nearby yuppie families. Even so, middle-class residents’ complaints about noise and drunk or stoned revellers make the life of a club-owner far trickier. As cities gentrify, local politicians are getting stricter about clubs. Madame JoJo’s, a burlesque bar in London’s Soho, had its licence revoked in 2014 after two bouncers brandished a baseball bat at a rowdy crowd. In December the owners of Fabric at last won a year-long court battle against Islington Council, the local borough, which wanted to introduce drug-sniffing dogs. Last year in Berlin two clubs were closed down for fire-code violations. Increasingly, anyone who wants to open a club must have a business plan, says Mr von Thülen, rather than just an enthusiastic bunch of friends willing to party. Patience is also useful: it took Mr Anceaux four years to get his club open and another year to get a full licence. This is boring. Let’s go to a gig Two big social changes are squeezing club owners still further. The first is that the youth of today are surprisingly abstemious. In Germany, Britain, Denmark and Spain the use of MDMA, or ecstasy, which makes bonding with strangers and dancing to repetitive thumping sounds far more enjoyable, has fallen among 15-34-year-olds (see chart). (Trends in the use of drugs less closely linked to clubbing, such as cannabis and cocaine, vary by country.) Heavy alcohol consumption has also fallen slightly among young people. Excessive drinking in Britain has seen a particular decline: between 2005 and 2013 the proportion of 16-24-year-olds who were frequent drinkers (defined as drinking alcohol on five days in the previous week) fell from 7% to 2%. Buying a drink in a club is “really expensive”, gripes Amanda, a university student from America in London. (In certain clubs “guys are douchebags”, she adds.) The second trend is that big outdoor music festivals are replacing clubs. In 2014 around 130 festivals took place in Amsterdam alone. In Britain some 250 take place annually, up from 80 in 2004. Many people are saving up to go to two big festivals a year, rather than clubbing each month, thinks Iason Chronis, a DJ. The economies of scale of big festivals, in which a captive audience splurges on food and drink, make it easier for festival organisers to book big DJs such as Calvin Harris or Jamie xx. This, in turn, makes it harder for clubs to afford them. The night mayor’s nightmares Some cities are trying to halt the decline. In 2002, after a stricter pole-dancing law was introduced in Amsterdam, the post of a voluntary “night mayor” was created to lobby on behalf of the night-time club and entertainment industry. “Small events are like small business schools,” claims Mirik Milan, a self-proclaimed “rebel in a suit” who has held the post of night mayor since 2012. In London last year a “music venues task-force” set up by the fun-loving mayor, Boris Johnson, recommended that local authorities should take a more “balanced” approach to dealing with noise and that a night mayor should be appointed. In Germany Mr Leichsenring of the Club Commission sits on a working group for the Berlin chamber of commerce. These night-time champions may be able to achieve better relations between governments, neighbourhoods and clubs. But there is little they can do about the decline of 24-hour party people.CALL them the hipsters of European neurosis. Take any of the anxieties that have lately beset Europe’s politics and you find the Dutch got there first. Concerns over fiscal waywardness in the euro zone? They were fuming at German and French profligacy over a decade ago. Asylum and immigration? The Dutch were agonising over multiculturalism while Angela Merkel was still plotting her ascent to the Bundeskanzleramt. The threat from anti-European populists? The Dutch have seen several come and go. Such worries have now gone mainstream across Europe. So it is an interesting time for the Netherlands to take over the rotating six-month presidency of the Council of the European Union (the forum for national ministers). As one of the six founding EU members the Dutch are practised at steering the machinery, even if the presidency is not the force it once was (see article). But they are taking charge at a tricky moment. The EU was supposed to be a “fair-weather union”, says Bert Koenders, the foreign minister. Now it must prove itself in a storm. The refugee crisis and the Paris attacks have threatened the EU’s passport-free Schengen area. Migration and security will therefore be at the top of the Dutch in-tray. Mark Rutte, the competent if plodding prime minister, should make a decent fist of the job, so far as Europe’s squabbling governments allow. But he has his own difficulties at home. The first is a bizarre referendum in April on an EU association agreement with Ukraine. The vote, triggered by a satirical website that gathered the necessary signatures, will inevitably turn into a simple test of the voters’ mood. That could mean trouble for Mr Rutte, for like many of his EU peers he has a populist problem. Geert Wilders, a Dutch Donald Trump (with equally striking hair), is way ahead in opinion polls. His anti-Islam, anti-EU PVV outfit has dragged every party rightward on immigration. Some figures in Mr Rutte’s liberal VVD now take an eye-wateringly tough line; their coalition partner, the centre-left Labour Party, frets about refugees undermining support for the welfare state. The PVV has not always translated its poll numbers into votes. But the Netherlands’ complex party system could leave future governments with an awkward choice: bring Mr Wilders into office (or rely on his support), or form an unwieldy coalition designed solely to keep him out of it. This dilemma is hardly unique to the Netherlands. But Dutch Euroscepticism has certain peculiarities. Small and highly dependent on trade (exports contribute 32% to GDP), the Netherlands does not have the luxury of British-style Euro-contempt, as is apparent at any of its hundreds of land border crossings. Indeed, when the political winds have been favourable the Dutch have been among the more enthusiastic members. Two EU treaties—Amsterdam and Maastricht—bear the names of the Dutch cities in which they were signed. The uppermost ranks of EU policymaking are dotted with Dutchmen, from Jeroen Dijsselbloem, head of the Eurogroup of finance ministers, to Frans Timmermans, first vice-president of the European Commission. But two things seem to have turned the Dutch. The first was a growing gap over Europe between ordinary voters and the cosy elites who have traditionally run the show: in 2005 many politicians were shocked when over 60% of voters rejected a proposed EU constitution in a referendum. (Mr Wilders continues to mine this anti-elitist seam.) The second was the discovery that not every European country can uphold its duties as responsibly as the Dutch—and that in an increasingly integrated club, a failure to behave in a Dutch fashion has painful consequences for others. Dutch patience has been tested on two counts. First, badly run economies in the euro-zone’s periphery have obliged the Netherlands to pay for half a dozen bail-outs (for which they have insisted on extremely tough conditions). Second, over 50,000 asylum-seekers made their way to the Netherlands in 2015, waved through by negligent Mediterranean countries that fail to register migrants properly. This influx, noteworthy if much smaller than the ones that reached Germany or Sweden, has even led some Dutch politicians to call for a revision of the 1951 Refugee Convention, the cornerstone of global asylum law. The Dutch approach should not be mistaken for an ideological reluctance to integrate. It is rather the frustration of the small, rich country that follows the rules and cannot abide those that don’t. Rather than walk away from the club, the Dutch want it to work better. From here spring ideas like a shrunken “neuro”, a currency shared by responsible northern Europeans shorn of southern fecklessness, or a “mini-Schengen”, an idea floated by Mr Dijsselbloem in which the current 26 members are reduced to a rump of five: the three Benelux countries plus Germany and Austria. Neither proposal was ever likely to pass. The hope was that they might spook other countries into shaping up. Euroscepticism with Dutch characteristics Two lessons can be drawn from the Dutch experience. The first is that the nasty brand of populism represented by Mr Wilders is here to stay, and not only in the Netherlands. It will poison public debate, complicate efforts to manage the migrant crisis and cause headaches for politicians trying to assemble governments. Such is the tortured terrain of European politics these days. But there is a second lesson that may act as a mild corrective to Euro-gloom. As border controls pop up across Europe, Schengen looks gravely imperilled. Yet the wealth and dynamism of the Dutch economy show the value of an open-border regime in an integrated continental club. The Netherlands will not be alone in battling for its future. Today’s border checks are troublesome but manageable. But Europeans will not tolerate complete border closures or 50-mile traffic jams. Charlemagne therefore ventures a prediction: forecasts of Schengen’s imminent collapse will prove no more accurate than those of the demise of the euro zone so often heard in 2011-12.TO SEE the future of Christianity in Britain, go on a Sunday morning to an old Welsh Congregational chapel off the Pentonville Road in Islington. The building has been bought by a Pentecostal Ethiopian church; the congregation raises its hands in a show of unEnglish ecstasy to praise God in Amharic. A few hours later, something unexpected happens. A congregation of mainly white members of the Church of England start their service. This group, known as King’s Cross Church, or KXC, has grown from a handful in 2010 to 500 now. The first service reflects a well-documented phenomenon: an immigrant-led surge in London churchgoing. Weekly participation in Christian services in the capital has grown by 16% since 2005. Most devout Londoners (88%) worship outside the ranks of the established church whose spires pierce the skyline; about a third are Pentecostal. But the second service shows that even some Anglican churches are bucking the downward trend in membership. London is one of several dioceses within the Church of England that are growing, if only a little (see chart). Overall the drift down in church attendance continues, as new figures later this month will show. The proportion of people calling themselves Christian fell from 72% in 2001 to 59% in 2011. Those saying they have no religion rose from 15% to 25% in that period (including 177,000 claiming to be Jedi). The number of churchgoing Anglicans fell by 12%, and in 2013 stood at 1m. Some 19m baptised Anglicans do not attend church. Hints of revival in parts of the Church of England point to broader changes. Traditionally, the established church has had an obligation to serve everyone who lives in a parish. Its churches have been the centrepiece for local and national events. But many Anglican churches that are growing, as in King’s Cross, are “network” churches. They meet in pubs and offices outside the parish system. Most are evangelical, emphasising a personal faith based on conversion rather than a cultural affiliation to a denomination. They believe in tithing—giving a tenth of their income to the church—which increases their influence as other congregations shrink and expectations of financial giving fall. Nick Spencer of Theos, a religious think tank, says the Church of England is switching from a broad-based organisation, characterised by affiliation more than commitment, to a smaller grouping of more committed worshippers. Some observers suggest the parochial system, which has helped shape English life for centuries, needs to change. They also question the Church of England’s position as the state church, established by law. Should it cling to its old role of thinly spread universal provision or abandon it to foster smaller pockets of exuberance? Papists and puritans For centuries, the Church of England has been a broad one. With a low bar for membership—being born usually suffices—it has been there to hatch, match and dispatch anyone who wanted its services, a sort of religious public utility whose moderation has formed the English character and provided a glue for English society. As in the worldwide Anglican Communion (see article), tensions remain. For liberals, the reasons for decline are obvious. “English society and the Church of England have gradually drifted apart in terms of values,” says Linda Woodhead, professor of the sociology of religion at Lancaster University. “This was true over issues like remarriage and the ordination of women, and it’s true of same-sex marriage.” Evangelicals say the church is right not to be swayed by changing social mores. They emphasise being counter-cultural and point out that many churches which are growing run against the liberal flow. “What is dying in England is not Christianity but nominal Anglicanism,” says David Goodhew of Durham University, author of “Church Growth in Britain”. The share of evangelicals in the Church of England rose from 26% to 34% between 1989 and 2005, says Peter Brierley, a church demographer, and could now be nearly 50%. Not all growth is evangelical. Attendance at cathedrals rose by 35% between 2002 and 2012. But four of the five most senior bishops in the Church of England, including the Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, are from the evangelical tradition. They differ from their American counterparts, says Mr Spencer. “They are less focused on creationism and abortion and less right-wing politically.” Archbishop Welby and Nicky Gumbel, vicar of Holy Trinity, Brompton (HTB), London’s most influential evangelical church, both have Cambridge law degrees. HTB has planted many churches in London and is doing so in the rest of England. They are conservative on issues like gay marriage, prompting accusations by liberals of bigotry. To be fair, there is not much sign of bigotry at King’s Cross Church’s weekly drop-in for prostitutes, nor its programme to keep kids on rough housing estates away from gangs. Many evangelicals want to restore the tradition of conservative social engagement set by William Wilberforce. They sigh at their characterisation as hateful homophobes. “Everyone thinks they know what the church is against,” says Pete Hughes, the church’s youthful pastor. “We want to be known for the things we are for: proclaiming the love of God and showing it in our actions.” The declining importance of denominational affiliation continues to put pressure on the parish system. With 9,000 of its 16,000 churches in rural villages, “it is not fit for purpose”, declares David Voas of Essex University. Network churches are “like a virtual community”, he says, better suited to the modern era. The church is trying other models. One is Fresh Expressions, a mixture of new congregations such as Messy Church for children and Café Church for grown-ups, trying to reach the unchurched. Many have lay leaders. Another bottom-up initiative is the “minster model”. A prototype in rural Buckinghamshire, Latimer Minster, has grown from eight people in 2010 to 350. It is financially independent, thanks to tithing. Frog Orr-Ewing, the vicar, calls minsters the “ecclesiastical equivalent of academies” (state-run schools outside local-authority control). Much of this is difficult for liberals to take. “What about the people who would rather stick their head in a food mixer than become an evangelical?” asks Alan Wilson, the bishop of Buckingham, who openly supports gay marriage. He worries that the increasing number of people who affiliate only loosely or not at all with the Church of England will be alienated. Many do not hold liberal Christian beliefs, let alone evangelical ones. Mr Voas calls them “the fuzzies”, epitomised by a 2011 survey that found only 47% of 18- to 34-year-olds declared a religious affiliation, but 67% said they occasionally or regularly pray. As to the possibility of disestablishment, most think it is unlikely to happen. Politicians are barely involved any longer in choosing bishops. A majority of people say they want a Christian coronation for the next monarch, and no government would tie up parliamentary time unpicking the links between canon and civil law. So the Church of England will probably struggle on. Yet if it is to survive, this most traditional of English institutions must do more to adapt to a post-Christian world.WHEN he was an undergraduate at Cambridge, Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury, was cox of a Trinity College rowing eight. Perhaps coincidentally, rowing metaphors flowed in September when he announced that he had invited all 37 global Anglican primates to Canterbury for a conference starting on January 11th, in what some see as a last-ditch attempt to save the Anglican Communion. One aide suggested that bishops should not spend so much time “trying to placate people and keep them in the boat, without ever getting the oars out and starting to row”. Frustrated that bickering is keeping Anglicans from their primary mission, the archbishop will need all his powers as a cox to head off a collision, or even the sinking of the global Anglican boat. The problem is a row between liberals, mainly North American, who want the church to allow same-sex marriage, and conservatives, who think it must not. Some leaders from each side are not on speaking terms. Archbishop Welby is said to want a looser affiliation, so that both groups can keep relations with Canterbury and continue to call themselves Anglican but not have to deal with each other. He has no “papal” powers to kick out any provinces; previous attempts to discipline those who defy traditional Anglican teaching have been stopped from below. The archbishop is “not so much trying to get closer unity”, says one informed cleric; “he is trying to prevent greater disunity.” The biggest danger is that some African conservatives, who take a traditional view of sexual ethics, will walk out and lead a breakaway movement. But liberal North Americans are also angry that Archbishop Welby has invited Foley Beach. He heads a group that has split off from the Episcopal church (the official American wing of Anglicanism) in opposition to its consecration of sexually active gay bishops, which the church first did in 2003. Mr Beach and others have formed alliances with conservative African leaders.   The archbishop’s pragmatic risk-taking represents a change from his two predecessors, who tried to encourage the two sides to work together. One way he has managed to get all the primates to attend (at the last big meeting in 2011 a third were absent) is to invite them to set the agenda. Used to spats in the Church of England at home, he has emphasised the need for “good disagreement”. He has also made clear to conservative Africans that, although he supports the church’s traditional stance on marriage, it must not translate into homophobia. In June he expressed deep concern about “the stress for the Anglican Communion” after the American Episcopal church started the procedure to enable its clergy to solemnise same-sex marriages. But he has also admonished bishops who support the criminalisation of gays. If he can steady the boat, says the cleric, it will be a miracle.  
