Gul Panag: biker chic ITS motorbikes may not be the best that India produces, in terms of performance or reliability, and they are certainly not the cheapest, but no other brand comes close to matching Royal Enfield’s cult following. Gul Panag, a Bollywood star-turned-politician, is often seen, as pictured, riding her Enfield. When she got married in 2011, her groom swept her off to their honeymoon in a Royal Enfield with sidecar. Indeed, it is said that owning one of the bikes can improve a young Indian man’s marriage prospects. They tend to be driven by sensible types, in contrast with those who get their kicks by showing off on flashy sports bikes, such as the KTM Duke 390. Owners of Enfields lavish care and attention on them, diligently polishing each spoke on their wheels. Prospective mothers-in-law find this reassuring. Royal Enfield claims to be the world’s oldest motorbike-maker in continuous production. Its history goes back to colonial times, when it was the Indian offshoot of a British firm. Indian-owned since the 1950s, it has long outlived its parent. In its early days of independence it was kept going with orders from the Indian army and police, which used it to patrol rough border terrain. Now consumers drive sales: in February more than 49,000 Enfields were sold, up by 63% on a year earlier. That month there was a frisson of excitement in India’s business press when the market capitalisation of the manufacturer’s parent company, Eicher Motors, briefly overtook that of Harley-Davidson, an equally admired American bike brand, having already surpassed it by sales volume. In Delhi, enthusiasts from across the world flock to rent Enfields for rides through the Himalayas. Other bikes may be speedier on the highways and sip less fuel, but only an Enfield can survive such rugged terrain, “not your Harley-Davidsons,” sniffs one fan. Yet as recently as 2000 the parent company was planning to close Royal Enfield down. Frequent breakdowns, oil leaks, engine seizures, electrical failures and poor service had dented the bikes’ reputation and burned much of the company’s cash. Sales were down to just 2,000 a month. A third-generation member of the family that controls the group, Siddhartha Lal—who had ridden to his own wedding on an Enfield instead of the traditional horse—persuaded his father to give him a chance to revive the brand. Over the years Mr Lal made a number of changes to the bike without compromising on what had made it so popular. The gold piping on their petrol tanks is still painted by hand. But mechanical carburettors have been replaced with electronic fuel-injection on many models, to improve mileage and prevent breakdowns, especially at high altitudes. The cast-iron engine was replaced by an aluminium one to reduce oil leaks. When this affected the sound of the bike’s legendary “thump”, foreign consultants were called in to fix things. The thump is one of the bikes’ biggest selling-points: some buyers pay workshops to tinker with their new bikes to make it even louder. Investment in increasing production capacity, in the firm’s southern home city of Chennai, has helped it meet surging demand, though there is a waiting-list of up to four months on some models. When their bike finally arrives, buyers sometimes hand out sweets in their workplace, as if celebrating the arrival of their first-born. K. Krishnamani, a forty-something manager at a logistics firm in Mumbai, now on his second Enfield, describes how riding his bike makes him feel as royal as the maker’s name. “On the road, anybody will stop and give way to you. That is the liberty you have when you ride Enfield.” Correction: On March 20th this article was corrected to say that many—not "most", as originally stated—Royal Enfield models no longer have carburettors.Wallenbergs: the fifth generation SWEDEN is a progressive place. Women participate fully in the workforce. Companies are transparent, generally uncorrupt and often globally minded. Enthusiasm for technology helps Stockholm flourish as a lively startup centre for gaming, music and fintech firms. Business leaders earnestly talk of the benefits of going green, caring for workers and being ethical. In politics, Sweden is egalitarian, redistributing wealth through high taxes. So it is a puzzle that Swedish capitalism appears so strikingly unequal, with a small number of individuals owning and running large chunks of the economy. Credit Suisse, in its annual report on global wealth in October, pointed to findings that the richest 1% of Swedish households control 24% of the population’s total wealth, making it only a bit less unequal than India (25.7%). In contrast, Spain’s 1% control 16.5% of the wealth, and Japan’s only 4.3%. As in many countries, family-controlled businesses are the norm in Sweden. But as Randall Morck of the University of Alberta in Canada has noted, Sweden is an extreme case among rich countries in that one particular family, the Wallenbergs, holds such sway in business. The foundations were laid for the dynasty’s fortunes 160 years ago when André Oscar Wallenberg, the globe-trotting son of a Lutheran bishop, returned from America with a book on how to set up a bank, and founded Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken (SEB). The bank flourished, and began buying chunks of distressed industrial firms, leading the family to set up a holding company, Investor, 100 years ago. At the height of the Wallenbergs’ pre-eminence, in the 1970s, their various firms together employed 40% of Sweden’s industrial workforce and represented 40% of the total worth of the Stockholm stockmarket. Like most modern manufacturers, the industrial firms in their portfolio, including ABB and Atlas Copco (engineering), AstraZeneca (drugs) and Electrolux (appliances), are no longer huge employers. But Investor, plus SEB and the other listed firms in Investor’s portfolio, still account for about a third of the stockmarket’s value. And they generally do better than the rest: in the past decade, Investor’s shares have doubled, whereas the OMX Stockholm 30 Index rose by just 40%. Swedes often talk about the collection of companies as Wallenbergsfaren, “the Wallenberg sphere”, and to its smaller local rivals as “systems”. One of the largest systems is Industrivarden, whose portfolio includes Handelsbanken and the maker of Volvo Trucks. It has passed through several hands down the years, including those of Ingvar Kamprad, the founder of the IKEA furniture stores; its leading investor nowadays is Fredrik Lundberg, the son of a construction magnate. The Wallenbergs and Industrivarden both have large stakes in Ericsson, a maker of telecoms equipment. Many Wallenberg firms have roots in the 19th century, before Investor was founded. But they have generally flourished under the active ownership and close managerial oversight of the family. The sphere is now overseen by a genial triad of middle-aged men, two brothers and a cousin: Jacob, Peter and Marcus Wallenberg (pictured, next page). A transition to a sixth generation of the family is looming, with the next set of leaders to be drawn from a pool of around 30 relatives in their 30s or younger. A hitherto male-dominated empire is then likely to have some Wallenberg women right at the top. Already, Caroline Ankarcrona, younger sister to Marcus Wallenberg and in her late 40s, has been running the main family foundation, KAW, for four years. “Sphere” is one way of describing the Wallenberg holdings. A more pointed term (literally as well as figuratively) is the one Mr Morck uses: a pyramid. The Wallenbergs are thought to have combined personal wealth of just $1 billion or so, but they control, or have strong influence over, businesses worth hundreds of times as much. They do so through a number of foundations. KAW, the largest, is named after two ancestors who provided the largest endowment, 99 years ago. KAW has 50.1% of voting rights in Investor, chaired by Jacob Wallenberg. It in turn holds stakes—and often outsized voting rights—in their main, listed firms, at which family members often take leadership roles. (Through a division called Patricia Industries, Investor holds majority stakes in financial, telecoms and other firms, and is also a founder-investor in a private-equity fund, EQT.) Fear of tunnelling These successive layers let the Wallenbergs multiply their clout. Investor has beaten the Stockholm market handsomely, but its listed businesses often trade at a discount to their global peers, points out Thomas Zellweger, who directs a centre studying business families in St Gallen, Switzerland. Outside investors may be discounting the shares out of fear of “tunnelling”, in which a controlling family uses one firm to prop up another—though Mr Morck notes that there is scant evidence of this. Shareholders may also fear a controlling family pursuing its private obsessions, while neglecting the business: an early Wallenberg, for instance, campaigned assiduously for a single global currency, based on gold and the French franc. They may also worry that the next generation of Wallenberg bosses are chosen for internal family reasons rather than on merit. The Wallenbergs have managed their successions well over the years, but there is no guarantee this will always be so. The Wallenberg empire might in theory be threatened if, as in other countries, there were moves towards curbing the use of the dual-class shares that let the family exercise such sway over its firms. In Ericsson, for example, Investor has just 5.3% of total stock, but controls 21.5% of votes. In Electrolux, Investor has 15.5% of the stock, but 30% of voting rights. Family firms often use such dual shares (The Economist Group, largely owned by European business families, uses them too), but prevalence does not mean popularity. However, the family has long enjoyed good political connections: for all its support for free trade and open markets abroad, until the 1990s it had decades of help from protectionist policies that kept foreign predators at bay. That the KAW and other foundations get the Wallenbergs’ share of profits helps shield them from Sweden’s top income-tax rate, of 62%. The foundations’ beneficence also helps shield them from criticism: the KAW, for instance, makes $250m of grants a year, notably to fund basic research and education. Nordic, not Anglo-Saxon Discuss their set-up with the Wallenbergs and they say “Anglo-Saxons”, schooled in British and American ideas that companies are best owned by masses of small investors (or pension funds), are wilfully blind to the benefits of family-dominated firms. The family argues that ownership models need not be “black and white”, that theirs has proved it can deliver a “nice track record” for more than a century-and-a-half. Well-run family firms can ensure modern virtues—transparency, professional management, clear communication, agility—as easily as those Anglo-Saxons. Tour the headquarters of Ericsson, and its CEO, Hans Vestberg, offers a similar argument: a stolid company, founded in 1876 (and part-owned by the Wallenbergs since 1950), can be nimble, even ruthless. Ericsson frittered away the strong position it once had as a maker of mobile handsets. But Mr Vestberg talks optimistically of how it will prosper from the coming launch of fifth-generation (5G) wireless telecoms and the “internet of things”. Ericsson, with a $5 billion annual research-and-development budget, files 4,000 patents a year, he says. In less than two years it has hired 30,000 staff, but also let go 28,000, to make possible a shift from a company that sells products to one more focused on services. Gunnar Wetterberg, author of a book on the Wallenberg family, argues that having most of its wealth locked up in the foundations best explains its long-term success: family feuds are discouraged when no relative can dream of running off to Bahamas with all the loot. “There are no family fights,” says one Wallenberg. “No one understands how it works, but it works well.” Other observers prefer explanations that focus on the personality and skills of a mostly self-effacing, hard-working and polyglot clan. Their spells working in the companies make them better owners. Carina Beckerman, who has just written a book on culture and leadership in Wallenberg companies, lauds two qualities that help encourage success. One is doggedness: the Wallenbergs found few firms, but they stick with existing ones, seek new markets and try ways to make them flourish. She notes that Atlas Copco had to be rescued from near-bankruptcy three times in its first 27 years, but now flourishes. The second quality, says Ms Beckerman, is a near-obsession with getting the right managers in place: it is often the top item on the agenda whenever the Wallenberg leaders gather. They typically favour loyal insiders, not show-offs who promise dramatic change. Not everything the family touches turns to gold. Efforts to go digital, just over a decade ago, by investing in a pair of online firms, Spray Networks and Bredbandsbolaget, had disappointing outcomes. Scania, a lorry-maker that has flourished since being bought by Volkswagen in 2000, was sold too cheaply, says Ms Beckerman. But the sphere’s more recent efforts to expand its medical interests have been more successful—witness its investments in Sobi, which specialises in treatments for haemophilia and other rare diseases, and in Mölnlycke Health Care, which makes products for use in surgery and treating wounds. Even if its dominance of the Swedish business scene has diminished in recent decades, the Wallenberg sphere looks set to go on prospering in the hands of its sixth generation. That makes them mere parvenus compared with the Lovenskiold family across the border in Norway: now led by its 13th generation, it claims a 360-year history and runs successful timber and furniture firms. But there may be a shared recipe for such longevity. “The majority of the really successful, long-lasting families are, like the Wallenbergs, convivial, modest, see the hard work needed and do it quietly,” says a close observer. If they were a bunch of work-shy show-offs, Swedes would surely have noticed the inequality by now.THE ride, handling and all-round appeal of BMW’s 3 Series, a sporty saloon car, makes it a benchmark for other vehicles of its type. The German firm, which celebrated its centenary on March 7th, has also become a benchmark for success in the motor industry. The world’s biggest maker of premium-priced cars is well run, has grown steadily and made profits consistently for years. But as the beer flowed and the oompah bands parped at the huge party thrown at its headquarters in Munich, BMW’s bosses may have been wondering how to stay ahead of the pack. BMW began life in 1916 assembling aircraft engines. Restrictions on Germany’s planemaking after the first world war encouraged it to diversify, first into motorbikes, and then in 1928 into making its first car. In 1933 it launched the 303, ancestor to today’s 3 Series, and the first BMW to feature the distinctive double kidney-shaped front grille. Though stylish and technically advanced, BMW’s pricey models at first sold in small quantities. At the end of the 1950s sales of motorbikes, on which the company still relied, faltered as cars from mass-market firms hit the roads. Only an investment by the Quandt family, which controls BMW to this day, saved it from a humiliating takeover by Daimler. Rather than joining the mass market, BMW, along with its German counterparts, Daimler’s Mercedes marque and VW’s Audi, all but cornered the worldwide market in expensive, high-performance saloons. By 1990 global sales of the “Ultimate Driving Machine”, as the company’s advertising slogan has it, hit half a million cars a year. However, in 1994 BMW took a wrong turn. Its purchase of Rover Group, an ailing British maker of both premium and mass-market cars, was a disaster. In 2000, having failed to turn Rover around, it decided to sell most of the group. Since then it has been upwards pretty much all the way, with sales now at more than 2m cars a year. BMW has confounded its rivals by maintaining an image of luxury and exclusivity even as it has introduced an ever-broader range of entry-level cars at prices comparable with the top of the mass-market firms’ ranges. For example, a clever reinvention of the Mini brand, retained from Rover, gives it a vehicle for drivers without the means to buy a BMW 1 Series, which in turn fits the budgets of those who cannot afford a 3 Series. BMW (unlike Volkswagen) was also early in spotting the craze for SUVs, and now makes them in all sorts of shapes and sizes. It even offers a people-carrier, the 2 Series Active Tourer. Having filled every imaginable niche, however, its growth seems to be slowing as it struggles to imagine new ones. Mercedes may overtake BMW by unit sales this year, as a slick restyling of its models wins over buyers seeking an alternative to BMW’s more staid designs. Jaguar Land Rover, Volvo and other premium carmakers are also competing harder than they used to. Mass-market brands such as Ford and Citroën are pouring resources into “premiumising” some of their models, in a drive for bigger margins. And the slowdown in China, hitherto a hugely profitable market, has hurt BMW disproportionately hard. Even so, BMW’s bosses were entitled to clunk their steins together and slap each other heartily on the back at this week’s celebrations. The firm has got where it is mainly through an unswerving commitment to producing excellent cars. Down the years a few of its model launches—such as a recent GT version of its 5 Series executive saloon—have underwhelmed somewhat. But so far at least, there have been no stinkers. Not bad for a centenarian.THE Bonobos shop on lower Fifth Avenue, in Manhattan, sits in a row of familiar fashion brands, including J.Crew, Zara and Gap. As at those stores, shoppers at Bonobos can survey racks of clothes, try on this shirt and those trousers, then decide which items to purchase. Unlike in those stores, shoppers at Bonobos may not buy any clothes to take home. When Bonobos first tried this idea, in 2011, it seemed like a lark. The company now has 20 such shops, from Texas to California, and plans to open at least seven more this year. Bricks-and-mortar stores are in the throes of an identity crisis. The growing threat from online shopping has spurred some physical retailers to do more than just sell goods. Lululemon lures shoppers with both yoga clothes and yoga classes; Louis Vuitton displays fine art beside its frocks. Among the most interesting models to emerge, however, are chains such as Bonobos, whose outlets have no stock to sell. The idea is to divorce the purchase of a product from its distribution. Until recently, this business model was largely restricted to sellers of big, non-portable things like furniture: people like to examine sofas before they buy them, but they do not fit neatly into shopping bags. Now, clothing retailers are seeing the downsides of conventional shops, too. If a retailer stores and sells goods in the same place, it must lease space, often in an expensive central location, for the store room as well as the shop floor. Staff may be needed to unpack deliveries overnight, which raises costs further. Employees spend much of the day restocking shelves, which means less attention paid to customers. Companies can never predict perfectly which items will sell in which shops. Inevitably some clothes linger unsold for too long, and must be marked down, which squeezes margins. Online-only shops have less of a problem with this sort of thing, but there are still many consumers who like to check the fit and the feel of a garment before buying. So Paul Evans and Jack Erwin, two young shoe companies, have showrooms in New York where shoppers can inspect loafers and brogues, then order them online. Warby Parker does the same for glasses. The most prominent American example is Bonobos, which began as an online-only men’s retailer before realising customers wanted shops, too. Its outlets house many styles and many sizes, but not every style in every size. Salesmen have the sole job of helping each shopper find clothes he likes, identify the proper fit and order the clothes online. “We do a better job of selling clothes because we don’t stock the clothes,” boasts Andy Dunn, the firm’s founder. Bonobos need not guess which trousers will sell at which store. All its stock is at one central warehouse. In Asia, Zalora offers a variation on this theme. The four-year-old online retailer displays its clothes in pop-up showrooms in Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Indonesia and the Philippines. Such temporary installations, explains Tito Costa, Zalora’s marketing chief, are “a way to build confidence either in a new way of shopping or in a young brand.” Shoppers can try on Zalora’s clothes, chat with its stylists and order items online, either from computer stations or by scanning a QR code with their phones, using Zalora’s app. It is no coincidence that the companies that are testing out such showrooms began online. Big, established retailers are unlikely to convert stores to showrooms, at least in the foreseeable future. They have trained millions of customers to expect immediate gratification—buy a Zara dress in the afternoon, for example, and go dancing in it that same evening. Delivering to individuals rather than shipping in bulk to stores would also require established retailers to upend their distribution networks, says Neil Saunders of Conlumino, a consulting firm. But for many younger retailers, selling online and in showrooms may be the future, not least because showrooms are cheaper to run than conventional shops. That means they can open more of them, more quickly.THESE are dark days for globalisation. In America, presidential candidates are talking about building walls and unpicking trade deals. Brazil, another giant of the Americas, seems as protectionist as ever. Britain is preparing to hold a referendum on withdrawing from the European Union. The EU as a whole is bickering over what to do about a swelling tide of refugees. Yet there is at least some light in the darkness. Mexico, for instance, continues to carry a torch for globalisation. President Enrique Peña Nieto’s administration boasts about the country’s 44 trade deals, more than any other country, and its 11 reform initiatives. The World Bank calculates that Mexico is one of the most open large economies in the world: exports plus imports are equivalent to 66% of GDP, compared with 26% for Brazil and 42% for China. The Boston Consulting Group finds in a survey that its people take a positive view of the future: 77% of Mexicans say they are optimistic, and only 6% that they are very pessimistic. Mexicans see the likes of Donald Trump as being cut from the same cloth as the old-fashioned Latin American strongmen who ruined the region through protectionism and gesture politics.   When the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) was created in 1994 it was as controversial in Mexico as it was in the United States: a Yanqui conspiracy, according to those on the left, designed to turn their country into a colony of El Norte. Today the Mexican elite speaks with one voice on the subject. Mexico is now one of the world’s top 15 manufacturing economies and one of its top five car producers. The output of the ten largest car plants rose from 1.1m vehicles in 1994 to 2.9m in 2012. Mexican consumers now have access to a huge range of multinational brands: marketers refer to young, middle-class Mexicans as the “children of NAFTA”, because their taste is so cosmopolitan. Free trade has helped to produce a corps of elite Mexican companies that are capable of going head-to-head with the best in the world. Bimbo is the world’s largest baker, thanks in part to its ambitious expansion into America with the purchase of Sara Lee’s bakery business. Gruma is the world’s biggest maker of tortillas, with more than 100 plants in 20 countries. Free trade has been a double blessing for such companies. First, it has encouraged those that have reached the limit of the Mexican market to go global. They have the huge advantages of speaking one of the world’s most popular languages, and sharing a 1,900-mile (3,100km) border with America. Second, now that they are more vulnerable to competition and takeovers, they have been forced to shake off a long-standing tendency for successful Mexican companies to become flabby. When AB InBev, a global brewer, bought Grupo Modelo, a Mexican beer firm, in 2013, it quickly eliminated around $1 billion in annual costs. Schumpeter noted in a previous column on Mexico that it is unusual in having both a global upper class (thanks to American education) and a global peasantry (thanks to emigration to America). Free trade is now rapidly globalising the middle class, which by some estimates makes up 30-40% of the population. Scot Rank, the boss of the Lala Group, a dairy firm, points out that better-off Mexicans are becoming more like Americans in their tastes. They want “lite” products that will help them fight the flab (obesity is a big problem in a country addicted to a “vitamin T” diet of tacos and tortillas) and “drinkables”, nutrition that can be consumed on the go (partly in response to the rise of two-income families). Mexico is now freeing up two hitherto protected areas, telecoms and energy. Telmex has been forced to surrender its telecoms monopoly, and is now in a vigorous battle with the Yanqui AT&T, in which average tariffs have fallen by half in the past year. Pemex, the state oil monolith, is being forced to auction off some fields to foreign bidders, and to form joint ventures with foreign firms. A visit to Pemex’s headquarters illustrates just how radical the latter policy is. A collection of giant slabs surrounded by thick iron railings, protected by a phalanx of armed guards, it looks more like an arm of government than a commercial organisation. Which is exactly what it is: Pemex provides a third of government revenues and thousands of coveted jobs—and until recently its monopoly status was guaranteed in the constitution. Last month the government underlined its seriousness by sacking the company’s boss, Emilio Lozoya, despite his close relationship with the president. The new boss, José Antonio González, argues that the steep fall in the oil price is also a “golden opportunity”: Pemex now has no choice but to reform if it is to thrive in the face of greater competition. The other Mexico that still needs fixing Even if the government can successfully re-engineer Pemex, it still has an enormous amount to do. Mexico is one of the world’s most unequal societies. Perhaps half of Mexicans are still poor and parochial, beset by crime and corruption, and poorly served by schools and banks. The economy is hobbled by a long tail of inefficient firms: the McKinsey Global Institute, a think-tank, points out that, though the productivity of Mexico’s globalised companies has risen by 5.8% a year since 1999, the productivity of small, traditional firms has fallen by 6.5% a year. Poorer regions, especially in the south, are mired in the past, too far from the American border to benefit from the manufacturing boom. These problems have held back the economy’s growth rate to a disappointing 2-3% over the past 30 years. They have also supplied the drugs cartels (which benefit from globalisation in their own, malign way) with an endless supply of young recruits. Mr Peña Nieto’s administration has done something to extend the benefits of globalisation to this other Mexico by deregulating telecoms and taking on the teachers’ unions. However, this is just the start of what is needed. Successful Mexicans are right to mock Mr Trump’s talk of building walls. But they need to focus their energies on some construction projects of their own: building ladders of opportunity for the poor, and bridges of commerce between the two Mexicos.SHANGHAI, China’s financial centre, does not make it easy on outsiders wishing to buy homes. Non-residents who are single are banned from buying property. The married are welcome but only so long as they have paid local taxes for two years and make nearly a third of the purchase in cash. Shenyang, China’s biggest northern city, is far more welcoming. Anyone can buy a home there. All to little effect: housing prices in Shanghai, five times more expensive than those in Shenyang, have risen by 20% over the past year; those in the northern city have edged down. This bifurcation is a worry for the government, which wants to spur growth without inflating bubbles. A divergence in housing prices between wealthy cities and the hinterland is a familiar problem in other countries—just look at London and Lincolnshire, say, or New York and Nebraska. But the divisions are starker in China. In its most prosperous cities, already giddy prices continue to shoot up, while unsold flats pile up in markets where valuations were low to begin with. Moreover, construction has long been one of the economy’s main engines, accounting for as much as a quarter of GDP growth until recently. This makes it especially important that the government get the balance right. Doing so is proving hard. Over the past half-year, the government has unveiled a series of measures to support the housing market that specifically exclude China’s five hottest markets (Beijing, Guangzhou, Sanya, Shanghai and Shenzhen). People buying homes need only make a 20% down-payment to obtain a mortgage, except in the five conurbations, where they must put down 30%. By the same token, in most of the country transaction taxes have been cut by as much as two-thirds for people buying second homes; in the five outliers they have been left unchanged. In Shenzhen, a southern tech hub that is the frothiest market, with prices up by 53% in the past year alone, local officials have vowed to crack down on speculators and expand the supply of affordable housing. The results of this two-tier system have been meagre so far. The frenzy in the biggest cities stems from the central bank’s steady loosening of monetary policy over the past 18 months. Although warranted from an economic perspective, it was inevitable that low interest rates would drive asset prices higher. Initially, much of the credit pumped out by banks ended up in the stockmarket, but following its crash last summer, property beckoned as one of the few decent investment options in China (capital controls, which have been further tightened recently, make it hard for Chinese savers to invest their money abroad). For speculators looking at property, the excess supply in smaller cities was all too evident, so they turned instead to the megalopolises. Du Jinsong of Credit Suisse describes it as a form of groupthink. “Everybody—investors, developers, policymakers and bankers—thinks that first-tier cities are safe,” he says. Even as the government tries to restrain the excesses, however, it does not want to snuff out the rally in the big cities altogether, for they tend to influence sentiment elsewhere. There are signs that this is beginning to happen. Housing prices started rising month on month in the biggest cities a year ago. In midsized cities (in China, those with populations of 5m-10m), prices have been rising for the past four months. In smaller cities (mere hamlets of 1m-5m), gains have been evident only for the past two months (see chart). If this upturn lasts, some investors reckon it will spur construction. Commodities used to build apartment blocks, such as iron (girders) and copper (wires), have recovered slightly from their recent swoon, partly in the hope that China’s property market is also stirring (see article). Indeed, a series of mini-cycles in the Chinese housing sector over the past decade followed this sort of pattern: rising housing sales led to new building starts, which in turn pushed commodity prices higher. Figures from the China Index Academy, a data provider, show that the stock of unsold homes has decreased recently, from nearly 30 months’ worth of sales early last year to 15 now. “A housing market with rising volume and prices clearly does not support the view that, on a macro level, China’s housing market is oversupplied,” notes Liang Hong of China International Capital Corp, an investment bank. But there is a further vast increment of supply on the verge of coming to market, because developers slowed the pace of construction in recent years and in some cases halted it altogether. There were 4.7 billion square metres of housing under construction but not yet available for sale at the end of last year, up by 25% from the end of 2011; 452 million square metres of housing were on sale, nearly three times as much as at the end of 2011. Some provinces and cities are drafting plans to convert unsold homes into subsidised housing for poorer residents. Xi Jinping, China’s president, has said that reducing property inventory is a “battle of annihilation” that must be won to revitalise the economy. Revived demand for new construction, in short, is a long way off. The exception is sure to be China’s biggest cities, where there clearly is an imbalance between supply and demand. Shenzhen and Shanghai, in particular, are popular with the young and the highly educated, just the kinds of people that push up housing prices. They are two of China’s best-run cities, offering good transport links, good jobs and, by Chinese standards, good air. Unsold housing inventories cover just about five months of demand at the current pace of sales, indicating that more construction is needed. INTERACTIVE CHART: China's housing affordability, city by city Even with these strong fundamentals, it is hard to justify a 50% surge in housing prices over the past year. Regulators suspect that there has been some foul play. This week they said they would target online lenders that have made loans to homebuyers to cover their down-payments; these loans have, in theory, allowed speculators to buy homes entirely with borrowed cash, in contravention of the minimum down-payment requirements. But reining in animal spirits is a hard task. At the Baoshan Property Trading Centre, where people buying homes in a district of northern Shanghai must go to register their purchases, crowds have swelled to such a size that the local government has deployed police to keep the peace. On one recent day a phalanx of security officers in white helmets stood guard alongside barricades as people lined up to submit their documentation. One of those queuing, Wang Jie, bought a new apartment for 2m yuan ($307,000) in October, and has watched its value soar by another 1m since then. “No one seems to buy when prices are falling,” he chuckled. “But everyone does when they start rising.” TECHNOLOGY ought to have revolutionised finance more than any other industry. After all, modern money is mostly an entry on a computer—capable of being transmitted instantly and virtually costlessly around the world. Stockmarket activity is now dominated by high-frequency traders, who make deals faster than they can blink. The finance sector spends more on technology, as a proportion of its revenues, than any other industry. Nevertheless, compared with the world of e-commerce, banking still sometimes gives the impression of a Volkswagen Beetle instead of a Formula 1 racing car. It took many years of effort to get to a world of “T+2”, where securities are settled two days after the trade is made, rather than the “T+3” system that preceded it. The international payments system still looks like a “spaghetti junction”, in the words of Andrew Haldane, the Bank of England’s chief economist, with money passing through several hands on the way from payer to recipient. The annual revenues earned by the banking system for processing payments are huge, at $1.7 trillion, and rising (see chart). One reason for this inefficiency is that technology has been tacked on to a centuries-old banking model. Much bank spending on technology is devoted to maintaining existing systems, a desperate effort to keep the show on the road. Hence the hype around “fintech”—the hope that the whole system can be overhauled by disruptive innovators, much as Uber is revolutionising the taxi business and Airbnb is taking on hotels. Fintech firms operate in many areas, from digital payments to automated wealth management. But at a London Business School conference this week, the greatest excitement was reserved for blockchain technology. A blockchain is a “distributed ledger” under which transaction records are held by a wide number of participants in a network; it is the technology behind Bitcoin, a digital currency. Technology experts seem to think a distributed ledger is more secure. A hacker would be required to break into a wide range of sites rather than a single, central register. But there are doubts over whether such a system could handle the sheer volume of payments in the financial system—hundreds of thousands of transactions every second. Even if those technological hurdles could be overcome, a register could develop in two different ways. An open system would be good for customers, allowing them to exchange money quickly, cheaply and anonymously. But it would be a nightmare for regulators trying to crack down on tax evasion and money-laundering. No longer would the unscrupulous need to keep high-value notes under the mattress. A supervised system would get round this problem, but it would also give the authorities much more power to pry into people’s financial lives. Customers would understandably be far less keen. A largely unregulated technology sector is bumping up against a heavily regulated finance industry. The result may be that advances in this area will be slow as regulators clamp down on anything that seems too anarchic. The big banks, conscious of the ability of regulators to fine them for aiding and abetting money-laundering, will proceed with caution. Susan Athey, an economist with links to Silicon Valley, argues that blockchain technology might be most useful for other purposes—to register asset ownership, for example. People in developing countries find it difficult to establish their ownership of land; a reliable digital register could reduce that problem. And a digital land registry in America would eliminate the need for homeowners to pay for expensive title insurance. Forecasting how new technology will change an industry is never easy. As Bill Gates once said, and tech types constantly repeat: “We always overestimate the change that will occur in the next two years and underestimate the change that will occur in the next ten.” But monetary policy may be giving new financial models a lift. Very low interest rates encourage investors to search for yield. One beneficiary is peer-to-peer lending, in which investors extend credit to people and businesses directly. And imagine what would happen if negative interest rates became semi-permanent and were passed on to retail depositors—a tax on bank accounts. The appeal of digital currencies that were out of the reach of central bankers would increase exponentially. Never mind disrupting commercial banks. What about doing the same thing to central banks?IT IS a tough time to be a central banker. On March 8th the IMF called for more stimulus globally to see off a lack of demand in the world economy. On the same day economists at the Peterson Institute, a think-tank, issued a report that was labelled a “reality check”, arguing that fears for the world economy were overblown. (One of the report’s authors, Olivier Blanchard, was until last year the IMF’s chief economist.) The disagreement reflects conflicting signals that the Federal Reserve must untangle at its next meeting, which begins on March 15th. When the Fed raised interest rates by a quarter-point in December, after seven years without a change, inflation was still in the doldrums. According to the central bank’s preferred measure, prices were rising by just 0.5% a year. The Fed raised rates anyway: Janet Yellen, its chair, argued that the fizzing labour market meant inflation must be on the way. Waiting for it to arrive before raising rates might force the Fed to yank them up abruptly later, potentially triggering a recession. Crucially, households’ inflation expectations had not fallen much, so the Fed could argue that its 2% inflation target remained credible even as it tightened policy. Since “lift-off” in December, worries about the global economy have sent stockmarkets sliding. The S&P 500 has fallen by about 5% since then; in the gloomiest moment in February, it was 12% down. But America’s labour market has not been gyrating in the same way. In February the economy created 242,000 jobs, many more than the roughly 100,000 thought to be needed to stop unemployment rising. What is more, Ms Yellen’s prediction is beginning to come true. Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, was 1.7% in January, its highest level since 2013. The headline measure has risen too, to 1.3%—still well below target, but a marked increase nonetheless. Rate-setters are likely to raise their forecasts for core inflation at their meeting this month, according to Zach Pandl of Goldman Sachs. But not every measure is following Ms Yellen’s script. According to the University of Michigan’s survey of consumers, Americans’ inflation expectations have dipped to 2.5%. Although that is above the Fed’s target, consumers usually predict inflation that is higher still. Their expectations today are 0.5 percentage points below their long-term average, and as low as they have been since 2010. Consumers may have only now adapted to a world of cheap fuel and a strong dollar. If so, rising inflation should gradually turn their forecasts around. But measures of inflation expectations in financial markets—usually thought of as more forward-looking than consumers—have been depressed for some time. The difference between yields on inflation-protected government bonds and the normal kind points to inflation of just 1.4% over the next five years. (This measure also rallied in the second half of February, having previously dipped below 1%, its lowest level since the crisis.) Ms Yellen is sceptical of these barometers. The market for inflation-protected bonds is less liquid than before the financial crisis. That means investors might demand a higher return to hold these bonds rather than regular ones, compressing the spread between the two. The “inflation-risk premium”, which investors demand to insure themselves against very high levels of inflation, may also have come down (this can happen without the mean forecast for inflation changing). It is unlikely, though, that such factors fully account for investors’ apparent nonchalance about inflation. The swaps market, which suffers less from such problems, points to medium-term inflation of around 1.7%. Markets, it seems, think the likely path of monetary policy is too tight. Yet Americans continue to spend strongly, as Mr Blanchard and his colleagues point out. Incomes and spending both rose by a robust 0.5% in January. Retail sales are strong. In December most rate-setters forecast another interest-rate rise at the coming meeting. That now looks very unlikely, thanks to the gloomy global picture. But the Fed may be in the curious position of marking up its inflation forecasts even as it postpones rate rises. The recent financial volatility, which could be a sign of problems to come, justifies the change of heart. But with the domestic economy purring, it would not take much of a climb in the oil price, or a fall in the dollar, to push inflation higher still. Markets expect only one interest-rate rise this year, and only three more rises by the end of 2018. They are probably underestimating.THE spectacular leap of almost 20% in the price of iron ore on March 7th reveals a lot about the idiosyncrasies of commodities markets. Coming on the first trading day after the opening of China’s National People’s Congress, at which the government pledged to maintain GDP growth of at least 6.5% a year for the next five years, the jump may well have reflected renewed optimism about the appetite of the world’s biggest steel consumer. But the price of physical commodities tends to depend more on supply, demand and inventories than on the expectations of financial markets. So a giant flower show in Tangshan, China’s biggest steel-producing city, may be an equally good—and more fragrant—explanation for the sudden rally. Tangshan’s authorities want their flowers to bloom under clean air during the show, from April to October, so they are curbing output at the city’s steel mills. Low inventories and the prospect of reduced supply over the summer have pushed up local prices, making mills even keener to operate at full tilt until the stoppage begins. That led to a scramble for ore, according to Tomás Gutiérrez of Kallanish Commodities, a steel-industry watcher. “People really panicked.” In China as a whole, it is typical to build stocks of metals before construction picks up in spring. That may explain why many of them have rallied this year—albeit from very low bases. David Wilson of Citigroup notes that the depreciation of the yuan has also encouraged traders to import extra ore in case the currency falls further. And Capital Economics, a consultancy, says one of the main drivers of the recovery in iron-ore prices may have been speculative short-covering—or the unwinding of bets that prices would fall further. The new target for growth may also have played a part—even if China’s ability to meet it is hotly debated. Goldman Sachs, for example, says China’s main avenue for stoking metals demand would be the property market, but it argues that though there are more home sales and higher prices, there is no sign of this yet spreading into new construction. Others argue that the strength of physical demand is not mirrored in China’s weak import data, or in low freight rates at sea. The downward pressure on metals prices is due as much to an avalanche of oversupply as a shortage of demand. In iron ore, in particular, there are no signs the glut in production in Australia’s Pilbara region is ebbing. By the time Tangshan’s peonies and chrysanthemums are in full bloom, the iron-ore rally may be long gone.
