The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye. By Sonny Liew. Pantheon; 320 pages; $30. WHAT sort of country is Singapore? Westerners who live there get used to being asked two questions whenever they go home: “Can you chew gum?” and “Have you been caned yet?” These foreigners may be familiar with “Disneyland with the Death Penalty”, a scathing essay that William Gibson wrote in 1993, depicting the Lion City as a soulless, consumerist, authoritarian wasteland. Yet to much of the developing world, Singapore is a model. It is politically stable and geopolitically independent; its citizens enjoy a high standard of living and all the trappings—but not much more than the trappings—of democracy. To its politicians and defenders, Singapore is an achievement born of self-sacrifice, hard work and committed multiculturalism (for instance, public-housing blocks, where most Singaporeans live, must reflect the ethnic make-up of the country: “There are no segregated ghettos in Singapore,” its prime minister boasted in a speech last year). Like any other country, Singapore means different things to different people. Its detractors admit that modern Singapore is safe, well-run and has achieved remarkable material progress since it became independent just over 50 years ago. And even its defenders admit that Singapore restricts civil liberties (for good reason, in their view), and that its progress has had costs as well as benefits. Sonny Liew’s brilliantly inventive “The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye” weighs those costs and benefits. Graphic novelists have made a mark in politics: Marjane Satrapi with Iran and Joe Sacco with Palestine are two of the most admired. The latest experiment in political storytelling through graphic art explores Singapore’s history through the career of Charlie, a fictional cartoonist, which begins in the mid-1950s when Singapore was still a British colony. The book is a series of interviews with Charlie, beginning in 2010, when he is 72 years old. Charlie is mild but steel-spined, observant and proud; with masterful economy of detail—an arched eyebrow here, his head at a resigned angle there—Mr Liew crafts him into a fully realised character. Charlie’s first published comic is a fairly standard mid-century science-fiction tale in which a boy and his dog discover a giant robot hidden in a cave. But his work quickly turns political. The boy and his dog find themselves embroiled in an anti-colonial demonstration. British police attack unarmed students, but the robot, who responds only to commands in Chinese, steps in to save the day. Lee Kuan Yew, who founded the People’s Action Party (PAP) in 1954 and won his first parliamentary seat a year later, makes an early appearance in Chan’s work in “Invasion”. The series depicts humanity under the rule of an alien race, the Hegemons. Mr Lee is a lawyer who argues for human self-rule and speaks fluent Hegemonese (“Invasion” is, of course, an allegory, with humans representing Singaporeans and Hegemons the British). Charlie also uses allegory to tell the story of Singapore’s failed merger with the Federation of Malaya in the early 1960s, with Mr Lee as Sang Kancil, a mouse-deer figure from Malaysian folk tales who lives by his wits; the British as Sir Lion, the Malayan prime minister as a kindly orang-utan. Charlie’s versions of Mr Lee grow steadily more Machiavellian. By 1983 he is “Mr Hairily” (Mr Lee’s name at birth was Harry Lee Kuan Yew), chairman of the so-called Sinkapor Inks corporation, who chucks his company’s newsletter-writer in the janitor’s cupboard for reporting inconvenient truths, and forces his employees to confess to their part in “a Richard Marxist conspiracy”—a sly reference to Operation Spectrum, in which 16 people were arrested and detained without trial, having been accused of being part of a “Marxist conspiracy” to topple the government. These events remain controversial: the country’s Media Development Authority in effect banned “To Singapore with Love”, a documentary about nine people exiled for their alleged involvement in a communist conspiracy during the 1960s and 1970s. The National Arts Council (NAC) revoked a grant awarded to “The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye” because, as a NAC director explained, the book “potentially undermines the authority or legitimacy of the Singapore government”. The book does not shy away from controversial periods in the nation’s history. But Singapore did not stop publication. One wonders if Lee Kuan Yew would have been so lenient. But the Singapore of 2016 is not the Singapore of 1983 or the 1950s. It is a more mature, confident country. Talk to an older Singaporean, however, and at some point you will hear her wax lyrical about the lost kampongs—the small, intimate villages of Singapore replaced by highways and high-rises. In perhaps the book’s most moving section, Charlie recalls the “old uncle with his cinema-on-wheels”: an old man on a bicycle toting a film projector. Eventually that gave way to theatres and television. The old uncles still came by, Charlie, recalls, “but the kids just didn’t seem to get as excited about his appearance anymore. As the years went by you’d see him less and less often, until one day (out of the blue), you’d look, but would not find him anywhere.” Most people, of course, would rather watch films on their flat-screen TVs than on the side of a courtyard wall. But in the rush to give everyone the means to buy state-of-the-art TVs, it’s worth sparing a thought for the walls.War on terror firma Broken Vows: Tony Blair: The Tragedy of Power. By Tom Bower. Faber & Faber; 653 pages; £20. IT IS a measure of how far Tony Blair’s stock has fallen that he has attracted the unwelcome attention of Tom Bower. Usually Mr Bower takes aim at controversial businessmen, such as Robert Maxwell, Mohamed al-Fayed, Conrad Black, Bernie Ecclestone, Simon Cowell and (twice) Richard Branson. A diligent cuttings job and interviews with anyone with dirt to dish or an axe to grind provide the material to shred a chap’s reputation. The charge sheet against the former prime minister is predictably devastating. He was a fraud whose communications skills obscured a paucity of accomplishment during a decade in office. He deceived voters: over Britain’s involvement in two wars and by presiding over an undeclared open-door immigration policy. Distrustful of the competence of cabinet colleagues, unwilling to resolve the dysfunctional relationship with Gordon Brown and sceptical of the “modernising” commitment of senior civil servants, his approach to the exercise of power became destructive of the very fabric of government. His second career as a highly remunerated globe-trotting political consultant, often to some pretty dodgy regimes, has done nothing for his reputation. The attack is relentless. Much of the evidence supporting Mr Bower’s narrative of a gifted but shallow politician who over-promised and under-delivered appears, at first sight, compelling. However, there is early on a warning about just how unbalanced this account is. Few would disagree that one of Mr Blair’s signal achievements was the Good Friday Agreement that brought an end to 30 years of violence in Northern Ireland. Yet it merits only one rather barbed paragraph. Mr Blair’s first term certainly lacked any guiding idea about how underperforming public services should be improved other than by spending more money. His losing gamble on the outcome of the Iraq war also drained the prime minister of political capital. Without it, pushing through a reform agenda that was at odds with the ideological prejudices of most of his own party and which Mr Brown, as chancellor in control of the purse strings, was determined to undermine (for personal as much as political reasons) was uphill work. Where Mr Bower gets it wrong, however, is in casting Mr Blair as a feckless flibbertigibbet incapable of the serious analysis required to think through and implement complex policies. In the second half of his term of office, Mr Blair had a very clear idea of what needed to be done. There was no doubting his intellectual conversion to the role that market discipline could play in improving public services, nor his command of intricate policy detail. But there were only a handful of people who could help him realise his goals. All too often, when faced with Mr Brown’s intransigence, he failed to stand by them.    On Iraq, Mr Bower does his best to suggest that Mr Blair was guilty of an act of deliberate deception in sending Britain to war. He fails to come up with anything fresh. Too much weight was indeed given to patchy intelligence about weapons of mass destruction. But there is no doubt that Mr Blair believed in it and thought it right to act on it. When the long-awaited Chilcot report is finally published, it will interest historians, but it will not satisfy those who say Mr Blair is a war criminal. Mr Bower is on firmer ground when it comes to Mr Blair’s life since leaving Number 10. Copying Bill Clinton, Mr Blair has combined lucrative political consulting and business networking with running philanthropic foundations: one aims to spread good governance in Africa, another advocates religious tolerance. In theory, the consulting is meant to provide funds for the philanthropy. But the latter often provides moneymaking openings for the former, Mr Bower alleges. Mr Blair’s acquisition of considerable wealth since leaving office has contributed as much to his subsequent vilification as the residual bitterness over Iraq. But his governments were far from being the unmitigated disaster Mr Bower describes. Had they been, voters would not twice have re-elected him. The author never tries to see things from his subject’s point of view. Nor does he consider the often adverse political context in which Mr Blair was operating. The result is a shrill and misleading account. Readers deserve a fairer and more serious book about this important political figure.The End of Alchemy: Money, Banking and the Future of the Global Economy. By Mervyn King. W.W. Norton; 448 pages; $28.95. Little, Brown; £25. INSIDER accounts of the financial crisis are two a penny. The recollections of Timothy Geithner, a former American treasury secretary, are packed with pulsating drama. A book from Ben Bernanke, a former chairman of the Federal Reserve, lacks the pyrotechnics but offers a robust defence of the Fed’s response to market meltdown. Mervyn King, who was governor of the Bank of England in 2003-13, sees such “instant memoirs” as “partial and self-serving”. In “The End of Alchemy” there is no gossip and few revelations. Instead Lord King uses his experience of the crisis as a platform from which to present economic ideas to non-specialists. He does a good job of putting complex concepts into plain English. The discussion of the evolution of money—from Roman times to 19th-century America to today—is a useful introduction for those not quite sure what currency really is. He explains why economies need central banks: at best, they are independent managers of the money supply and rein in the banking system. Central bankers like giving the impression that they have played such roles since time immemorial, but as Lord King points out the reality is otherwise. The Fed was created only in 1913; believe it or not, until 1994 it would not reveal to the public its interest-rate decisions until weeks after the event. Even the Bank of England, founded in 1694, got the exclusive right to print banknotes (in England and Wales) only in 1844. At times, Lord King can be refreshingly frank. He is no fan of austerity policies, saying that they have imposed “enormous costs on citizens throughout Europe”. He also reserves plenty of criticism for the economics profession. Since forecasting is so hit and miss, he thinks, the practice of giving prizes to the best forecasters “makes as much sense as it would to award the Fields Medal in mathematics to the winner of the National Lottery”. This is all perfectly interesting, and Lord King opines on a wide range of issues (though with more emphasis on breadth than depth). But the real point of the book, it seems, is to propose a policy to reform global finance. The problem leading up to the crisis, as Lord King sees it, is that commercial banks had little incentive to hold large quantities of safe, liquid assets. They knew that in a panic, the central bank would provide liquidity, no matter the quality of their balance-sheets; in response they loaded up on risky investments. Instead of this unhappy arrangement, Lord King wants banks to buy “liquidity insurance”. In normal times banks would pledge collateral to the central bank, which would agree to lend a certain amount against it, if necessary. Banks would thus know in advance precisely how much help they could get in the event of a meltdown, making them behave responsibly when times were good. The argument is persuasive (indeed, some central banks have policies that bear resemblance to the one Lord King is suggesting). However, there is something unsatisfying about a plea for radical reform from a man who has recently spent a decade in a position of exceptional power: if your suggestions are so good, readers will find themselves asking, then why did you not push for them yourself? Lord King has produced a worthy book, but a shamelessly self-serving account of his role during the financial crisis would have been a lot more fun.Your turn now Rebooting India: Realising a Billion Aspirations. By Nandan Nilekani and Viral Shah. Allen Lane; 337 pages; £20. IN A month or so, India will have registered a billion residents—the latest stage in the creation of a complete identity database of what will soon be the world’s most populous country. Aadhaar, which means “foundation” in Hindi, matches names with fingerprints and iris scans on a scale that has never been seen before. Reimagining government with such technology at its core will be key to meeting the mounting aspirations of India’s citizens, according to two of the scheme’s architects, Nandan Nilekani and Viral Shah. If the Domesday Book, an 11th-century survey of England, was commissioned to raise funds for government, Aadhaar’s most useful purpose is to help their disbursement. Making sure each farmer gets one dose of subsidised fertiliser and all poor families their share of rice is fiendish without knowing who they are. Many of those who are entitled to government handouts live in one of the 600,000 Indian villages with no banking facilities. Serving the citizenry in a country where 59% of births are not registered, and many people can’t read, is a task that has been a costly failure. Rajiv Gandhi, a former prime minister, once claimed that just 17% of subsidies reached the right people: not so much a leaky bucket as a sieve. A patchwork of rival ID schemes, from driving licences to ration cards, electoral rolls and tax-registration numbers, did not serve the purpose of making each and every citizen visible to the state. Much debate about public policy is about the principles behind it: which citizens should pay how much tax, for example. “Rebooting India” is a welcome detour to the often-overlooked realities of how these principles translate into reality. A government benefit which requires days of trekking to receive, and then a bribe to unlock, may not feel like much of a benefit at all. Women who can access a subsidy without the involvement of their husbands or brothers are in quite a different position than those who cannot. Aadhaar is transforming the way many citizens interact with the state. It allows the government to pay benefits directly to over 200m bank accounts linked to its database, so cutting out layers of corrupt and inept middlemen. That will feel much more tangible, to the average Indian, than a tax break here or a new subsidy there.  “Rebooting India” is at its best when it delves into the veritable sausage-making that is large-scale government IT projects. (Mr Nilekani, one of the authors, knows more than most about what it takes to deliver these, having co-founded and then run Infosys, an Indian IT giant.) How do you coax a reluctant bureaucracy to adopt a new technology that might erode its privileges? How do you resist those who want to turn it into something more comprehensive than just an ID scheme—and therefore make it more likely to fail? Given Aadhaar’s relatively smooth implementation, civil servants across the world would do well to seek inspiration from it. Its potential is vast but mostly unknown. It is described as a “platform” in which an “ecosystem” can thrive, much like the iPhone is a platform for apps. Beyond subsidy payments, a few such applications for Aadhaar already exist: one allows citizens to track in real time which bureaucrats are physically at their desk. If that is not helpful, other uses that have not yet been thought of undoubtedly will be. There is the occasional whiff of naivety. The book’s title alone suggests that India’s governing apparatus could be improved if it could just be turned off and on again. And how can a government that is so inept as to need recasting be trusted to avoid the Orwellian possibilities of a billion-strong database? Police have already nagged to get access to its fingerprints and have been rebuffed—for now. If Aadhaar is indeed as revolutionary as the personal computer, it is frustrating that the second half of the book veers into other ways IT can help deliver government services. The authors’ suggestions on how road tolls or India’s court system could be better run with added tech savvy are correct, but their solutions to other problems, such as managing health records, lack Aadhaar’s elegance. It is a credit to Aadhaar that the book, while fascinating, feels like primary material for a weightier tome. The high politics of the scheme are glossed over, particularly the election of Narendra Modi halfway through its implementation (Mr Nilekani stood unsuccessfully as an MP for the rival Congress party). The chronicles of a revolution, if indeed this is one, are best not written by the perpetrators.INTHEBEGINNINGWASTHEWORD, and the word was run together. Ancient texts (like the Greek of the Gospel of John) had few of the devices that tell readers where words begin and end (spaces), which words are proper names (the upper-lower case distinction), where breaks in meaning come (commas, dashes, semicolons and full stops), who said what (inverted commas), and so on.  Most people take punctuation to be something obvious and settled. In fact, the system is in a bit of upheaval. The beginnings of that date back to 1971, when Ray Tomlinson sent an experimental message between two computers in the same room, connected only by ARPANET (the precursor to the internet). Tomlinson, who died on March 5th, made a lasting contribution to the world’s orthography by choosing the @ symbol for e-mail addresses. His legacy will be a long one. E-mail and the @ sign have conquered the world: you cannot truly say you speak a foreign language until you can give your e-mail address complete with the local word for the glyph, like snabel-a (“elephant-trunk A”) in Danish or aapenstartje (“little monkey’s tail”) in Dutch. It seems that Tomlinson opened a Pandora’s box. As communication using computers proliferated, so did people’s recourse to those lesser-used characters at the edges of their computer keyboard. In the 1990s, it was the rise of the emoticon, from the humble :-) to the more elaborate, like >:\ (a furrowed-brow look of scepticism). The use of # to signal a topic (#language), as on Twitter, has evolved as a way to send messages through a kind of second channel. Some find this #playful, and others find it #irritating, but it has its uses in condensed media like Twitter. Other innovations may have seen their day come and go: nerds once preferred tags in the style of HTML (used to code web pages) like “<sarcasm>”. But this already seems to be on the wane, in favour of things like “*sigh*”. A *sigh* was Johnson’s reaction to another story of non-traditional writing: last year Oxford Dictionaries chose an emoji—those cartoonish faces descended from emoticons—as its “Word of the Year”. (It was the face intended to signal “tears of joy”.) Emoji aren’t really words or punctuation, but something akin to a graphical hashtag, performing a bit of the same role as tone of voice and body language in speech. With all this flux, many people worry that skill with punctuation is disappearing: witness, after all, the way teens text and tweet not bothering to capitalise or punctuate at all. It is in fact more complicated (and interesting) than that. Not putting a full stop in a text is normal for teens in an internet message, and including it sends a separate note of annoyance or frustration on the part of the writer. Full stops can also be used for other effects, like “You. Must. Be. Joking.” Such chaos is not all that historically unusual. The first English writers, when they punctuated at all, availed themselves of long-forgotten symbols like the diastole and trigon, the interpunct and the diple. Printing began the process of settling the punctuation system, but even that took four centuries. Samuel Johnson’s commas, in the mid-18th century, were not only heavy; many would be ungrammatical today, and this style persisted into the first editions of The Economist in 1843. As David Crystal, a linguist, points out in his history of punctuation (“Making a Point”) published in 2015, at the dawn of the 19th century, punctuation prescribers were still divided into those who insisted that punctuation follow grammar and those who wanted it to aid elocution. Even one of the grammarians, Lindley Murray, wrote in 1795, in a hugely influential grammar book, that a semicolon signalled a pause twice as long as a comma; that a colon was twice as long as a semicolon; and that a full stop was twice as long as a colon. (Try that next time you read a text aloud.) Punctuation, in other words, has not always been the epitome of order that some of its fans think. It is unsurprising that the rise of computers would unsettle a system that had barely settled to begin with. Fortunately, most of the upheaval is confined to new channels: e-mail, texting, Twitter and whatever is to come next. Even most teens know to keep it out of formal writing. And those who prefer not to follow fads at all need only wait a while: much of today’s playful punctuation will soon become unfashionable, dead as the diastole and the diple.IF ANYONE attacked her Ronnie, when he was governor of California in the 1970s, Nancy Reagan knew just what to do. She would run a big tub, pour in lots of bath salts, and as she soaked she would shout defiance at the wall. Didn’t happen. Didn’t happen. What are you doing to my husband? What’s wrong with that? By the time the tub was cool she was all sweetness, and the world was in kilter again.  Keeping life’s untidiness at bay was a full-time job. It started with herself. Only Julius could style her hair, and he had to be flown in from Los Angeles. As a teenager her nose was too big, so she had it done, of course. (She wanted to be a movie star; that never came to much, but she networked with Spencer Tracy and Clark Gable and met Ronnie, so it was worth it.) With daily exercise she could stay a size four, and look stunning in the Bill Blass gowns and red Adolfo suits that came in armfuls to the White House. But her ankles were so thick that she cried for days when the Washington Star noticed. On every side lay disorder, even in the White House. Ashtrays that needed emptying (she would do it herself, if no one else would). Pictures hanging askew, which must be straightened. Coffee cups on desks. Aides coming in sweaty, wearing trainers and with mussed hair: just inappropriate. Appearances mattered, which was why she had refused to live in the governor’s house in Sacramento, that old firetrap, and instead moved to a 12-room Tudor mansion in a better part of town. Good taste, and a horror of mismatched plates, was the reason she spent $209,508 on new china for the White House, which everyone attacked her for. Otherwise she was frugality itself, recycling unwanted presents and getting her rich friends to donate their furniture. Because everything had to be just so, she continually fussed, phoned and deployed her two steeliest weapons, the silence and the stare. Before state dinners, she checked that the salad leaves were perfectly arranged and the sauce exactly seasoned. When the Queen of England visited, she drafted the guest list five times over. If anything went wrong, she was furious. Naturally. Unhappy families Her own history needed tidying, too. Two years were lost from her age somewhere. Her potty-mouthed mother was kept at arm’s length. Her father, a car-dealer, out of the picture since her parents’ divorce, was replaced as “real” by Loyal Davis, her stepfather, a respectable neurosurgeon who did not agree to adopt her for six years. As for her own children, they were frankly a nightmare: Patti a damn hippie and Ron, eventually, a ballet dancer. She ransacked his bedroom for drugs and worried herself sick that he was probably gay, but had to accept in the end that families couldn’t be wrapped up prettily in white paper. The hardest thing was that Ronnie had brought two children of his own, with Jane Wyman, to the marriage. Her shadow came too. They couldn’t be fitted in at all. As for Ronnie himself, her wonder and her hero, the man without whom she couldn’t live—he was her chief project. Dear, sweet, easy-going Ronnie had no straight-line ambition to be governor or president. She had it for him. (She wasn’t political one scrap, beyond being, obviously, Republican, but could nudge him to do smart things like reach out to the Soviets.) Ronnie loved and trusted everyone; so it was just as well she didn’t. If anyone was harming him, they had to go, and she would keep at it and at it. She couldn’t win every battle, of course. Don Regan, pushy awful man, was turfed out as White House chief of staff, but Ronnie refused to put all protesters in jail, as she requested, or sack Cap Weinberger from the Pentagon, because he was his friend. (And sure enough, she wouldn’t drop her own best friends, like the Bloomingdales or Frank Sinatra, just because they got in a mess.) In front of the cameras she made certain Ronnie looked good, and tore up official snaps that showed him sleepy or old. If he got lost for words, she supplied them. Her unwavering, loving gaze when he spoke was, in fact, a firewall. One thing she could not order was the future and his fate. She could try her damnedest, though. She insisted that on election day in 1970, when Ronnie was running again for governor of California, he should play golf and eat chicken curry for dinner, just as he had on the day when he was first elected. It worked. In the White House she brought in astrologers to fix, according to Ronnie’s star chart, the times of press conferences and foreign trips. That worked, too. It even helped when she felt she needed to change her own image as a clothes-horse and an icicle to something softer. Following her seers’ advice, she started a “Just Say No” campaign against drug use and began to appear more often with sick children. When Ronnie got Alzheimer’s, she rather bravely—for a Republican—started pushing for stem-cell research. People still misunderstood her. They kept sniping at her tight little laugh, her jewellery and her influence over her husband. Perhaps, since Ronnie was so popular, they needed her as a lightning rod. Perhaps these press types—especially the women reporters—wished they too could be that slim and that much in control. Well, they would just have to work at it as hard as she had. Even in the bath.Brazilian police detained Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a former president, for questioning on suspicion that he had benefited from bribes paid to Petrobras, a state-controlled oil giant. He was released after three hours. In a separate investigation, state prosecutors charged him with concealing his ownership of a seaside property. He denies wrongdoing. The judge investigating the Petrobras scandal sentenced Marcelo Odebrecht, a former chief of Brazil’s biggest construction company, to 19 years in prison for corrupt dealings with the oil company. Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, described Donald Trump’s rhetoric as a danger, saying, “that’s how Hitler got in.” Mr Peña added that there was “no scenario” in which Mexico would pay for the wall that Mr Trump plans to build on the border if he wins the American presidency. The opposition alliance that controls Venezuela’s National Assembly said it will use “all constitutional means” to force the populist president, Nicolás Maduro, from office. These include launching a referendum to recall him, and peaceful street protests against the government. Peru’s electoral court barred two candidates from a presidential election, to be held on April 10th. Julio Guzmán, who is second in the polls, was disqualified because his party failed to obey its rules when it nominated him. César Acuña was excluded for giving money to voters while campaigning. The Brexit bandwagon Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, was accused of promoting pro-European Union views for saying that a British exit from the EU would pose the “biggest domestic risk” to financial stability. Mr Carney tried to re-establish his neutrality by suggesting EU membership brought risks, too. The Sun, a populist newspaper, claimed the queen favours Brexit. An official denial and complaint to the press regulator swiftly followed. Boris Johnson, London’s mayor and a Brexiteer never far from controversy, described an e-mail that sought to gag pro-EU views within his office as a “cock-up”. In Slovakia Robert Fico, the prime minister, won a general election but failed to secure a parliamentary majority. Despite Mr Fico’s anti-immigrant rhetoric the far-right People’s Party Our Slovakia won 8% of the vote and 14 seats in the 150-seat parliament. Leaders from the EU and the prime minister of Turkey, Ahmet Davutoglu, agreed on the outline of a deal to deport boat people back to Turkey. The terms, which will be confirmed at another summit later this month, have been criticised by international aid organisations and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. But as more refugees are expected in the spring, it may be the only hope for Europe. At least 200,000 union-led protesters and students took to the streets of France and railway workers held a national strike for 37 hours. Their main grievance was the French government’s labour-reform bill, which would help companies bypass tricky unions when they want to alter working times and cut the cost of redundancies. Junior doctors in England held their third, and longest, strike, walking out for 48 hours. Only emergency cover was provided; 5,000 surgical procedures were cancelled. Last month the health secretary said he would impose new contracts after negotiations with doctors failed. The doctors have the public’s sympathy; two-thirds back their actions. Hopes, and fears Talks aimed at finding an end to the conflict in Syria were postponed again, but are now set to start next week. A ceasefire, which has been in place since February 27th, is continuing to hold generally, though numerous minor violations have been reported, and aid is getting through to more areas. The UN warned that a humanitarian disaster is looming in the western Iraqi city of Fallujah, held by Islamic State but under siege for many months by Iraqi forces. Tens of thousands of people in the city are facing food shortages. A survey found that almost half of Israeli Jews think that Israeli Arabs, who make up a fifth of the population, should be expelled or transferred from Israel. America launched an air strike at a camp belonging to al-Shabab, a terrorist outfit in Somalia, killing 150 fighters. A stinging Bern In the biggest upset in America’s primary elections so far, Bernie Sanders proved the pollsters so very wrong by beating Hillary Clinton in Michigan’s Democratic primary by 50% to 48%. Mrs Clinton had been expected to win handily. Her defeat raised questions about the breadth of her appeal outside heavily black electorates in the South (she trounced Mr Sanders in Mississippi and Louisiana), but she remains on course to take the party’s nomination. On the Republican side Donald Trump chalked up big wins in Michigan and Mississippi, though he won Louisiana and Kentucky by smaller margins. Marco Rubio’s campaign seemed all but over after another dismal showing. Michael Bloomberg, a former mayor of New York, said he would not enter the presidential race as an independent, after months of apparently planning to do so. He is concerned that a three-way race would benefit Mr Trump, whose campaign Mr Bloomberg described as “the most divisive…I can remember”. You can clap now As the annual session of China’s toothless National People’s Congress got under way, the one-party state forbade the country’s media from reporting on diverse topics including smog, the use of land for burials and delegates’ wealth. They were, however, ordered to “thoroughly report” on the participation of Xi Jinping, the country’s president. The son of a liberal Pakistani politician, Salman Taseer, who was assassinated by his bodyguard for opposing harsh blasphemy laws, emerged near Quetta after five years of captivity. Shahbaz Ali Taseer had been kidnapped by Islamic extremists eight months after his father’s killing. For the first time, a computer beat a world champion at the Asian board game of Go, when Google’s DeepMind AlphaGo outclassed Lee Se-dol of South Korea, who has won 18 championships. Computers have beaten the world’s best chess players, but Go is much more complex.The Volkswagen scandal rumbled on. Prosecutors in Germany expanded the number of employees at the carmaker who are under investigation to 17. But they have yet to find firm evidence that senior executives had knowledge of the rigged software in diesel cars that yielded false readings in emissions tests. In France authorities opened a formal inquiry into “aggravated fraud”. VW’s chief in America, Michael Horn, resigned. Matthias Müller, VW’s chief executive, warned of “substantial and painful” financial damage at the company because of the scandal. Pay attention Under pressure to hand over more tax in Britain, Facebook reportedly told its larger British advertisers to pay it via its UK subsidiary rather than through its office in lower-tax Ireland. Earlier it was revealed that in 2014 Facebook paid just £4,300 in corporate tax; the next year British tax authorities paid the social-network company £27,000 ($44,000) to place ads reminding people about tax commitments. Chevron announced additional cuts to its capital-spending plans on top of the ones it outlined last December. Like its rivals, the oil giant has been hurt by the prolonged fall in oil prices. The further reduction in spending should shore up its dividend to shareholders, which it has paid out continuously since 1926. Oil prices have been rallying recently, however. Brent crude rose above $40 a barrel for the first time since early December and at mid-week was priced 47% higher than the 13-year low it had sunk to in mid-January. The price has risen in part because oil production in America, where output from shale fields has boomed in recent years, is dropping. The price of iron ore soared by record amounts after Chinese officials said they would do what it takes to boost growth. The prospect of building Hinkley Point C, a proposed nuclear-power plant in Britain, was thrown into turmoil after the chief financial officer of Électricité de France, which is to build Hinkley, quit over concerns that the project threatened EDF’s future. At £18 billion ($25 billion), Hinkley would be the most expensive power plant in history. The British government has promised to pay the French utility company up to £92.50 per megawatt hour (three times the current wholesale price) for its output. Despite this generous offer EDF could still lose out as it is liable for cost overruns. A vigorous campaign by officials in China to slow the flow of money leaving the country seems to be working. Foreign-exchange reserves dropped by $29 billion in February to $3.2 trillion, a sharply lower monthly amount than the $100 billion that has been the norm recently. Meanwhile, new figures showed that China’s exports plunged by 25% in February compared with the same month last year and imports fell by 14%. Mystery shoppers News that an investor had accumulated a 5% stake in Burberry prompted speculation that the British luxury-goods company may become a takeover target. The identity of the investor was not known, but Burberry asked HSBC, which is the custodian of the stake, who it was. The bank was reportedly said to be holding it on behalf of multiple investors. Three years after the country was bailed out, euro-zone officials confirmed that Cyprus will conclude its €10 billion ($11 billion) rescue programme at the end of this month. Supercell, the Finnish mobile-gaming firm behind “Clash of Clans” and three other blockbuster games, reported a 37% rise in sales last year to €2.1 billion ($2.3 billion). Owned by Softbank, a Japanese conglomerate, Supercell also announced that for the first time 100m users were playing its games on a daily basis. Its games are played in every country of the world, bar Tuvalu. Break point Corporate sponsors reacted swiftly to the revelation that Maria Sharapova, a five-time Grand Slam tennis champion, had failed a doping test earlier this year. At least three sponsors either cut or suspended their ties with the world’s highest-paid female athlete. Ms Sharapova tested positive for meldonium, which she said was prescribed to her for medical conditions. It was banned by the World Anti-Doping Agency only at the start of the year. In another crack at shedding its cheap image in order to appeal to business travellers, Ryanair, Europe’s biggest low-cost airline, started hiring out a customised Boeing 737 with 60 business-class seats for flights. The chartered corporate jet will provide “fine dining”, a far cry from the “hot chips, chicken nuggets, hot dogs…snack boxes and more!” offered in economy class (if passengers can get a meal at all).More KAL's cartoons
