WITHOUT encryption, internet traffic might as well be written on postcards. So governments, bankers and retailers encipher their messages, as do terrorists and criminals. For spy agencies, cracking methods of encryption is therefore a priority. Using computational brute force is costly and slow, because making codes is far easier than breaking them. One alternative is to force companies to help the authorities crack their customers’ encryption, the thrust of a new law just passed in China and a power that Western spy agencies also covet. Another option is to open “back doors”: flaws in software or hardware which make it possible to guess or steal the encryption keys. Such back doors can be the result of programming mistakes, built by design (with the co-operation of the encryption provider) or created through unauthorised tinkering with software—or some combination of the three. The problem with back doors is that, though they make life easier for spooks, they also make the internet less secure for everyone else. Recent revelations involving Juniper, an American maker of networking hardware and software, vividly demonstrate how. Juniper disclosed in December that a back door, dating to 2012, let anyone with knowledge of it read traffic encrypted by its “virtual private network” software, which is used by companies and government agencies worldwide to connect different offices via the public internet. It is unclear who is responsible, but the flaw may have arisen when one intelligence agency installed a back door which was then secretly modified by another. The back door involved a faulty random-number generator in an encryption standard championed by America’s National Security Agency (NSA); other clues point to Chinese or British intelligence agencies. Decrypting messages that involve one or more intelligence targets is clearly within a spy agency’s remit. And there are good reasons why governments should be able to snoop, in the interests of national security and within legal limits. The danger is that back doors introduced for snooping may also end up being used for nefarious ends by rogue spooks, enemy governments, or malefactors who wish to spy on the law-abiding. It is unclear who installed Juniper’s back door or used it and to what end. Intelligence agencies argue that back doors can be kept secret and are sufficiently complex that their unauthorised use is unlikely. But an outsider may stumble across a weakness or steal details of it. America, in particular, has a lamentable record when it comes to storing secrets safely. In the summer it became known that the Office of Personnel Management, which stores the sensitive personal data of more than 20m federal employees and others, had been breached—allegedly by the Chinese. Some call that the biggest disaster in American intelligence history. It is rivalled only by the data taken by Edward Snowden, a former NSA contractor now living in Moscow. (The authorities responsible for airport security also let slip the details of master keys that can open most commercially available luggage—a form of physical back door.) Push back against back doors Calls for the mandatory inclusion of back doors should therefore be resisted. Their potential use by criminals weakens overall internet security, on which billions of people rely for banking and payments. Their existence also undermines confidence in technology companies and makes it hard for Western governments to criticise authoritarian regimes for interfering with the internet. And their imposition would be futile in any case: high-powered encryption software, with no back doors, is available free online to anyone who wants it. Rather than weakening everyone’s encryption by exploiting back doors, spies should use other means. The attacks in Paris in November succeeded not because terrorists used computer wizardry, but because information about their activities was not shared. When necessary, the NSA and other agencies can usually worm their way into suspects’ computers or phones. That is harder and slower than using a universal back door—but it is safer for everyone else.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Changing gears It is true that businesses need to make deliberate decisions about clock speed, and therefore strategy, according to their individual circumstances (“The creed of speed”, December 5th). Research for our recent book, “Your Strategy Needs a Strategy”, showed that competitive conditions overall have accelerated in some important respects. For example, the volatility of competitive rankings has increased several fold in many industries, and the five-year mortality rate for public corporations has increased from around 5% to over 30% in recent decades. However, a more important finding is that there has been a marked divergence in competitive conditions, requiring companies to adopt very different approaches to strategy according to what they face. Although short-term adaptive strategies are appropriate for some fast-moving, unpredictable businesses, others will be best served by more classical plan-based approaches. Furthermore, large companies will need to master the art of running strategies with different clock speeds in different parts of their business. One might say that businesses need not only an accelerator pedal, but a gearbox too.  MARTIN REEVES I am amazed that your leader (“Hyperactive, yet passive”, December 5th) cited lengthening maturities of company bonds as evidence against corporate short-termism. Rather, that is evidence of companies locking-in historically low interest rates driven down by governments’ monetary policies. The proceeds of this low-cost debt have been used to repay high-cost debt, or to fund share buy-backs, both enhancing earnings per share in the short term. This is hardly value-creating for the economy at large. FRANK KNOWLES The data you presented to challenge the widely held view that the speed of business is increasing are not convincing. The measures chosen, such as years of job tenure, bond durations and length of shareholdings, merely capture the churn of business, not its speed. They capture how fast the engine of business is revving, but not its velocity. For time-based competition, the critical measures of speed are the response time to customers and the development time for new products and services. In most industries these dropped dramatically in the 1970s and 1980s. JOSEPH BLACKBURN Invasive species Although eradicating invasive species is indeed difficult (“Day of the triffids”, December 5th), the primary goal of most management efforts is to reduce their damage. In the case of invasive brown tree snakes on Guam, the economic and ecological damage is clear. Only two of the 12 native forest-bird species remain, $4m is lost a year in productivity from the snakes electrocuting themselves on power lines and one out of 1,000 emergency-room visits is from a snake bite. If the snakes were to colonise Hawaii, the estimated damage could be as high as $2 billion a year. It is important to note the difference between exotic and invasive species. The latter cause great harm ecologically and economically. But there are numerous exotic species, such as rainbow trout, which are not considered invasive. We agree that a knee-jerk reaction to all exotic species is not the best policy. However, when an exotic species becomes injurious and its costs high, investing in control measures is justified. LARRY CLARK Legitimacy at the polls Venezuela’s Bolivarian revolution was “resoundingly rejected” in the recent parliamentary election, you say (“A democratic counter-revolution”, December 12th). Yet the defeated party of President Nicolás Maduro got 41%. That was a larger share of the vote than the 37% that the victorious Conservatives gained in Britain’s election last May. JULIA BUXTON Rewarding whistleblowers Whistleblowing has increased because of the success of American whistleblower-reward programmes (“The age of the whistleblower”, December 5th). These programmes offer monetary awards, confidentiality and job protection. In 2015 British regulators failed to enhance their anti-fraud efforts in the financial industry when they decided against introducing such incentives. My law firm has been contacted by dozens of people in Britain hoping to participate in American whistleblower programmes. In instances where their claims did not fall under American jurisdiction, every one of them chose to keep quiet rather than contact British regulators. Without the potential for financial rewards, not one was willing to risk his livelihood by stepping forward. In the financial world, it’s all about risk versus benefit. For whistleblowers, it’s the same calculation. ERIKA KELTON Plural sex According to Dennis Baron’s Web of Language Distinguished Usage Panel, singular “they” is the word of the year. But I may not be the only one of your readers to be troubled by the ambiguity of a proposition in “Pot luck”: “I have to be closely attached to someone before I am comfortable having sex with them” (December 12th). RONALD MACAULAY Better than the primaries The qualities associated with strong leadership are well known. Potential business leaders are often evaluated on their verbal and non-verbal IQ, communication skills, temperament, physical fitness and health, and the ability to handle stressful situations. Rather than dwelling on the buffoonery of Republican candidates for president (“The greatest show on earth”, December 5th), why not call for formal leadership testing? Those who are likely to excel will relish in brandishing their credentials. Those who refuse testing would be branded cowards. Those who are tested and perform poorly would be exposed and humiliated, giving the voting public a picture of their true calibre. GOUTHAM RAO   I was relieved to read of Nate Silver’s calculation that only about 6-8% of the electorate—roughly equal to the proportion who think the moon landings were faked—really support Donald Trump. Can I assume we are talking about the same 6-8%? JOSEPH FRAZIER * Thank you, thank you, thank you. Despite repeated scrutiny, the cover of The World in 2016 does not reveal a likeness of Donald Trump. The future looks brighter already. CLIFF FELDWICK * Letter appears online onlyTHE longest recession in a century; the biggest bribery scandal in history; the most unpopular leader in living memory. These are not the sort of records Brazil was hoping to set in 2016, the year in which Rio de Janeiro hosts South America’s first-ever Olympic games. When the games were awarded to Brazil in 2009 Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, then president and in his pomp, pointed proudly to the ease with which a booming Brazil had weathered the global financial crisis. Now Lula’s handpicked successor, Dilma Rousseff, who began her second term in January 2015, presides over an unprecedented roster of calamities. By the end of 2016 Brazil’s economy may be 8% smaller than it was in the first quarter of 2014, when it last saw growth; GDP per person could be down by a fifth since its peak in 2010, which is not as bad as the situation in Greece, but not far off. Two ratings agencies have demoted Brazilian debt to junk status. Joaquim Levy, who was appointed as finance minister last January with a mandate to cut the deficit, quit in December. Any country where it is hard to tell the difference between the inflation rate—which has edged into double digits—and the president’s approval rating—currently 12%, having dipped into single figures—has serious problems. Ms Rousseff’s political woes are as crippling as her economic ones. Thirty-two sitting members of Congress, mostly from the coalition led by her left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), are under investigation for accepting billions of dollars in bribes in exchange for padded contracts with the state-controlled oil-and-gas company, Petrobras. On December 15th the police raided several offices of the Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB), a partner in Ms Rousseff’s coalition led by the vice-president, Michel Temer. Brazil’s electoral tribunal is investigating whether to annul Ms Rousseff’s re-election in 2014 over dodgy campaign donations. In December members of Congress began debating her impeachment. The proceedings were launched by the speaker of the lower house, Eduardo Cunha (who though part of the PMDB considers himself in opposition) on the grounds that Ms Rousseff tampered with public accounts to hide the true size of the budgetary hole. Some see the impeachment as a way to divert attention from Mr Cunha’s own problems; Brazil’s chief prosecutor wants him stripped of his privileged position so that his role in the Petrobras affair can be investigated more freely. Mr Cunha denies any wrongdoing. Brazil is no stranger to crises. Following the end of two decades of military rule in 1985, the first directly elected president, Fernando Collor, was impeached in 1992. After a “lost decade” of stagnation and hyperinflation ended in the mid-1990s the economy was knocked sideways by the emerging-markets turmoil of 1997-98. In the mid-2000s politics was beset by the scandal of a bribes-for-votes scheme known as the mensalão (“big monthly”, for the size and schedule of the payments), which eventually saw Lula’s chief of staff jailed in 2013.  Yet rarely, if ever, have shocks both external and domestic, political and economic, conspired as they do today. During the original lost decade global conditions were relatively benign; in the crisis of the late 1990s the tough measures to quell inflation and revive growth taken after Mr Collor’s departure stood Brazil in moderately good stead; when scandal rocked the 2000s commodity markets were booming. A sad convergence Now prices of Brazilian commodities such as oil, iron ore and soya have slumped: a Brazilian commodities index compiled by Credit Suisse, a bank, has fallen by 41% since its peak in 2011. The commodities bust has hit economies around the world, but Brazil has fared particularly badly, with its structural weaknesses—poor productivity and unaffordable, misdirected public spending—exacerbating the damage. Regardless of what she may or may not have done with respect to the impeachment charge, Ms Rousseff’s cardinal sin is her failure to have confronted these problems in her previous term, when she had some political room for manoeuvre. Instead, that term was marked by loose fiscal and monetary policies, incessant microeconomic meddling and fickle policymaking that bloated the budget, stoked inflation and sapped confidence. Poor though her record has been, some of these problems have deeper roots in what is in some ways a great achievement: the federal constitution of 1988, which enshrined the transition from military to democratic rule. This 70,000-word doorstop of a document crams in as many social, political and economic rights as its drafters could dream up, some of them highly specific: a 44-hour working week; a retirement age of 65 for men and 60 for women. The “purchasing power” of benefits “shall be preserved”, it proclaims, creating a powerful ratchet on public spending. Since the constitution’s enactment, federal outlays have nearly doubled to 18% of GDP; total public spending is over 40%. Some 90% of the federal budget is ring-fenced either by the constitution or by legislation. Constitutionally protected pensions alone now swallow 11.6% of GDP, a higher proportion than in Japan, whose citizens are a great deal older. By 2014 the government was running a primary deficit (ie, before interest payments) of 32.5 billion reais ($13.9 billion) (see chart). Mr Levy tried to live up to the nickname he had earned during an earlier stint as a treasury official—“Scissorhands”—with record-breaking cuts of 70 billion reais from discretionary spending. But Mansueto Almeida, a public-finance expert, points out that this work was more than countered by constitutionally mandated spending increases; government expenditure as a share of output rose in 2015. On top of that, a new scrupulousness in government accounting surely not unrelated to the impeachment proceedings has seen 57 billion reais in unpaid bills from years past newly recognised by the treasury. Nor could Mr Levy easily fill the fiscal hole by raising taxes. Taxes already consume 36% of GDP, up from a quarter in 1991. And the recession has hit tax receipts hard. On December 18th, days after Fitch, a rating agency, followed the lead of Standard & Poor’s in downgrading Brazilian debt, Mr Levy threw in the towel. His job went to Nelson Barbosa, previously the planning minister, who insists he is committed to following the same policies. But before his elevation Mr Barbosa made no secret of favouring a more gradual fiscal adjustment—for example, a primary surplus of 0.5% of GDP in 2016, against Mr Levy’s preferred 0.7% (and an original promise of 2% a year ago). The real and the São Paulo stockmarket tumbled on news of his appointment. Analysts at Barclays, a bank, expect debt to reach 93% of GDP by 2019; among big emerging markets only Ukraine and Hungary are more indebted. The figure may still seem on the safe side compared with 197% in Greece or 246% in Japan. But those are rich countries; Brazil is not. As a proportion of its wealth Brazil’s public debt is higher than that of Japan and nearly twice that of Greece. Unable to increase taxes, Ms Rousseff’s government may prefer something even more troubling to investors and consumers alike: inflation. Faced with the inflationary pressure that has come with the devalued real, the Central Bank has held its nerve, increasing its benchmark rate by three percentage points since October 2014 and keeping it at 14.25% since July in the face of the recession. But despite this juicy rate the real continues to depreciate. There is a worry that the bank may be unable to raise rates further for fear of making public debt unmanageable—what is known as “fiscal dominance”. This year the treasury spent around 7% of GDP servicing public debt. What is more, raising rates may have the perverse effect of stoking inflation rather than quenching it; an increasing risk of default as borrowing costs grow is likely to see investors dumping government bonds, provoking further currency depreciation. A handful of economists, including Monica de Bolle of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, believe that Brazil is on the verge of fiscal dominance. And once interest rates no longer have a hold on inflation, she says, it can quickly spiral out of control. Forecasts by Credit Suisse warn that prices could be rising by 17% in 2017. Three-quarters of government spending remains linked to the price level, embedding past inflation in future prices. That said, the economy as a whole is much less indexed than it was in the hyperinflationary early 1990s. That leaves the government a bit more time, thinks Marcos Lisboa of Insper, a university in São Paulo. But not much more: perhaps a year or two. Despite this pressing economic need for speed there seems to be no political capacity for it. Members of Congress are consumed by Ms Rousseff’s impeachment. By February they must decide whether to send her case to the Senate, which would require the votes of three-fifths of the 513 deputies in the lower house. To fend off such a decision Ms Rousseff is rallying her left-wing, anti-austerity base. Gently doesn’t always do it These efforts are meeting with some success: in December pro-government rallies drew more people than anti-government ones for the first time all year. It looks unlikely that the impeachment will indeed move to the Senate (which would trigger a further six months of turmoil). But this hardly provides a political climate conducive to belt-tightening, let alone to the amendment of the constitution which Mr Barbosa has said is needed to deal with the ratchet effect on benefits. Fiscal adjustment is anathema to the government workers and union members who are Ms Rousseff’s core supporters. Like the country’s economic problems, its political ones, while specific to today’s particular scandals and manoeuvring, can be traced to the transition of the 1980s. History reveals a consistent tendency towards negotiated consensus at Brazil’s political watersheds; it can be seen in the war- and regicide-free independence declared in 1822, the military coup of 1964, which was mild compared with the blood-soaked affairs in Chile and Argentina, and the transition that created the new constitution. One aspect of this often admirable trait is a resistance to purging. The mid-1980s saw a lot of institutions—the federal police, the public prosecutor’s office, the judiciary, assorted regulators—overhauled or created afresh. But many of the old regime kept their jobs in the civil service and elsewhere. The transition was thus bound to be a generational affair. So it is now proving, with a retiring old guard being replaced by fresh blood often educated abroad. In 2013 the average judge was 45 years old, meaning he entered university in a democratic Brazil. Civil servants are getting younger and better qualified, says Gleisson Rubin, who heads the National School of Public Administration. More than a quarter now boast a postgraduate degree, up from a tenth in 2002. Sérgio Moro, the crusading 43-year-old federal judge who oversees the Petrobras investigations, and Deltan Dallagnol, the case’s 35-year-old lead prosecutor, are the most famous faces of this new generation. Unfortunately, this rejuvenation does not extend to the institution most in need of it: Congress. Its younger faces typically have family ties to the old guard. “Party politics is a market for lemons,” says Fernando Haddad, the fresh-faced PT mayor of São Paulo and a rare exception to the dynastic rule, nodding to George Akerlof’s classic analysis of adverse selection in the market for used cars: it attracts the venal and repels the honest. Consultants who have advised consecutive Congresses agree that each one is feebler than the last. Brazilians have noticed the decline, and are transferring their hopes accordingly. “Judges and prosecutors are becoming more legitimate representatives of the Brazilian people than politicians,” says Norman Gall of the Braudel Institute, a think-tank in São Paulo. Everyone wants a selfie with Mr Moro and, disturbingly, nearly half of Brazilians think that military intervention is justified to combat corruption, according to a recent poll. Barely one in five trusts legislators; just 29% identify with a political party. Monthly, oily, deeply That last fact is perhaps particularly impressive given that they have so many parties to choose from. Keen to promote pluralism the constitution’s framers set no national cut-off below which a party’s votes would not count. It is possible to get into Congress with less than 1% of the vote: in principle, it could be done with 0.02%. As a result the number of parties has grown from a dozen in 1990 to 28 today. The three biggest—the PT, the PMDB and the opposition centre-right Party of Brazilian Social Democracy (PSDB)—together account for just 182 of 513 seats in the lower house and 42 out of 81 senators. One of the causes of the mensalão scandal was corruption that provided Lula’s government with a way to get the votes it needed from the disparate small parties. The petrolão (“big oily”, as the Petrobras affair is widely known) apparently shared a similar aim. Such ruses may have helped PT governments pass some good laws, such as an extension of the successful Bolsa Família (family fund) cash-transfer programme. But the party was not able to do all that it had said it would; potentially helpful reforms in which it was less invested fell by the wayside. Raphael Di Cunto of Pinheiro Neto, a big law firm in São Paulo, points to many antiquated statutes in need of an update, such as the Mussolini-inspired labour code (from 1943) and laws governing foreign investments (1962) and capital markets (1974). A Congress in which dysfunction feeds corruption which feeds further dysfunction is not one likely to take the hard decisions that the economy needs. But this is the Congress Brazil has: though there will be local elections in October 2016, congressional elections, like the next presidential poll, are not due until 2018. Can Brazil’s public finances hold out that long? Many prominent economists think they just about can. They forecast a “muddling-through” in which Ms Rousseff holds on to her job, Congress passes a few modest spending cuts and tax rises, including a financial-transactions levy, the Central Bank continues to fight inflation, the cheap real boosts exports and investors don’t panic. After three years of this, the theory goes, an electorate fed up with stagnation and sleaze will give the PSDB a clear mandate for change. Ms Rousseff narrowly defeated the party’s candidate in 2014 by deriding his calls for prudence as heartless “neoliberalism”, only to propose a similar agenda (through gritted teeth) immediately after winning. If proposed by a PSDB in power that actually believed in them, such measures might receive cross-party support—though given the PSDB’s spiteful unwillingness to support Mr Levy’s measures in 2015 this would not be without irony. Such a scenario is possible. Figures for the third quarter of 2015 show exports picking up. Price rises could slow down as steep increases in government-controlled prices for petrol and electricity put in place in 2015 run their course. Politicians and policymakers are keenly aware that Brazilians are less tolerant of inflation than in the 1980s and 1990s, when rates of 10% would have seemed mild. Investors are staying put, at least in aggregate. Yield-hungry asset managers are taking the place of pension and mutual funds that left in anticipation of Brazil’s inevitable demotion to junk status. The real has fallen 31% since the start of 2015 and the stockmarket is down by 12.4%; but though battered they are not knocked flat. The banking system is well capitalised and, observers agree, diligently monitored by the Central Bank. The $250 billion in foreign-denominated debt racked up by Brazilian companies during the commodity-price-fuelled binge has ballooned in local-currency terms and remains a worry. But much of it is hedged through the firms’ own dollar revenues or with swaps—though settling some of those swaps has cost the government, which sold them, some 2% of GDP this year. Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts The sardonic Mr Lisboa observes with uncharacteristic optimism that “at last people are talking seriously about Brazil’s structural problems”. Fiscal dominance has left arcane discussions among economic theorists and burst onto newspaper columns. Mr Barbosa is openly discussing pension reform and the constitutional change that would have to go with it. In October the PMDB, which tends to lag behind public opinion more than to lead it, published a manifesto that talked about privatising state businesses and raising the retirement age. Even the famously stubborn Ms Rousseff has begun to listen rather than to hector, says a foreign economic dignitary who met her recently. But the fact that muddling through may be possible does not mean it is assured. It hinges on the hope that politicians come to their senses more quickly than they have done in the past (witness the lost decade begun in the 1980s). It also assumes that Brazil’s penchant for consensus will hold its people back from social unrest on the sort of scale that topples regimes in other countries. The anti-government protests of 2015 were large, drawing up to a million people in a single day. But they were middle-class affairs which took place on sporadic Sundays, causing Ms Rousseff more annoyance than grief. As wages sag and unemployment rises, though, tempers could flare. If they do there will be every chance of a facile populist response that does even deeper economic damage. Should Ms Rousseff be booted out—through impeachment, annulment of the election or coerced resignation (none of which looks likely just now)—chaos would surely ensue. Her core supporters may be less numerous than they once were, but she has many more than Mr Collor had in 1992. They would close ranks against the “coup-mongers”. The strength of Brazil’s institutions suggests something shy of the failed populist experiments of some South American neighbours. And the fact that voters in Argentina and Venezuela rebuffed that populism in the past few months has not escaped the notice of Brazil’s politicians. But every month of dithering and every new petrolão revelation chips away at Brazil’s prospects. The 2010s are already certain to be another lost decade; GDP per person won’t rebound for years to come. It will be a long time before a president can match the pride with which Lula showed off his Olympic trophy. But if Brazil’s politicians get their act together, the 2020s could be cheerier. Alas, if they do not, things will get a great deal worse.ASK Republicans how best to reform taxes, and they will inevitably mention Ronald Reagan. In 1986 the Gipper slashed levies on earnings; the highest income-tax rate tumbled from 50% to 28%. At the same time, Reagan simplified taxes by closing loopholes and killing off exemptions. Today’s Republican presidential contenders would dearly love to repeat the trick. But they have given up a key ingredient in the recipe. The 1986 reform cost nothing, mainly because taxes on businesses went up. In stark contrast, today’s Republican tax plans are jaw-droppingly expensive. American taxes are a mess. There are seven different rates of federal income tax, up from three after Reagan’s reform (in Canada there are four; in Britain, three). Endless exemptions and deductions cost just over 7% of GDP. These distort incentives and benefit mainly richer folk, but are hard to keep track of because their cost stays off the government’s books. Filling in tax returns takes the average non-business filer eight hours and costs $110 every year. By one recent estimate, the inconvenience costs of filing add up to 1.3% of GDP. Business taxes are no better. At 39%, the tax on corporate profits is the highest in the OECD. In reality, businesses pay less because of a whirlwind of incentive-distorting exemptions. Want to invest in America? Issue shares to finance your project, and your marginal tax rate ends up at 38%. Load up on risky debt and the rate plummets—in fact, you will benefit from a 6% subsidy. Across industries, average tax rates range from 40% for making software to 15% for building mineshafts. The World Bank and PricewaterhouseCoopers, an accounting firm, ranks America’s tax system 53rd in the world, wedged between Jordan and Vanuatu. It takes American businesses 87 hours, on average, to pay their taxes; in France it takes just 26 hours. Tax reform, then, is essential, and Republicans have embraced the cause. Among the presidential candidates, Jeb Bush has proposed the most detailed plan, and is cheered on by a crew of right-leaning economists. One thing keeping the plan on the shelf is that Mr Bush lags behind in the polls. But thanks to its detail—and the scrutiny poured on it as a result—it is a useful benchmark. Mr Bush rightly wants to reduce the number of income tax bands, to three. In doing so, though, he calls for a whopping reduction in the top rate of income tax to 28%, from 39.6% today. Mr Bush would slash the corporate tax rate to 20% and all but abolish the tax incentive to borrow. Today, if a firm buys a new computer or piece of machinery, it can knock the cost off its tax bill only incrementally as the new equipment loses value; but under Mr Bush’s plan it could deduct the full cost up-front. That should encourage investment. The plan is hugely expensive. Before accounting for its economic effects, it would cost $6.8 trillion, or 2.6% of GDP, over a decade, according to the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Centre, a think-tank. About two-thirds of the bill comes from income-tax cuts. Cuts for high-earners are costly, because the highest-earning 1%—who would see a 12% increase in after-tax income under the plan—produce almost half of income-tax revenues. By 2026 the $715 billion annual cost of the plan exceeds the projected budget for national defence. The plan would wrench on purse-strings that are already stretched. By 2025 government health-care and pensions programmes will have nearly 60% more beneficiaries than in 2007. Mr Bush, like most Republicans, wants to increase rather than cut defence spending. And non-defence day-to-day spending has already been slashed by 22% in real terms since 2010. Mr Bush’s plan, then, looks unachievable. Incredibly, though, it is one of the most modest in the pack. Donald Trump, who tops opinion polls, wants to cut income taxes still further; under his plan, the top rate of tax falls to 25%. Whereas Mr Bush would nearly double the standard deduction, the amount that can be earned before paying income tax Mr Trump would quadruple it. The Donald would cut business taxes more aggressively, too. Though he talks about raising taxes on hedge-fund managers by removing the “carried interest” provision, Mr Trump’s cuts to income tax are so deep that the provision barely matters. In all, reckons the Tax Policy Centre, Mr Trump’s plan is almost 40% more expensive than Mr Bush’s. Must be funny Where to look for realism? Marco Rubio offers more modest income-tax cuts, but would eliminate most taxes on capital gains and company dividend payments. Many economists view these taxes as inefficient. Yet capital is mostly the preserve of the well-off: only a fifth of adults who earn less than $30,000 tell pollsters they have stockmarket investments, compared with nearly nine in ten who earn more than $75,000. Citizens for Tax Justice, an advocacy group, reckons Mr Rubio’s plan would make the pockets of the top 1% of earners bulge more than Mr Bush’s would. Teflon Trump: Donald Trump’s gravity-defying poll ratings Ted Cruz has the boldest plan. The Texan senator promises to replace all income taxes—including payroll taxes which fund Social Security and Medicare payments—with a 10% flat tax. Business taxes would be replaced with a value-added tax of 16%. This plan is roughly as expensive as the Bush plan, before accounting for its economic effects, according to the Tax Foundation, a right-leaning think tank. But it would be still more generous to the highest earners, as value-added taxes are less progressive than income tax. The candidates all say their plans will increase economic growth, boosting tax-revenues and dramatically bringing down costs. Mr Bush’s cheerleaders say his plan will add 0.5 percentage points to growth each year, knocking two-thirds off the so-called “static” cost. Mr Trump claims—with a straight face—that his plan is revenue-neutral. Done right, reforming and simplifying taxes would boost growth. Yet the gargantuan cost of the plans comes from tax cuts for high earners, and the evidence that these help the economy is patchy. Crucially, whether tax cuts boost growth depends on how they are paid for. If they cause deficits to gape larger, tax cuts will weigh on growth rather than support it, by gradually pushing up interest rates. There is better evidence that tax cuts for businesses help the economy. But that does not mean they would pay for themselves—as Mr Trump suggests—or make up for expensive giveaways elsewhere. The best evidence suggests that taxes on dividends, which Mr Rubio would abolish, have no effect at all on investment. More than most proposals, Republican tax plans are articles of faith.Where intersextionality meets microaggressive adultism WISHING for his death “in a fiery car accident” was only one of many messages directed at Chuck Henson when he became the University of Missouri’s new interim vice-chancellor for inclusion, diversity and equity. Mr Henson does not follow social media, but his wife does. Recently she agreed to stop reading the death threats and other missives intended for her husband, and instead to help him focus on his task, which is to end the racial turmoil that has made the university the centre of a nationwide campus protest movement over race for the past three months. “We have a unique history and we have a unique problem,” says Mr Henson, a law professor. Missouri was a slave state until 1865; its first public university was founded in 1839 by James Rollins, an owner of slaves. It first admitted black students only in 1950 (Yale’s first black student graduated in 1857, Harvard’s in 1870). The relations of African-Americans both with other students, and with the overwhelmingly white faculty, have frequently been uneasy. Anger boiled over in November, leading to the resignation of Tim Wolfe, the university’s president and chancellor, after weeks of protests by students outraged by what they saw as Mr Wolfe’s failure to deal with racism on campus. Offensive incidents last year included a swastika smeared with faeces on the wall of a dormitory bathroom and racial epithets hurled at black students, including Payton Head, the president of the student body. Cynthia Frisby, a member of faculty, recounted in a Facebook post how, when jogging along a road, a white man in a lorry flying the Confederate flag stopped, spat at her, delivered racist abuse, gave her the finger and drove off. “I have been called the N-word too many times to count”, she wrote, including, she says, by other members of faculty. The student protests gained momentum when Jonathan Butler, a graduate student, staged a hunger strike to force Mr Wolfe to resign. Yet the turning point was the announcement by members of the football team that they would not play or practise and boycott a game against Brigham Young University (BYU) unless Mr Wolfe stepped down. The footballers’ boycott of the game would have cost the university around $1m.  Mr Wolfe was replaced as president of the university, temporarily, by Michael Middleton, a long-standing member of the law faculty and graduate of the university, who founded its Legion of Black Collegians in 1968. Mr Middleton promises to meet all the demands of “Concerned Student 1950”, the group of black students leading the protests, which include the creation of a “comprehensive racial awareness and inclusion curriculum” and an increase in black members of faculty to 10% from around 3%. Mr Middleton cautions, however, that some demands will be tricky to meet by the deadline the student group proposes, adding that he will explain why. Mr Middleton insists that racism at the University of Missouri, nicknamed Mizzou, is no worse than at other big universities. He calls the often inadvertent “micro-aggressions” against minority students a “national problem” that is embedded in American history, and adds: “We are the first in finding effective solutions.” So far that has meant a clean-out of the university’s leadership. Seven temporary officials, in addition to Mr Middleton, are now running the university, including Mr Henson and Hank Foley, Mizzou’s new interim chancellor. Yet while the university is making changes, the student protests have also set off a different kind of reaction. Kurt Bahr, a Republican state representative, says some of his constituents have told him that they regret attending Mizzou and do not want their children to go there, because they do not trust the new leadership of the university. One of his constituents even said that he feared for the safety of his daughter on campus thanks to the “instability” there. Mr Bahr co-sponsored a bill in December that would strip scholarships from any athlete who “calls, incites, supports or participates in any strike”, and would require colleges and universities to fine coaching staff who encourage them. The bill has been withdrawn since because its author, Rick Brattin, another Republican state lawmaker, realised that the state could not mandate the revocation of privately funded athletic scholarships such as the football scholarships at Mizzou. But Mr Bahr insists that the proposed bill “made its point”, which is that a strike is not a good way to cope with a possible systemic problem. “Are we promoting anarchy within our university system?” he asks. The backlash against the changes at Mizzou is likely to continue, led by self-styled defenders of the First Amendment (which protects free speech). Yet the First Amendment does not give people a free pass to go round saying hateful things, points out Mr Henson. To help students and faculty realise this, Mizzou has developed a new guide to “inclusive terminology” which ensures a healthy level of respect for all minority groups. It includes terms such as “adultism” (prejudice against the young), “minoritised” (when under-represented groups are made to feel inferior) and intersextionality (obscure). Some will see this stuff as movement in the right direction. But it is also likely to increase the ire of those who watched the protests and thought they saw a group of privileged college students complaining about how terrible their lot is.Steve McGarrett, awaiting feedback THE Christian siblings were doing their homework when the police arrived. Two officers entered the house, guns drawn, pursuing what was evidently a prank tip-off about a captive being held at their address. The guns stayed out even when the mistake became apparent. The officers ran the details of the children’s father—who, like them, is black—through the police system on the off-chance of turning something up. The family was traumatised. The incident, in 2013, brought home to Ima Christian, now 18, that Americans could be vulnerable to rough policing “no matter where you live, or who you are”; her sister Asha, who is 16, says it is “not until you are face to face with an officer that you realise what the deal is.” The sisters—from Stone Mountain, just outside Atlanta—didn’t get even, exactly. Instead, with their brother Caleb (now 15), they developed an app, called Five-O, intended to help improve police behaviour and community relations. It lets citizens rate their experiences with officers, record both parties’ race and sex and the purpose of the interaction, and find aggregate scores for county forces. Five-O (a slang term for cops) was launched in 2014, but will get a boost this spring from the €20,000 ($22,000) prize it won at an international contest for justice-related initiatives, organised by a think-tank in the Netherlands. The money will go towards marketing the tool in Baltimore and Chicago. Attracting input from broad cross-sections of such communities is one of the ways the Christians believe they can neutralise an obvious potential bias—ie, that the ratings will be skewed by the aggrieved, legitimate as those grievances may sometimes be. That composite picture, combining good and bad feedback, is, they reckon, one of the ways their product differs from other police-related apps, which concentrate on uploading video. They also want to extend its availability from Android to iPhones. The long-term plan is to include Britain, Brazil, Canada and Russia, making Five-O, as Asha puts it, “a global repository of unbiased police data”. That is an ambitious goal for teenagers who mostly taught themselves to code. (Their parents used to work for an internet start-up and, Caleb recalls, noticed youngsters “getting paid insane amounts of money” for programming.) In 2016 they aim to launch another app through their firm, Pinetart Inc: this one, Coily, lets women rate hair-care products, and so avoid shower-stall accumulations of half-empty bottles. Studies permitting, that is. Ima is a freshman at Stanford University; Asha—who is finishing high school online, to free up time for enterprise—hopes to join her or go to Columbia. “I’m very proud of them,” says their mother Karen.IF YOU believed the pollsters, America’s 2012 presidential election looked like a nail-biter. Most national surveys had Mitt Romney and Barack Obama tied; Gallup, the country’s oldest scientific polling outfit, had the challenger ahead, 49% to 48%. When the votes were counted, however, Mr Obama won by four percentage points. To many political pundits, as to Mr Romney, Mr Obama’s margin of victory came as a shock. Among bettors, however, it barely elicited a shrug: prediction markets, in which punters wager on the outcomes of elections, had always considered the incumbent a heavy favourite. An Irish bookmaker, Paddy Power, was so confident of his chances that it paid out £400,000 ($640,000) two days before the election to people who had bet on Mr Obama. Will this trick be repeated in 2016? Though now a fringe asset class, prediction markets are in fact among the oldest exchanges in America. In the 1820s prominent supporters of candidates frequently offered public wagers on them as a demonstration of their conviction. Punters who could not afford to pony up cash would compensate with offers of public humiliation: one common wager made losers trundle winners around in a wheelbarrow; another required them to roll peanuts up and down streets with toothpicks. Some losers had to eat real crow. Half a century later, these expressions of bravado had evolved into semi-formal financial markets. Trading volume began to approach that of actual shares: in 1916 $10m ($218m in today's prices) was wagered on the photo-finish race between Woodrow Wilson and Charles Hughes. The markets were wrong that year, predicting a win for Hughes. But in 11 of 12 elections between 1884 and 1940 when bettors had identified a clear favourite by mid-October they were vindicated, despite operating in an era without any reliable polling. Newspapers diligently reported presidential betting odds: according to Paul Rhode and Koleman Strumpf, the economists who unearthed the records of these markets, the press published prices five days a week in the month before an election. The death knell for the electoral markets of yesteryear sounded in 1936, when George Gallup of the American Institute of Public Opinion stationed pollsters on street corners and asked passers-by whom they would vote for, thus obtaining a random sample. The well-known Literary Digest survey, which relied on readers mailing in postcards, had over-sampled the well-off and called the election for the Republican Alf Landon, while Gallup accurately predicted an easy victory for the incumbent, Franklin Roosevelt. Punters were not fooled by the Digest’s “poll”, and also forecast that Roosevelt would win. But the dawn of scientific polling made gambling odds look amateurish, and allowed newspapers to publish campaign updates without having to cite markets of dubious legality and (in their view) morality. Nonetheless, the markets might have soldiered on had history not conspired against them. The industry was centred in New York, and during the second world war Fiorello La Guardia, the city’s mayor, launched a crackdown on unauthorised gambling. His raids drove political bookmakers deep underground or out of town. At the same time, competing forms of wagering began to offer alluring substitutes. In 1939 the state legalised betting on horse races, allowing punters to slake their thirst for action dozens of times a day rather than once every four years, without any risk that a bookie would fail to pay out. By the late 1940s, what was once an eight-figure marketplace had all but vanished. Electoral betting would not make a comeback until 1988, when Jesse Jackson defied expectations to win Michigan’s Democratic presidential primary. His victory highlighted how unreliable polls could be, and led a group of professors at the University of Iowa to hunt for an alternative. Though unaware of prediction markets’ pre-war history, they reinvented the idea by setting up an “Iowa Political Stock Market”, in which students and faculty could wager modest sums on the upcoming general election.  Four years later, America’s Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) authorised the Iowa Electronic Markets to take money from the public because they were at heart an academic enterprise, though the regulators capped bets at $500 to prevent speculation with meaningful sums. For the next 20 years the IEM consistently out-performed polls in various executive, legislative, national and local elections in a dozen different countries. But the logistical difficulty of placing bets on the exchange (particularly before internet access became widespread), along with the low wagering ceiling, limited it to trivial volumes of a few hundred thousand dollars a year. It was not until 2008, after the internet had globalised both information and financial flows, that pre-war prediction markets found a worthy heir. During the 2004 presidential campaign an Irish sports-betting site called Intrade started taking bets without the low limits of the IEM. Even though credit-card companies in America would not process deposits to the site, punters flocked to it. A whopping $230m was wagered on the 2012 election—an even greater sum in constant dollars than on the Hughes-Wilson contest of 1916. And like its predecessors, Intrade was deadly accurate. Its markets correctly predicted the results of 47 of the 50 states in the election of 2008, and 49 of 50 in 2012. But just like the street-corner action of the 1930s, Intrade soon came under legal scrutiny. In November 2012 the CFTC ordered the site to stop offering contracts on the price of goods under the agency’s oversight, such as oil and gold. Four months later, the risks of investing in Intrade’s unregulated marketplace were laid bare when the site abruptly shut down after it dipped into its clients’ funds to transfer money to its late founder. It took months for account-holders to be made whole. The site’s untimely demise provided fresh ammunition for those who regard prediction markets as unsavoury speculation. The collapse of Intrade did not annihilate prediction markets, though. The IEM is alive and well, and in late 2014 PredictIt, an online exchange sponsored by Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand, entered the fray with an $850 wager cap and official authorisation from the CFTC. But these operations still fall far short of realising prediction markets’ full potential. Their low betting limits prevent investors with extremely valuable information—say, a looming scandal—from cashing in on the value of their knowledge and incorporating it into the market price. At the time of writing, PredictIt reckons that the fight for the Republican nomination is between Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, and that Hillary Clinton has a 54% chance of becoming the next president.
