THE whizzy gadgets for geeks to goggle at during CES, an annual consumer-electronics show in Las Vegas, have typically been small enough to pick up. But they have been joined in recent years by an increasing number of cars. The Detroit motor show, America’s biggest and glitziest, starts later this month, but many in the car industry now regard CES, which opened on January 5th, as a more important event. Mary Barra, GM’s boss, unveiled a new production version of its Bolt electric car at Las Vegas this week. Incumbent manufacturers are recognising the double threat posed by technology, as car-sharing takes off and driverless vehicles come closer. First, some people who might hitherto have wanted to own a car may no longer do so, cancelling out the growth the motor industry might otherwise have expected from the rising middle classes in developing countries (see chart). Second, technology firms may be better placed than carmakers to develop and profit from the software that will underpin both automated driving and vehicle-sharing. Some of these firms may even manufacture cars of their own. In a report ahead of the Las Vegas and Detroit shows, Morgan Stanley, an investment bank, said the motor industry was being disrupted “far sooner, faster and more powerfully than one might expect.” It predicted that conventional carmakers would scramble in the coming year to reinvent themselves. As if to demonstrate this, shortly before CES opened, GM announced a $500m investment in Lyft, a ride-sharing service. A rumoured tie-up between Ford and Google to produce driverless cars failed to materialise at the show, but even the rumours underlined the disruption that tech firms are bringing to the motor industry. And other partnerships were announced: Ford is teaming up with Amazon to connect its cars to sensor-laden smart homes. It was also revealed at CES that Toyota would adopt Ford’s in-car technology, which is a competitor to Apple’s CarPlay and Google’s Android Auto, to access smartphone apps and other features. That is not the only example of carmakers joining forces to avoid being beholden to the tech giants. In August BMW, Daimler and Volkswagen’s Audi division jointly bought Here, a mapping service, from Nokia, to ensure that carmakers have an independent provider rather than having to depend on Google Maps. Nevertheless, carmakers are also teaming up with tech firms because each has something the other needs. Building and marketing cars, and dealing with safety and emissions regulators, is tricky. Tech firms could copy Tesla, which has built its own electric cars for more than a decade. Apple, which is said to be planning an electric car, may try to have them made in the same way as it does its iPhones, outsourcing to a contract manufacturer. But a more obvious route is to ally with an established carmaker. Carmakers also have lots to learn. Most are working on making their vehicles either fully or partly self-piloting, and a number are running their own car-sharing experiments. But Google remains the leading exponent of autonomous driving. Its robotics, drones and search engine all contribute expertise that helps to guide a driverless car down the road avoiding pedestrians, obstacles and other vehicles, using computing power and sophisticated software to interpret masses of data received both from the car’s on-board sensors and from external sources through wireless connections. Yet if the tech firms have much to gain as they muscle in to the motor business, the carmakers are wary of what they have to lose. Profits may seep away towards the producers of the software and the owners of the data, and away from the makers of the hardware. Hitherto, new cars—even quite modest ones—have tended to be bought as status symbols and expressions of personal style, but if consumers become more interested in what software and entertainment systems a car can run, rather than what it looks like, the industry’s whole business model may come apart. Ride-sharing, car clubs and other alternatives to ownership are already growing fast. Young city-dwellers are turning their backs on owning a costly asset that sits largely unused and loses value the moment it is first driven. Carmakers insist that such consumers are merely deferring buying a vehicle, pointing to the fact that people continue to drive at an older age than they used to. But the pronouncements of motor-industry bosses suggest that doubts are creeping in. At CES Mark Fields, Ford’s CEO, said that it would in future be “both a product and mobility company”. Membership of car clubs, which let people book by app for periods as short as 15 minutes, is growing by over 30% a year, according to Alix Partners, a consulting firm, and should hit 26m members worldwide by 2020. Competition is intense. ZipCar, owned by Avis Budget, a conventional car-hire firm, is thriving. More carmakers are copying Daimler’s Car2Go and BMW’s Drive Now apps. Earlier this year Ford began testing both a car-sharing service in America and a car club in Britain. Daimler reckons its scheme is profitable. But such services are unlikely ever to match the returns, especially for premium makers, from selling vehicles. At the same time, app-based taxi services such as Uber and its Chinese counterpart Didi Dache, which are often cheaper and more efficient than conventional cabs, are also growing quickly. Once these are able to dispense with drivers for their vehicles, the taxi, car-club and car-sharing businesses will in effect merge into one big, convenient and affordable alternative to owning a car. So when will the fully autonomous car hit the showrooms? Google, whose cars have done 1.3m test miles (2.1m km) on public roads, once promised 2018, whereas most analysts reckoned the 2030s more plausible as carmakers introduced automated-driving features in stages. Now, Mr Fields is talking about autonomous cars being ready to roll by 2020. More conservative car bosses add five years. Barclays, another bank, forecasts that the fully driverless vehicle will result in the average American household cutting its car ownership from 2.1 vehicles now to 1.2 by 2040. A self-piloting car may drop off a family’s breadwinner at work, then scuttle back to pick up the kids and take them to school. The 11m or so annual sales of mass-market cars for personal ownership in America may be replaced by 3.8m sales of self-driving cars, either personally owned or part of taxi fleets, Barclays thinks. Driverless cars still have problems in bad weather. They may struggle to recognise that light shining off a puddle is harmless or guess that a pedestrian is about to step into the traffic without looking. But sophisticated systems for hands-free driving on motorways, and for automated parking, are already available on a number of manufacturers’ models. Fully driverless cars will ferry workers round GM’s technical centre in Detroit in late 2016. Convincing regulators to allow fully driverless cars onto the streets is the next hurdle. Insurers and consumers also need to be won round. If self-driving cars can be introduced first on private roads or designated areas of cities to prove their worth in avoiding accidents and reducing congestion, that might help. Within the industry, the big question is not whether this future will arrive, but whether tech firms or carmakers will grab the spoils. Will the sign on the dashboard say Ford (powered by Google) or Google (powered by Ford)?Volkswagen’s hopes that it was getting on top of the emissions-test cheating scandals that emerged in September were short-lived. European regulators have accepted its proposals to fix affected cars. The damage to sales in America was less than feared—they fell by 9% year on year in December. But now VW faces a civil action by the Department of Justice that could cost it up to $48 billion. Criminal charges and more fines may follow. Investors shuddered, fearing a repeat of BP’s colossal Deepwater Horizon payouts. Exane BNP Paribas, a bank, reckons VW will end up paying a fraction of that sum.AS DIFFICULT sales pitches go, this one is hard to beat. This biotech company has burned through $75m in the past few years and has not yet started clinical work on a drug candidate. It says it will be many years, “if ever”, before it has something ready to commercialise. If this were not enough, not only is there a thorny patent thicket to manage but the firm must fight and win a case seeking to overturn its own intellectual-property claims on the ground that it was not the first to invent them. Despite all this, shares in Editas Medicine, which filed on January 4th for an initial public offering, look set to draw great interest from investors. It will be an opportunity to buy into a revolutionary new technology called CRISPR-Cas9, which allows DNA to be cut and edited almost as easily as one might rewrite a document on a computer. Editas, spun out of the work of geneticists at the Broad Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has already raised $163m from private investors and is seeking a further $100m from the markets. Its initial aim is to begin trials by 2017 on a possible treatment for a rare form of blindness. Editas is not alone in pursuing the CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Others include Caribou Biosciences, CRISPR Therapeutics and Intellia Therapeutics. There are also firms such as Bluebird Bio and Sangamo, which are further ahead with drug candidates developed using older, and clunkier, forms of gene-editing. In the past two years about $1 billion of venture-capital financing has been invested in new gene-editing technologies, reckons the Boston Consulting Group. This reflects the promise the technology offers for producing treatments, and even cures, for a wide range of conditions—and not just those linked to mutated genes, such as haemophilia or sickle-cell anaemia. An early move to go public will help Editas stand out from the crowd, and perhaps help it recruit and retain good scientists.   CRISPR Therapeutics says it is also thinking about going public, given investors’ interest. Although enthusiasm for biotech IPOs as a whole may have cooled in the second half of 2015, Eva Haas of Hume Brophy, an investor-relations firm, says the Editas IPO is happening because it is “in a hot area and because it can.” Editas is also helped by having a stellar list of private investors, including Google, Bill Gates and Fidelity Investments, as well as three venture-capital backers, Polaris Partners, Third Rock and Flagship Ventures. (A number of other biotech companies filed to go public this week, including Corvus Pharmaceuticals, which is working on small-molecule drugs for cancer, and Audentes Therapeutics, a gene-therapy firm.) Some startups in other areas of technology have chosen in recent years to delay going for IPOs and to raise money privately instead. However, Sam Zucker of Sidley Austin, a law firm that manages corporate transactions in biotech, says that early-stage firms in this area may be keen to go public because they want to be free from dependence on a small network of venture-capital firms. The pool of public capital they will then be able to dip into is often faster to materialise, as well as larger, than private capital, he says. Wherever the money comes from, however, Editas and other gene-editing firms will need to show results eventually.Sorry, I’m just talking to my Facebook friends “WHO could possibly be against this?”, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s boss, asked in an editorial in the Times of India on December 28th. The “this” in question is “Free Basics”, a programme that gives its users free access to Facebook and a handful of other online services on their smartphones in 36 poor countries. According to Mr Zuckerberg, Free Basics acts as a gateway drug to the internet: half of those who first experience going online through the service start paying for full internet access within a month. Though the programme is promoted by Facebook, its costs are borne by the mobile-telecoms operators it works with—in the case of India, Reliance Communications, the country’s fourth-largest. As it turns out, plenty of people are against Free Basics. They include everyone from India’s internet-and-mobile-industry body (of which Facebook is itself a member) to a ragtag group of volunteer activists who mustered almost 400,000 people to write to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) as part of a public consultation on whether mobile operators should be allowed to charge different amounts for different forms of data. At stake is one of the world’s largest and fastest-growing internet markets outside China, which bars foreign digital services such as Facebook from entering. Around a quarter of the Indian population—or 300m people—were online at the end of 2014, and the number is expected to double by 2020. Critics of the programme say that Facebook’s generosity is cover for a landgrab. They argue that Free Basics is a walled garden of Facebook-approved content, that it breaches consumer privacy by sucking up all the data generated by users of the service, and that it is anticompetitive to boot. Moreover, critics fear that if new internet users are merely Facebook users, other online businesses will have no choice but to operate within Facebook’s world. Nandan Nilekani, an Indian tech luminary opposed to Free Basics, suggests that, instead, the government subsidise a monthly allowance of free mobile data for each user. Facebook counters that the programme is open to all-comers that meet certain technical requirements, that user data are stored for only 90 days, and that there is no profit motive: the service does not include advertising. As for suppressing local competition, Facebook argues, “there is no greater threat to local innovation than leaving people offline.” If, as Mr Zuckerberg says, Free Basics users quickly graduate to paying for full internet service, India’s ferociously competitive mobile operators should provide it cheaply. And if Free Basics proved popular there would be little to stop India’s big media and e-commerce groups from creating rival services to attract new surfers to their web offerings. Over the past few weeks, Facebook has run an extensive campaign with full-page ads in Indian newspapers touting Free Basics. Newspapers, blogs and television channels have presented arguments and counterarguments every day. Even All India Bakchod, a popular comedy collective, got into the act. The group’s video arguing against Free Basics has been watched 800,000 times on YouTube—and another 350,000 on Facebook itself. Activists in India won early victories in 2015, leading Facebook to change the name of its service from internet.org, which they said was misleading, and forcing the company to accept more services than those it handpicks. In December the TRAI suspended Free Basics in India pending the results of its consultation. The TRAI has received 1.4m notes of support for Free Basics as part of this process, driven largely by an automated response tool Facebook used to gather support from its Indian users. But the regulator says it may have to disregard them, since they do not answer the question it is asking. The TRAI itself will deliver its verdict at the end of this month.THE downtown Manhattan store of T.J. Maxx, with its dreary fluorescent lighting and haphazard displays, is about as glamorous as the average petrol station. Yet to retail analysts, and bargain-hunters, it is thrilling. At the end of one bedraggled rack, a red jacket offers a hint of the store’s appeal. The coat, from Michael Kors, an American designer, is on sale at $99.99. A comparable coat would cost $140 elsewhere, the label boasts. Using discounts to shift clothes is no novelty in fashion retailing. Indeed, in the current climate, with competition fierce and consumers hesitant, it is hard to avoid. But what marks out T.J. Maxx and other “off-price” retailers is that most of their stock is from habitually pricey designer labels, at drastic reductions. TJX, the parent company of T.J. Maxx and a handful of other off-price chains, rarely gives interviews, like its closest competitor, Ross. But their model is essentially as follows: when the designer labels produce more clothes than normal shops will sell at full price, TJX and Ross buy them at a deep discount, then resell them. As a strategy for global domination, it sounds underwhelming. But TJX and Ross are booming. TJX has become the top seller of clothing not just in America but, according to some measures, the world. Ross is smaller but, given its room to grow, has become an investor darling. The Dow Jones United States Apparel Retailers Index fell by 6% during 2015 but the shares of Ross and TJX rose by 15% and 4% respectively. Other American fashion chains are having a harder time. Shoppers are snubbing once-beloved names like Gap, J.Crew and Abercrombie & Fitch. Department stores’ habit of ordering their stocks of clothes months in advance leaves them vulnerable to ever-faster changes in tastes and to unpredictable weather. This autumn’s mild temperatures, for example, left them stuck with unwanted coats and scarves. All are threatened by more agile foreign “fast fashion” retailers, such as Inditex of Spain and H&M of Sweden. In contrast, the American off-price chains are continuing to expand. In 2014 TJX’s sales overtook those of Macy’s, a famous department-store chain (which this week announced big job cuts and store closures). They are not at the cutting edge of high-street fashions: many of their lines are last season’s. Their skill lies in hunting down surplus batches of stock from well-known brands and negotiating steep reductions. But the wind is at their backs. According to Bryan Gildenberg of Kantar Retail, a consulting firm, it is getting harder for shops to predict which clothes will sell at full price. “If the apparel industry is harder to forecast, there’s more inventory at risk, and if there’s more inventory at risk, the opportunity for this sort of buying goes up astronomically,” he says. Off-price retailers do not try to offer every size in every colour in every outlet. They buy whatever is available, so their shops have a constantly changing, seemingly random assortment. Ross says its stores typically get fresh stock three to six times a week. They therefore appeal to the sort of shopper who loves to rummage, hoping to stumble across the perfect item at an irresistible price. “It looks like a jumble, but actually it’s a very deliberate jumble,” says Neil Saunders of Conlumino, another consulting firm. The shops are spartan and thinly staffed, since customers are happy to hunt for bargains without help, and understand that if it isn’t on display, the store doesn’t have it. As a result, the overheads at TJX and Ross are, as a percentage of sales, about half those of Macy’s or Nordstrom, another department-store chain. The experience of shopping in an off-price store is hard to replicate online, notes Oliver Chen of Cowen and Company, a financial-services firm, so TJX and Ross are less threatened by the rise of internet retailing than other clothing chains. It may all sound simple, yet some off-price chains have flopped. The company that owned Filene’s Basement, for example, filed for bankruptcy in 2011. Ross and TJX now have the benefits of scale as well as, analysts say, strong management. TJX is spreading across Europe, where it trades as T.K. Maxx. The two chains are not just admired by industry analysts. They are also appreciated, albeit more discreetly, by the designer labels. An elite brand dare not damage its image by flooding off-price retailers with its products. But TJX and Ross have become an essential part of the retail ecosystem, offering a way for brands to clear their excess stock quickly. The off-price chains may drive a hard bargain but are otherwise easy to deal with. Department-store chains often demand sale-or-return clauses, or retrospective discounts for stock that they were forced to reduce. The risk for the fashion brands is that they end up a bit like American carmakers before their bail-outs, habitually overproducing and dumping their growing surpluses on the off-price chains and thus gradually losing their ability to sell at full price. As for TJX and Ross, one long-term worry, says Mr Gildenberg, is that younger consumers expect ever less expensive clothes. Forever 21, which specialises in cheap, trendy wear, has grown quickly. Primark of Ireland, which opened its first American branches last year, boasts fashionable clothes for Walmart prices. For now, though, both of the big off-price chains have room for further expansion. It is no surprise then, that some rivals are seeking to muscle in to the business: Macy’s is expanding a new off-price chain, Macy’s Backstage, and Nordstrom is opening more branches of its one, Nordstrom Rack. Off-price is in fashion.Filipinos’ fave DESPITE coming from a region full of celebrated cuisines, the food of the Philippines has a grim reputation among foreigners. Among its delicacies is the balut—a duck egg containing a two-week-old embryo, which is eaten straight from the shell. A more representative picture of local tastes is painted by the menu of Jollibee, a fast-food chain that peddles sugary burgers, noodles and fried chicken. At home, Jollibee is much loved and highly profitable. But its attempts to conquer foreign markets have had only modest success. After decades of trying, the Jollibee chain has only 133 foreign branches (compared with 890 back home), catering mainly to clusters of expat Filipinos in places such as the Gulf and California. Jollibee’s roots lie in a pair of ice-cream parlours opened in 1975 by Tony Tan Caktiong, the company’s founder and chairman. At home Mr Tan and his burger joints are feted for having survived the arrival of McDonald’s, which entered the Philippines in 1981. Today Jollibee far outsells its great rival there. It catered better to the whims of locals, who prefer dishes such as Jollibee Spaghetti—an odd Bolognese mixed with chopped frankfurters—to Western chains’ more savoury offerings. And it has marketed itself cannily as a family firm and a store of national pride. Over the years Jollibee Foods, the parent company, has expanded to include restaurants run under a handful of other brands, including Chowking (which sells Chinese-style dishes) and the local Burger King franchise. Since 2010 the parent’s sales and net profits have increased by around 70%, to 118 billion pesos ($2.5 billion) and 5.4 billion pesos respectively, as the growth of Filipino call-centres and other outsourcing businesses has boosted overall consumer spending. The parent group’s total number of outlets has grown to more than 3,000 (of which 630 are abroad). The firm still has a lot of room to expand in fast-growing provinces beyond the densely populated main island of Luzon, which is home to only about half the country’s 100m people. However, Mr Tan has long aspired to make Jollibee Foods a global champion. His current target is for the company’s foreign revenues eventually to be half of the total, up from less than one-quarter now. Managers talk of it becoming one of the world’s five most valuable fast-food operators. There are still substantial pockets of expats unable to feast on an Amazing Aloha Champ Burger (a bacon-cheeseburger with a wodge of pineapple), and in 2016 the company will open new branches of its eponymous chain in places such as Britain, Italy and Canada to reach them. But the company has gradually come round to the view that to reach its goal, it needs to buy foreign restaurant chains with menus better suited to the tastes of non-Filipinos. A trio of chains acquired since 2004, offering Chinese cuisine, have given Jollibee Foods a sizeable foothold in mainland China. They now generate about 12% of its sales, though collectively they have taken a decade to turn consistently profitable. In January 2015 the company announced that it was part of a joint venture which plans to bring at least 1,400 branches of Dunkin’ Donuts to China in the next two decades, which will mean tussling with such fellow invaders as Starbucks and Costa Coffee. America is the next frontier. In October Jollibee Foods said it would fork out a little under $100m—its biggest investment to date—for a 40% stake in Smashburger, an American “fast-casual” burger joint. That should allow it to benefit from America’s increasing fondness for slightly finer on-the-go nosh, which is shaking McDonald’s grip on its home market. Mr Tan said in November that he was looking for one or two further foreign acquisitions of the same size or bigger. There is no guarantee that venturing into new markets with unfamiliar menus will succeed any better than its forays under its own brand. In America as in China, the market for all sorts of low-cost dining is getting ever more competitive. It will be vital to avoid unforced errors such as Jollibee’s shambolic overhaul of its IT systems in 2014, which briefly closed more than 70 of its branches and which is still weighing on its performance. Some analysts back home are, however, confident it is up to the task. Creating a national brand in the Philippines, a disparate archipelago with distinct local cultures, will have been good practice for venturing abroad, reckons Ghia Yuson of First Metro Securities, a stockbroker in Manila. She thinks the relentless market research which has kept Jollibee in tune with Filipino food fads will also serve it well overseas. Furthermore, its strategy seems to be to buy food chains that are already well established and have capable managers, rather than buying weaker businesses and attempting to turn them around. Several other cash-rich Philippine firms, such as Universal Robina, a food manufacturer, and Emperador, a distiller, are now spreading their wings across South-East Asia, says Hazel Tañedo of CLSA, another broker. But none has made so direct a beeline for the world’s biggest markets. If Jollibee’s American venture succeeds and its profits in China keep growing, it should boost ambition among other Filipino firms, even if it doesn’t change foreigners’ minds about the country’s cuisine.Now all we need is a tiny popcorn-seller IT STARTED in a cosy izakaya, or pub, in Fujieda, in Shizuoka prefecture, when a gathering of furniture-makers dreamed of marking out some space for themselves in their cramped family homes. The result was an otoko no kakureya, or “hiding place for men”, a tiny, cockpit-like wooden room with a desk, shelves and reclining chair. Sales are taking off. Another popular Japanese product offering the illusion of personal space is the Solo Theatre (pictured), a cardboard box that users put over their heads, which has a slot for Apple’s iPhone. Inside there is a black cut-out of a row of heads, as if the user is at a cinema. The product’s surrealism has tickled thousands of Japanese social-media users. It is a selfish product that appeals to the need to get into a small womblike space of one’s own and watch films and other content, explains Satoshi Aoyagi, of Lucy Alter Design, who fashioned it with a colleague. Another factor is shrinking living-space. The average Japanese apartment has dwindled from 70 to 60 square metres over the past decade, so that people are even more on top of each other. Cultural forces are powerful too, notes Masahiro Abe, a sociologist at Konan University. Japanese must don a public mask for their hierarchy-bound, open-plan offices, and a second face for their families. Turning to small, private boxes at home is their way of searching for a “third space”, he says. Hayato Kawase, a subculture expert at Bibi Lab, a design firm, went so far as to bring a tent to the office as a way of tucking himself away and avoiding interaction with colleagues. His company quickly spotted a new product in it, and designed an indoor “Bocchi Tent”. Bocchi is a sarcastic word for “alone”, but now it is becoming a brand. There is also a new “Danbocchi” soundproofed cardboard box for karaoke from Bandai Namco Entertainment, a video-game company, so that singers no longer have to record under blankets at home. Bibi Lab’s tent for loners now far outsells the firm’s regular ones for camping outdoors. Despite the success of such products at home, it remains unclear if there is much demand outside Japan from people hankering for privacy. They are also examples of the introversion of Japanese product designers, who nowadays tend to think more of the home market, and struggle to create world-beating ideas like the Sony Walkman. They are also often unwilling to compromise. One enthusiastic customer asked the makers of the Solo Theatre to produce a double-sized cardboard box so that he could watch films in it with another person. The answer was a firm “no”. Correction: This article has been amended since publication to correct the spelling of the name of Hayato Kawase of Bibi LabTHAT was quick. A couple of months ago hoverboards were the next big thing. Today they are a bad joke. It turns out that they sometimes burst into flames, pitch their riders onto the floor and otherwise cause mayhem. In his boxing career, Mike Tyson was knocked out only five times. A YouTube video shows him felled by a hoverboard in a matter of seconds. This is more than a story of a short-lived fad. It is a parable of business life under what Jeremy Corbyn, the hard-left leader of the British Labour Party, would probably call “late capitalism”. “This is the modern economy in a nutshell,” says Josh Horwitz on Quartz, a news website: “viral trends, massive manufacturing hubs, IP disputes, weak regulation, immensely powerful businesses, and global ripple effects.” The big question is whether it is a prophecy as well as a parable: a growing number of analysts think that 2016 will be the year in which the new economy falls back to earth. The hoverboard craze exemplifies three facets of modern business. The first is its propensity to blur the boundaries between fantasy and reality. Many modern high-tech devices started life in science fiction: think of “Star Trek” characters consulting clever hand-held devices and talking to their computers. Elon Musk wants to shoot people across California in vacuum-sealed tubes. Jeff Bezos wants to deliver packages by drone. Hoverboards themselves were introduced to the world by Hollywood in “Back to the Future Part II”. One problem with hoverboards is that they don’t blur the line between fantasy and reality far enough. Rather than hovering above the ground, they trundle along it on a couple of wheels (although someone has now invented one that really hovers; see our Science section). Hoverboard entrepreneurs dealt with this problem by pulling another rabbit from the fantasist’s hat—pretending that hoverboarding is part of the celebrity lifestyle. The trick was to put the product in the right places—at the MTV awards ceremony and under the feet of Justin Bieber. The fad gained momentum as the B-list celebs followed the A-listers, and the wannabes aped the B-listers. Kendall Jenner, a reality-TV starlet, posted a video of herself on one. More than a million people “liked” it on Instagram. Wiz Khalifa, a rapper, was stopped and handcuffed for riding on one in Los Angeles airport. A Filipino priest sang to his congregation while gliding around on one. The craze for hoverboards also exemplifies the agility of modern business, from the prowess of China’s manufacturing cluster in Shenzhen to the reach of e-commerce platforms in both China (Alibaba) and America (Amazon). China’s manufacturers have a long record of churning out cheap knock-offs at high speed. But they are more efficient than ever thanks to the arrival of internet platforms. Alibaba allows Chinese manufacturers to place bulk orders for components and lets wholesalers place bulk orders for finished products. Amazon completes the picture by allowing Western consumers to have their hoverboards delivered rapidly with just the click of a mouse. And the hoverboard fad points to a third characteristic: the difficulty of regulating a global supply chain that starts with a fantasy, ends with an Amazon package and takes in a bustling Chinese assembly plant in the middle. Everything in the product’s supply chain emphasised speed over competence. Britain’s National Trading Standards agency found that 15,000 of the 17,000 hoverboards it examined were unsafe because of problems with their plugs, cabling, chargers, batteries or cut-off switches. It is frustratingly hard to hold the various producers of the gadgets accountable for these problems: manufacturers subcontract as much as they can and internet retailers are often simply electronic shopfronts with no influence over product quality. The regulation of hoverboards was complicated further by a legal battle between three separate entrepreneurs over who has the rights to them. Even so, this still does not explain why retailers in the United States were able to sell the products apparently without even rudimentary health-and-safety tests. Hovering on the edge of legality The problem may have solved itself: so many hoverboards have burst into flames that Amazon has either dramatically restricted the number of models it sells, as in America, or banned them entirely, in the case of Britain. Several Chinese firms have stopped producing them. But, for a remarkable number of new-economy businesses, the regulatory problem remains unresolved. Many tech startups have tended to adopt the same approach as the hoverboard industry—exploiting legal grey areas on the ground that, if they build enough momentum, legislators and judges will simply adjust the law to take into account new commercial realities. That is a big bet: many of today’s biggest firms are like hoverboard riders heading for bumpy ground. Uber may be forced to reclassify its drivers as employees rather than contractors, rendering it liable for millions of dollars in back pay and upending its business model. Airbnb may be forced to abide by the health-and-safety and licensing rules that apply to hotels. The threat of adverse regulation animates the question of whether the hoverboard fiasco is a prophecy as well as a parable. Silicon Valley has long displayed some of the classic characteristics of a bubble: companies vying to build the most eye-catching headquarters and CEOs competing to produce the most extravagant ideas to “change the world”. There are growing signs that private valuations of tech “unicorns” will not hold up when they are subjected to the rigours of the public market. Some unicorns have shied away from going public at the last moment and others such as Good Technology, a mobile-device security firm, have sold themselves at lower valuations than they had hoped. If regulators alter the landscape further, 2016 might be the year that such firms follow the hoverboard and go up in a puff of smoke.
