MOBUTU SESE SEKO, the late dictator of Zaire, used to reshuffle his cabinet every six months or so to show ministers who was boss. (To reinforce the point, he sometimes also slept with their wives.) Brussels is no Kinshasa. Yet it shares Mobutu’s love of musical chairs. The presidency of the Council of the European Union, the forum where national governments discuss and negotiate EU laws, rotates every six months. On January 1st the Netherlands took the chair from Luxembourg (see Charlemagne). Brussels creates a song and dance about each handover, but the system makes no more sense than Mobutu’s. Each country that assumes the presidency sends lots of civil servants to Brussels, plus various nationally flavoured goodies and trinkets. (The Cypriots gave away 650kg of halloumi cheese.) But the greater cost is to the quality of EU lawmaking. Some countries that take up the presidency lack the diplomatic experience and political clout to broker agreements. And the six-month term is typically too brief for the tortuous process of European consensus-building. Worse, a recalcitrant president can slow down or derail talks. During its presidency Luxembourg, eager to protect its financial-services industry, shelved critical moves to implement regulations on Europe’s shadow banking that had been drawn up by the G20 group of big economies. Spain delayed discussions on banking supervision to avoid exposing the flaws of its national supervisor; it was only after Belgium took over that a deal was quickly sealed. The Dutch, who want to grapple with the refugee crisis, will have precious little time to do so. After them come the Slovaks, whose prime minister, Robert Fico, opposes any Europe-wide deal on migrants. Defenders of the status quo make a couple of arguments. National governments, they say, gain a greater sense of responsibility for EU affairs when they are periodically placed in charge of them. Their civil servants get a chance to become familiar with the machinery of Brussels. These points were valid when the EU had just six members. They no longer hold in a union of 28 where each country must wait 14 years to take the reins. Enlargement has made the old system unworkable. The EU’s Lisbon treaty, which came into force in 2009, recognises this. It has sensibly taken away some of the tasks that used to be handled by the rotating presidency. The European Council, the gathering of the EU’s national leaders, now elects its own president (currently Donald Tusk). It also appoints the EU’s foreign-policy chief. Still, from home affairs to finance, energy, telecommunications and the budget, plenty of areas are left to the rotating presidency’s wheel of dysfunction. Cure the hangover The rotating presidency is one of several stubborn relics of the EU’s past. Like the European Parliament’s wasteful second chamber in Strasbourg, scrapping it would require a treaty change. Some new member states have yet to enjoy presidential status, but by 2020 only Croatia will remain, and it should get a turn soon enough. Europeans are sure to tweak the treaties again; they do so every five years, on average. Ending this self-defeating system will then be possible. A better alternative would be for each council working group to elect its own chairman. The European Parliament’s committees pick their heads this way, as does the Eurogroup of euro-zone finance ministers. Council bosses with mandates from their peers and direct lines to European capitals would have greater clout, and be more accountable. The inevitable horse-trading might mean that the best candidate would not always win. But, although Mobutu was no fan of elections, they work better than any plausible alternative.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Finish the sentence As a former prosecutor, I found your story on the ongoing demise of the death penalty in America to be spot-on (“Who killed the death penalty?”, December 19th). The practice is barbaric, and the United States should simply not be in the small club of countries that executes its citizens. You noted the traumatic effect that imposing the death penalty can have on jurors. I have had conversations with a Swedish friend who considers it unimaginable that he would be asked to sit in a room with other Swedes to determine if a fellow Swede lives or dies. Indeed, the European Union could hasten the demise of death row by refusing to admit Americans who are involved with the death penalty. A travel ban would extend to judges who sentence convicts to death, as well as the prosecutors who sought the sentence and even the staff in prisons where executions are carried out. A ban of this magnitude would affect those who feel they have no role, or a limited one, in the death penalty, but who are all either active participants or enablers in the process. It would cause them to think through their role in that process, perhaps for the first time. Is a person truly more morally pure if he, as a prosecutor, files legal papers to seek and obtain the death penalty because he has nothing to do with the ultimate application of the sentence? MICHAEL BRAUTIGAM Evading the question Your article on a proposal to triple the limit on cash transactions in Italy was welcome (“Show me the money”, December 5th). The current limit of €1,000 ($1,090) is meant to discourage tax evasion. Riparte il futuro, the largest non-political anti-corruption group in Italy, with over 1m users, has launched an online campaign to ask the government not to raise it. Our petition has gained 50,000 signatures and received the endorsement of many experts. When he presented his proposal, Matteo Renzi, the prime minister, asked for contrary evidence. We published a detailed report with unequivocal data supporting our view. The government has not yet responded. FEDERICO ANGHELÉ The problem with Myanmar I am appalled that you chose Myanmar as your country of the year (“Most favoured nation”, December 19th). You celebrated Myanmar holding an election at which people freely elected their leaders. Yet the Rohingya weren’t allowed to vote or run for office. Putting a remark in parenthetical comment that the Rohingya are treated “disgracefully” is an insult to the thousands who have perished at the hands of government-sponsored violence. They are one of the most persecuted minorities anywhere in the world. Persecuted, by the way, by those who claim to be followers of Buddhism, a religion mostly associated with peace. M.Y. DADANI   The wealth of nations * Your article on anti-competitive practices in Latin America highlights that in that region the private sector talks of the virtues of free markets but too often practises the vices of monopolies and cartels (Bello, December 5th). This is of course absolutely right, but it is not solely a Latin American phenomenon; it is in fact inherent in the capitalist economy. It was none other than Adam Smith who denounced the fallacy of regarding the free market and private enterprise as one and the same thing. His superb prose on the topic is well worth recalling at some length: “The interest of the dealers ... in any particular branch of trade or manufactures, is always in some respects different from, and even opposite to, that of the public. To ... narrow the competition, is always the interest of the dealers... The proposal of any new law or regulation of commerce which comes from this order, ought always to be listened to with great precaution ... It comes from an order of men ... who have generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public, and who accordingly have, upon many occasions, both deceived and oppressed it.” CARLOS FORTIN Antiques treasured I disagree with your take on the antiques trade (“Out with the old”, December 19th). It is not dying, merely changing, and its future is bright. The traditional definition of an “antique” being at least 100 years old is restrictive and outmoded. The New York Armory Winter Antique Show now allows items from as late as 1969. You implied that the popularity of mid-century modernism explains why antiques are out of fashion. However, one may see in this a sign that the younger generation still appreciates old things, just different things from the ones that their parents appreciated. Thirty-somethings are expanding their tastes; the heavy hand of mid-century is lifting and early 20th-century modernism and Art Deco styles are creeping in. A more eclectic use of styles in interiors is indeed returning. In the Architectural Digest 2016 forecast, several interior designers noted a trend away from mid-century period rooms towards more traditional styles mixed with the modern. Robert Stilin, a designer, even used the term “brown furniture” in a positive light. Not quite the definitive death that many old-guard dealers are predicting. CHRISTA PIRL Medicine v public policy * Your recent leader (“In praise of human guinea pigs”, December 12th) argues strongly in favour of using randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in public policy as they are used in medicine. You are insufficiently cautious in pointing to the serious methodological concerns around using RCTs as a basis for public policy analysis and formation. Rather, scanting the many serious issues raised by scholars, you conclude that “the biggest problem with RCTs is that they are not used nearly often enough”. Teaching language Much of what you say about South Africa’s Stellenbosch University is true and uncontroversial (“The ivory tower is too white”, December 5th). There has been a campaign to replace Afrikaans as the main teaching language on campus with English. But this could disadvantage poor Afrikaans-speaking people in higher education, especially the coloured population. The irony is that by wishing to move away from the European culture that pervades South Africa’s ivory towers, having English as the lingua franca makes it more likely that European cultural and intellectual hegemony will remain. PROFESSOR DAVID COLDWELL Is it a bird? Is it a plane?…   I enjoyed Schumpeter’s musings on the rise of the SuperBoss (December 19th). Not only are senior executives hyperactive, but almost everybody that works for them has been infected by the SuperBoss virus. Underlings such as myself are constantly bombarded by “tips” from our bosses about how to be just like them. If I were to follow even a tenth of these suggestions, which always seem to have a passive-aggressive threat buried within them, I would get no work done. Even weeding through them and exploring one or two eats up 60% of my day. It is as though every executive in the 15 or so layers of management is competing to be the SuperBoss. A lot of people are to blame for this. Publications like The Economist play a role in promoting it. I applaud you for now taking a stand against it. As an addendum to Peter Drucker’s quote, I’ve discovered this to be true: in battles and unpredictable disasters we need heroes. In business a hero is a single point of failure. MARK MARTINO In “Elizabeth”, a film from 1998 about Elizabeth I, Sir Francis Walsingham says that “All men need something greater than themselves to look up to and worship. They must be able to touch the divine here on Earth”. The cult of overperforming is not a new fad, even if it has a new disguise. ANNA PIETKA Mencken on populism The spate of fear-mongering from populist politicians in America and Europe is an old political strategy (“Enough said”, December 19th). H.L. Mencken put it succinctly almost a century ago: “The whole aim of practical politics is to keep the populace alarmed (and hence clamorous to be led to safety), by menacing it with an endless series of hobgoblins, all of them imaginary.” GENE TINELLI * Letters appear online onlyTHE Al Sauds once again hold court in Diriya, their ancestral capital that was laid waste by the Ottoman empire and is being lovingly restored as a national tourist attraction. This is where the Al Sauds forged their alliance in the 18th century with a Muslim revivalist preacher, Muhammad Ibn Abdel-Wahhab—a pact that to this day fuses the modern Saudi state with the puritanism of Wahhabi Islam. And this is where Muhammad bin Salman (pictured), the 30-year-old deputy crown prince who is the power behind the throne of his elderly father, King Salman, receives foreign guests in a walled complex. One side of his reception room is decorated with the spears, swords and daggers of tradition. The other is dominated by a large television, showing the casual horrors of the Middle East and the repercussions of his own actions play out on rolling news: the execution of a prominent Shia cleric, Nimr al-Nimr, (and 46 others accused of terrorism and sedition, mostly linked to al-Qaeda jihadists) led to a mob ransacking the Saudi embassy in Tehran and, in retaliation, to the kingdom severing diplomatic relations with Iran. Talking late into the night with the news left on throughout, Prince Muhammad discusses his country’s interventionist foreign policy and its uncompromising response to terrorism and sedition. Asked whether the kingdom’s actions were stoking regional tensions, he said that things were already so bad they could scarcely get any worse. “We try as hard as we can not to escalate anything further,” he says; and he certainly does not expect war. But for his entourage, Saudi Arabia has no choice but to stop Iran from trying to carve out a new Persian empire. If his defence of Saudi foreign policy was unrepentant, even more striking was his ambition to remake the entire Saudi state by harnessing the power of markets. No economic reform is taboo, say his officials: not the shedding of do-nothing public-sector workers, not the abolition of subsidies that Saudis have come to see as their birthright, not the privatisation of basic services such as education and health care. And not even the sale of shares in the crown jewel: Saudi Aramco, the secretive national oil and gas producer that is the world’s biggest company (see article).    At 80, the newish King Salman is part of the same gerontocracy that has run the country for decades. But he has entrusted much of his realm to Prince Muhammad, who is in a hurry to awaken it from its torpor. He knows that, for all its ostentatious luxury, the country faces huge problems. The oil price has plunged. Arab states all around have collapsed. In the vacuum, Iran, the Shia power that has long alarmed Sunni Arabs, has spread its influence across the region, particularly through the militias it grooms—in Lebanon, Iraq, Syria and most recently in Yemen, Saudi Arabia’s underbelly. The Arab world is confronted not just by a Shia Crescent, “but by a Shia full moon”, says one confidant of the prince. As well as Shia militants, Saudi Arabia also faces resurgent Sunni jihadists: a revived al-Qaeda in Yemen to the south, and Islamic State (IS) in Iraq and Syria to the north. Both seek to lure young Saudis raised on the same textbooks and homilies that the jihadists use. Pillars of the House of Saud The Al Sauds have survived by making three compacts: with the Wahhabis to burnish their Islamic credentials as the custodians of the holy places of Mecca and Medina; with the population by providing munificence in exchange for acquiescence to absolutist rule; and with America to defend Saudi Arabia in exchange for stability in oil markets. But all three of these covenants are fraying. America is semi-detached from the Middle East. The plummeting price of oil, which provides almost all of the government’s revenues, means the old economic model can no longer sustain the swelling and unproductive population. And the alliance with obscurantists brings threats, because they provide intellectual sustenance to jihadists, and form an obstacle even to modest social reforms that must be part of any attempt to wean the country off oil and create a more productive economy. Not surprisingly, Saudi Arabia’s many critics have dusted off their obituaries of the House of Saud. But for Prince Muhammad the lesson of the Arab spring, and of history, is that regimes that lack deep roots are doomed to be swept away; by implication the Al Sauds are here to stay. Yet he knows that change must come, and fast. He has injected new energy into government, and is taking huge gambles. What he lacks in experience and foreign travel, he compensates for with confidence, focus and a battery of consultants’ reports. He reels off numbers and policies with ease, pausing only to take a call from John Kerry, America’s secretary of state. He speaks in the first person, as if he were already king even though he is only second in line. Over five hours King Salman is mentioned once; his cousin, the crown prince, Muhammad bin Nayef, does not figure at all, though he is in charge of internal security and may be biding his time. No crisis wasted Such is Prince Muhammad’s frenetic activity that officials reel and outsiders regard him as a bullock in a china shop. Just weeks after his father made him defence minister, fighter jets from Saudi Arabia, the Arab world’s richest state, led a coalition into action against the Houthi militias of its poorest, Yemen. To critics who say he was rash to intervene in a land that has bloodied foreign armies before, Prince Muhammad says the action, if anything, came too late: the Shia Houthis, with Iran’s help, had taken the country and sophisticated weapons, such as jets and Scud missiles. Scuds are occasionally fired at Saudi targets; thousands of Saudis living near Yemen have been evacuated to avoid rockets and artillery fire. In Syria he plans to send special forces against IS. (The crown prince is said to be more cautious, fearing blowback from jihadists). Prince Muhammad’s most dramatic moves may be at home. He seems determined to use the collapse in the price of oil, from $115 a barrel in 2014 to below $35, to enact radical economic reforms. This begins with fiscal retrenchment. Even after initial budget cuts last year, Saudi Arabia recorded a whopping budget deficit of 15% of GDP. Its pile of foreign reserves has fallen by $100 billion, to $650 billion. Even with its minimal debt of 5% of GDP, Saudi Arabia’s public finances are unsustainable for more than a few years (see chart). His budget, unveiled in December, cuts subsidies on water, electricity and fuel. These were aimed mostly at big consumers, including the myriad royal princes. “I don’t deserve these subsidies,” he says. Even so, Saudis witnessed the rare sight of people queuing to buy petrol before the prices rose by 50% on January 1st. This month Saudis accustomed to leaving on the air-conditioner when going on holiday will receive dearer electricity and water bills. Within five years, the plan is that Saudis should be paying market prices, probably with compensation in the form of direct payments for poorer citizens. Ministries have halted expenditure on cars, furniture and showcase projects. The government is scrutinising allowances and overtime claims to save money. Soon Saudis will for the first time pay value-added tax of 5% on non-essentials, in a move co-ordinated with other members of the six-country Gulf Co-operation Council. Prince Muhammad is adamant that there will be no income or wealth taxes, but he plans to balance the budget in five years. Under his “Transformation Plan 2020”, set for publication by the end of the month, the prince wants to develop alternatives to oil and drastically to cut the public payroll, which acts as a form of unemployment benefit. To do so he wants to create jobs for a workforce that will double by 2030. Ministers speak of doubling private education to cover 30% of students, establishing charter schools and transforming public health care into an insurance-based system with expanded private provision. In addition to Aramco, the prince wants to sell stakes in state assets from telecoms to power stations and the national airline. The government is to sell land to developers, such as the 4m square metres it owns around Mecca, the most expensive real estate in the world. The prince sees huge promise in developing Islamic tourism to the holy sites; he hopes to boost the 18m annual visitors to 35m-45m in five years. Sceptics abound. Reform has long been talked about but never implemented. Prince Muhammad’s ministers are astute, have PhDs from Western universities and speak the jargon of key performance indicators, but much of the government is deadweight. Even the unemployment figures are subject to doubt. “Few bits of the bureaucracy actually function at a high level,” says a Western diplomat. Even senior advisers question the kingdom’s capacity to find and absorb the trillions of dollars on which the plan is predicated. In Jeddah, the commercial capital on the Red Sea, some businessmen remain sceptical, and speak more of exporting their wealth than investing it in the country. There is also suspicion of hidden motives. With each new elderly monarch, they say, favoured sons have indulged in self-aggrandisement, leaving courtiers to disguise their acquisitions as privatisations and economic reforms. Media reports of Prince Muhammad’s lavish parties in the Maldives and the crown prince’s house-hunting for a Sardinian villa worth half a billion euros are fodder for social media, of which Saudis are keen users. As the man who ultimately controls the Public Investment Fund, the destination for many assets to be sold, and who has taken direct oversight of Aramco, the prince is already the subject of some muttering. What is true is that, for all his talk of transparency, his government continues to treat royal and state expenses as one and same; the royal component is a state secret. A bigger challenge for the reformers is the fact that the prince’s dizzying changes amount to, in effect, a rewriting of the Saudi social contract. Why, mutter some Saudis, should we tighten our belts when the princes continue to enjoy untold riches? And for all his boldness in economic matters, he remains obtuse when it comes to political liberalisation that might help secure consent for the economic revolution. A tiny number of women have recently campaigned for and won seats in municipal elections, under changes brought in by the late King Abdullah; who more than a decade ago had promised Saudis “true democracy” in 20 years. It is nowhere in sight. Government repression has intensified. “It has never been this bad,” says one campaigner for women’s rights. Indeed, counter-terror legislation passed in 2014 makes virtually all dissent a terrorist offence. The evidence is all around: lawyers representing troublesome clients have found themselves behind bars; preachers who used to pronounce against corruption stick strictly to their anodyne scripts; and stand-up comedians have stopped poking fun at royals. Tellingly, more people have been executed in King Salman’s first year in office than in any of the previous 20. In a country where concerts, public movies and female performances are banned, the prince talks of the “entertainment crisis”, and about his own children lacking things to do. Here and there, he seems ready to try to loosen the grip of the clerics. His latest education minister, Ahmed al-Eissa, is an academic whose book on the dreadful state of Saudi schools, which he blames in part on the restrictions placed by “religious culture”, remains banned in the kingdom. Private schools, still barred from teaching evolution, would have a freer hand to set their curriculum and choose pedagogic materials beyond those designed by the clerics. The prince says that he supports women working, not least to reduce the fertility rate: “A large portion of my productive factors are unutilised,” he says. “I have population growth reaching very scary figures.” These days Saudi Arabia has more women in the workplace, but female labour-force participation is still very low, at 18%. Prince Muhammad thinks women are not taking full advantage of the opportunities they already have: “A large percentage of Saudi women are used to the fact of staying at home. They’re not used to being working women.” Still, he is in no mood to challenge the ban on women driving—even though some might want to lay off their chauffeurs in such straitened times. “I do not want to get involved in this issue as it is Saudi society that will decide whether to accept it or not.” The country’s regional assertiveness also presents a threat to the planned transformation. Spending on defence and security, has grown from 7% of GDP in 2012 to 10% in 2015, and is set to rise again in 2016. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts Drumming up allies, including the 34-country counter-terrorism coalition that the prince announced in December (to the bemusement and surprise of some of its putative members) is proving costly. It has recently promised $8 billion for Egypt. Saudi Arabia is financing a proxy war in Syria and waging a full-scale one in Yemen, which has dragged on longer than initially flagged. Nevertheless for some, the sight of Saudi Arabia standing up forcefully for Sunnis against Iran is part of the antidote to the jihadists’ poisonous ideology. Uncle Sam, we need you Surprisingly, perhaps, for a Saudi royal with no Western education, Prince Muhammad speaks about America passionately. “The United States has to realise that they are the Number One in the world, and they have to act like it,” he says; the sooner America steps back into the region—even with boots on the ground—the better. Prince Muhammad’s schemes do not appear to be inspired by ideology. Many of the ideas he is pursuing have lurked in ministers’ drawers for years. Others follow examples from elsewhere, be it charter schools in America, public-private partnerships in Britain or the abolition of fuel subsidies in Egypt (and Iran). Instead they are born of necessity. The conjunction of a fall in oil prices, a geopolitical crisis and a hyperactive prince afford a once-in-a-generation chance to modernise the country. The Arab spring has shown time and again that post-colonial Arab states are singularly dysfunctional (see page 41). That raises serious doubts about Saudi Arabia’s ability to reform. But the regime has little choice: its survival may depend on it. For a transcript of the formal interview with the prince, see Economist.com/saudi_interview“THE amounts of oil are incredible, and I have to rub my eyes frequently and say like the farmer: ‘There ain’t no such beast.’” So wrote an American oilman in the Persian Gulf a few years after the discovery in 1938 of a gusher of oil from Saudi Arabia’s Well Number Seven, 4,727 feet (1,440 metres) below the desert floor. You could say the same today about Saudi Aramco, the state-owned firm that for decades has had exclusive control of Saudi Arabia’s oil and is the world’s biggest, most coveted and secretive oil company. On January 4th the kingdom’s deputy crown prince, Muhammad bin Salman, told The Economist that Saudi Arabia was considering the possibility of floating shares in the company, adding that personally he was “enthusiastic” about the idea. It was a stunning revelation. Officials say options under preliminary consideration range from listing some of Aramco’s petrochemical and other “downstream” firms, to selling shares in the parent company, which includes the core business of producing crude. The staggered nationalisation of the Arabian American Oil Company (Aramco), made up of four big American firms, in the 1970s was emblematic of a wave of “resource nationalism” that has helped define the industry (see chart 1). Aramco is worth, officials say, “trillions of dollars”, making it easily the world’s biggest company. It says it has hydrocarbon reserves of 261 billion barrels, more than ten times those of ExxonMobil, the largest private oil firm, which is worth $323 billion. It pumps more oil than the whole of America, about 10.2m barrels a day (b/d), giving it unparalleled sway over prices. If just a sliver of its shares were placed on the Saudi stock exchange, which currently has a total market value of about $400 billion, they could greatly increase its size. Prince Muhammad says a listing would not only help the stockmarket, which opened to foreigners last year. It would also make Aramco more transparent and “counter corruption, if any”. A final decision has yet to be taken. Yet the prince has held two recent meetings with senior Saudi officials to discuss a possible Aramco listing and diplomats say investors are being sounded out. The talk is of at first floating only a small portion of the company in Riyadh, perhaps 5%. In time that could rise—though not by enough to jeopardise the kingdom’s control of decision-making. The aim would be to foster greater shareholder involvement in Saudi Arabia; a senior official said there was no intention of surrendering control of Aramco or its oil resources to foreign firms. But it is part of a frenzy of reforms proposed by the prince that his government is rushing to keep pace with. “Everything is on the table. We are willing to consider options we were not willing to get our heads around in the past,” an official says. For many investors, a listing of Aramco, however partial, would be a prize even at today’s low oil prices. Its “upstream” business is mouth-watering. Rystad Energy, a Norwegian consultancy, says no other country except Kuwait can produce oil at a lower break even cost (see chart 2). By the standards of national oil monopolies, analysts say that Aramco is well run. In the 1940s and 1950s, when the American consortium recruited young Saudis, it was an “unlikely union of Bedouin Arabs and Texas oil men, a traditional Islamic autocracy allied with modern American capitalism”, writes Daniel Yergin in “The Prize”. Under American ownership, it built towns with schools, wiped out malaria and cholera, and helped farmers become entrepreneurs, officials recall, explaining why it was popular with Saudis. It was a different story in Iran and elsewhere, where citizens grew sick of the colonial-era concessions taken by British and French firms, and a wave of nationalisation began. The Saudis, having declared their first 25% stake in Aramco in 1973 “indissoluble, like a Catholic marriage”, were unable to resist the tide. Full nationalisation of Aramco came in 1980. But an American business ethic survived. Just over a decade ago Matthew Simmons, an American banker, argued that Saudi wells were past their prime and that production would soon peak. Yet Aramco has increased output by more than 1m b/d in the past five years, reaching record highs. “They’ve proven their resilience,” says Chris DeLucia of IHS, a consultancy. INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability Questions surround the company, though. Mr DeLucia says 87% of its output is oil; it needs to develop more gas to satisfy the country’s needs for cleaner, cheaper power. Some argue that its reserves, which have barely budged since the late 1980s, are overstated. Internal documents about them are “phenomenally closely guarded secrets” says a local observer. The company does not report its revenues. Its fleet of eight jets, including four Boeing 737s, and a string of football stadiums suggest that it is not run on purely commercial lines. It is the government’s project manager of choice even for non-oil developments, and runs a hospital system for 360,000 people. A listing would require it to become more transparent. But even with greater disclosure, minority shareholders may play second fiddle. The company is integral to the social fabric of Saudi Arabia and the survival of the ruling Al Saud dynasty, providing up to nine-tenths of government revenues. Cuts in its output have been a foreign-policy lever through which OPEC, the producers’ cartel, has often sought to rescue oil prices. Investors in Russia’s Gazprom, another national champion, have watched in frustration as the company has been used as an arm of the Russian foreign ministry. Elsewhere, selling stakes in national oil companies has had mixed results. Prince Muhammad’s desire for reform fits a pattern that some consider reckless. Saudi Arabia has recently forced OPEC to maintain production despite oil falling from a peak of $120 a barrel to below $35. Its decision on January 3rd to suspend diplomatic relations with Iran, a fellow OPEC member, makes it harder for both to agree on production cuts, though Saudi officials are in any case adamant that they have no intention of rescuing prices. Others believe Saudi Arabia’s strategy makes sense. They think it wants to protect its share of the global oil market by driving high-cost producers to the wall at a time when unconventional forms of oil, such as American shale, have had gushing success. Another threat is alternative forms of energy, such as wind and solar, which may well challenge fossil fuels. Selling shares in Saudi Aramco could thus be intended to cash in before the “decarbonisation” of the economy starts to gain credibility. It would also fit with a trend that has started to transform the oil industry for the first time in half a century—denationalisation. Paul Stevens of Chatham House, a British think-tank, says a cadre of well-educated technocrats from oil-producing nations are wondering whether their national oil companies are “ripping us off”, through corruption or inefficiency. Brazil’s corruption-plagued Petrobras proves that public markets are no guarantee of probity. But as in Mexico, which is opening up its oil industry for the first time since 1938, many want to impose market-based checks and balances, so that no company can operate as a state within a state. If that happens to Saudi Aramco, the biggest of them all, it will have global repercussions.PUERTO RICO’S creditors have plenty to complain about, but they can’t claim they weren’t warned. Last June Alejandro García Padilla, the governor of America’s Caribbean outpost, announced that its $72 billion public debt was “unpayable”, and that a “unilateral and unplanned non-payment of obligations” loomed. Half a year later, he has fulfilled that threat: on January 4th the government missed a $36m coupon on paper issued by its Infrastructure Financing Authority. “There were those who said I was bluffing,” he says. “I told the truth. To avoid a new default, [bondholders] have to sit down and negotiate.” Unlike fiscal crises elsewhere, the decision did not set off pot-banging protests or queues at cashpoints. On the contrary, the governor was all smiles the next day as he welcomed children into La Fortaleza, his colonial-era palace in the capital of San Juan, for the eve of Three Kings’ Day, which Puerto Ricans (boricuas, as they call themselves) celebrate as much as Christmas. Plaza las Américas, the city’s mega-shopping mall, was packed as parents finished shopping for gifts to put under their children’s beds overnight, and waiting times at popular restaurants were over an hour. The contrast between the island’s dire public finances and its holiday spending binge was surreal, and impossible to sustain. Only in a territory as unconventionally governed as Puerto Rico could this through-the-looking-glass economy persist. America conquered the island from Spain in 1898 and granted its residents citizenship in 1917, just in time to draft 20,000 of them for the first world war. In 1952 the island became a self-governing “commonwealth”, subject to American law but excluded from federal income taxes and from voting representation in Washington. Federal investment and tax breaks helped Puerto Rico develop from a sugar-based economy to a pharmaceutical-manufacturing hub. But once producers like Ireland and Singapore began to compete and the tax preferences expired, the island did not develop a new comparative advantage. As part of the United States, Puerto Rico could not devalue its currency, and the national minimum wage inflated its labour costs. But being American offered benefits as well. Residents could move to the States to find work, and were eligible for federal welfare payments if they stayed. Meanwhile, the government could issue tax-exempt municipal bonds, prized by mainland investors. As a result, the economy slowly hollowed out. The population has fallen from 3.9m to 3.5m during the past decade, with young workers accounting for much of the exodus. Those who stayed tended either to depend on the state—as students, public employees, pensioners or recipients of federal largesse—or to fall into the sprawling underground economy and bustling drug trade. Candidates from across the political spectrum have won office by keeping the gravy train running: more than a third of Puerto Rican schoolchildren are classified as having special needs, inflating the teacher-to-pupil ratio, and the island’s health plan for the poor would be the envy of any American state. A paltry 40% of working-age boricuas are in the labour force, and just 57% of personal income in Puerto Rico comes from formal private jobs, compared with 76% for the 50 states, according to José Villamil, an economist. Investment has collapsed, from 27% of GNP in 2001 to 13% today. Yet retail sales have held steady since 2008. The only way to maintain consumption was via massive borrowing: during the past 15 years, the government’s nominal debt load has tripled. This system worked as long as mainland investors retained their appetite for Puerto Rico’s high-yielding bonds. But after Detroit went bust in 2013, municipal creditors fled to safety and the commonwealth lost market access. That forced Mr García Padilla to cut spending and raise taxes. The island’s only children’s hospital, whose budget has been cut by 14% in the past two years, lacks CT and MRI machines. Overall spending has dropped by 6.2% since 2013, while tax increases have raised revenues by 8%. This has exacerbated the island’s decade-long recession. The government’s audited 2014 financial statements are long overdue, but according to Mr Villamil GNP shrank 0.9% that year and a further 1.7% in 2015. The sharpest decline is forecast for 2017. “The numbers don’t add up in Puerto Rico’s books,” Mr García Padilla says. Only by reducing and delaying the government’s liabilities, he argues, can the island resume growth and generate enough tax revenue to maximise repayment to creditors. However, the commonwealth’s awkward status within the United States has stymied his efforts. If Puerto Rico were either an independent country or the 51st state, it could abrogate its central-government debt, because states cannot be sued in federal court. As an “unincorporated territory”, it may not enjoy this privilege. Similarly, in 1984 Congress excluded Puerto Rico from Chapter 9 of the federal bankruptcy code, which covers “instrumentalities” of states such as local governments and state-owned enterprises. In 2014 the territory passed its own version of Chapter 9, but it was struck down in federal court (though the Supreme Court is to hear its appeal). Mr García Padilla is desperate for Congress to change this. But the hedge and mutual funds that hold large swathes of its debt oppose the idea vigorously, and so far the legislature has failed to act. “The bottom line is our political status,” says Juan Torruella, a Puerto Rican federal judge who voted to reject the territory’s home-grown bankruptcy law. “Any way you put it, Puerto Rico is a colony. What happens in Puerto Rico is decided in Washington.” Unless and until the law changes, the government will keep juggling liabilities to stave off default. After 17 months of talks, the Puerto Rican power company recently struck a deal with its creditors. But with 18 different issuers and the treasury running dry, such an agreement will be hard to replicate at scale. To conserve cash, Mr García Padilla is taking his sweet time to pay tax refunds and public contractors. Guillermo Martínez of GM Group, which provides security guards, says $4.5m of his firm’s bills to the commonwealth are over 90 days past due. Just like its bondholders, the government has these suppliers over a barrel. “If we stop providing services, will they pay me, or the people who will replace me?”, he asks. “Puerto Rico has been good to us. We have to help the government—until we can’t afford it any more.” After exhausting such gambits, Puerto Rico is now resorting to payment prioritisation. In August it failed to pay a legally unenforceable “moral obligation” bond. And last month it “clawed back” rum taxes originally destined to pay infrastructure bonds in order to make good on its constitutionally guaranteed “general-obligation” bonds. That left the lower-ranked securities to default. Mr García Padilla says that if he must pick between servicing debt and paying police, nurses or teachers, he will choose the latter, which would set off a constitutional crisis. Without a reprieve from the federal government, a cascade of lawsuits appears inevitable. Fortunately, a solution could be forthcoming. The Treasury Department has proposed a mechanism that would allow a restructuring of the constitutionally guaranteed debt. Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House, has promised a “responsible solution” by March. What would be life-changing sums of money for the commonwealth are rounding errors in the federal budget. Rescuing Puerto Rico might prove a relatively cheap way to curry favour with Latino voters in this year’s congressional and presidential elections. And the Supreme Court may yet rule that state-owned companies can enter Chapter 9. Three Kings’ Day may have already passed. But Mr García Padilla has reason to hope that the camels will soon bring a belated gift.A new year celebration BARACK OBAMA began the new year, the last of his presidency, with a tearful plea for gun control. He explained that he was compelled to take action because Congress has failed to. Mr Obama announced executive actions that included a modest expansion of background checks and an exhortation to federal agencies to enforce existing laws. He was confident, he added, that Ronald Reagan would have supported the idea. Meanwhile, in Texas, some gun owners were exercising a newly acquired right: to carry firearms openly in public. The collision of these two events shows how the rival sides in the gun debate can see the same outrages—the shootings at San Bernardino being the most recent example—and draw opposing conclusions. Texas is now the largest state where gun owners can carry firearms openly. Since the mid-1990s, Texans who wanted to carry guns in public places have had to acquire concealed-weapons permits and hide their guns under layers of clothing (which can be sticky in a Texas summer). Thanks to a law passed by the legislature in 2015, gun owners with permits can now carry them undisguised. This was a popular move: in Texas, as elsewhere in America, the number of people who think the best response to gun violence and fear of terrorism is for upstanding citizens to arm themselves has risen in the past eight years, just as the sales of guns have risen with each rumour of restrictions on sales. In graphics: America's guns While the president was addressing the nation (his speech causing the share prices of some notable arms manufacturers to spike), Texas was at the tail-end of a week of confusion and distemper. Many of those celebrating their new gun rights had found themselves at odds with those enjoying their long-standing property rights. One of the provisions of the law is that business owners can ban open carrying on their own property, and many had decided to do so. This caused confusion in some places: H-E-B, a grocery chain, already had a policy of allowing shoppers to carry concealed weapons, but decided to keep openly toted guns out of its stores.   There is little evidence that such laws have a discernible effect on gun-crime rates, or even gun-ownership rates. Based on the number of concealed-carry licences that have been issued in Texas in the past 20 years, the number of people who support the right to carry vastly exceeds the number who actually want to do so themselves. That has not deterred Dan Patrick, the lieutenant-governor of Texas, who told Meet the Press that: “Everywhere that we have more citizens carrying guns, crime is less.” Several days later, Mr Patrick was among the Republicans attacking the president’s efforts to tweak gun laws. He dismissed Mr Obama’s announcement as “simply political posturing and more propaganda.” The hard edge of the pro-gun movement considers Mr Patrick a bit soft. Having won, it has already moved on and is now agitating for open carry with no permits or other limitations or, as its backers poetically call it, constitutional carry.“UNCLE SAM is rich enough to give us all a farm.” So runs the refrain of a popular song of the mid-19th century, when America’s government began dispensing homesteads in the newly opening West. Sometimes, impatiently, the settlers took the land, or its resources, without permission: their families’ sweat and guts entitled them to, and there was more than enough to go round. This outlook combined fierce individualism and egalitarianism; as Patty Limerick, of the University of Colorado, puts it, the pioneers were at once advancing civilisation and rejecting it. That romanticised past is the backdrop of a seemingly eccentric stand-off that began on January 2nd when armed militiamen seized the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge near Burns, Oregon. The pretext was the plight of two local ranchers, Dwight and Steven Hammond. Convicted for setting fires that ignited federal land and endangered firefighters, the pair were harshly resentenced and returned to prison after the government appealed against their original punishments. But the real issue is the land itself: specifically the fact that the federal government still controls so much of it in the West, including most of Idaho, Nevada, Oregon and Utah. For the occupiers, this territorial stranglehold unjustly restricts grazing, mining, logging and hunting; moreover, according to their quirky jurisprudence, it is unconstitutional (courts have tended to disagree). They want to force the feds out of the refuge—run by the US Fish & Wildlife Service—the county and ultimately the rest of the government’s Western holdings. In milder form, this cause is espoused by others: some western politicians also want territory to be transferred to the control of states, costly as that might prove for them. Before the mission, one of the crew, Jon Ritzheimer, released an almost-touching farewell video in which he vows to “die a free man”. Only almost, because, after all, the plan was to seize a nesting habitat for migratory birds in a remote, frigid desert. The mystique is further undercut by Mr Ritzheimer’s record of Muslim-baiting in his home state of Arizona. That points to another interpretation of such activism: less agrarian and romantic than a combustible form of anti-government extremism, fuelled by conspiracy theories and sharing ideological roots, and some personnel, with white supremacism. Both of these spread dramatically after Barack Obama’s election in 2008, says Ryan Lenz of the Southern Poverty Law Centre, an advocacy group. Antics such as those in Oregon may seem circus-like; but, says Tom Gorey of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM)—which, as the steward of much government land, is viewed by the zealots as an instrument of tyranny—they are “not funny by any stretch of the imagination” to the officials sometimes confronted by gun-toting fanatics. To some, the identity of the putschists’ leader, Ammon Bundy, suggests an even less grandiose motive: the desire to make a buck using public assets. Ammon is a son of Cliven Bundy, who in 2014 rallied militiamen to his ranch in Nevada after the BLM rounded up some of his cattle; he alienated some sympathisers by speculating that black people in America had been better off as slaves. The animals were grazing on public land; Mr Bundy had long refused to pay the (heavily subsidised) fees. On that occasion, with rifles trained on its officials, the BLM backed down. Critics think that capitulation was mistaken, though when paranoia and conspiracy-theorists are involved, it is hard to find an approach that does not either embolden them or—as in the siege at Waco, Texas in 1993—make them martyrs. So far the police and FBI have been patient in Oregon, too. Any private claim to personify the “We” in the constitution’s “We the people” is ominous. In the case of the Bundys and their sort, it is also spurious, and not only because locals in Oregon want to be rid of them. Other citizens—including, in an increasingly urban region, hikers and tourists—have claims to the public domain; so, for all the ranchers’ rage against environmentalists, do other species, such as, in Nevada, an imperilled tortoise. Clumsy as they can be, federal agencies can moderate these conflicts, and, indeed, save ranchers from themselves: part of their purpose has always been to prevent overgrazing. Gung-ho individualism is only compatible with egalitarianism, that old Western brew, when resources are infinite and the individuals are few. How the West has won Professions of divine guidance are similarly alarming: Ammon Bundy, whose family are Mormons, thinks he is doing “what the Lord asked me to”. And the idea that disputed lands should be “returned” to the people, as he maintains, is absurd. As John Faragher of Yale University says, they were conquered or acquired by the federal government in the first place, often from native Americans. Yet though these agitators may be crackpots, criminals, terrorists or all three—and only a handful are holed up in Oregon—it would be wrong entirely to dismiss them as unrepresentative. Through pulp novels, Buffalo Bill’s spectacles and the cinema, the ideal of the dauntless, self-reliant westerner quickly trickled east to inform the whole country’s self-perception. Likewise, these days, a conviction that America’s economy is rigged, distrust of the government and faith in the redemptive power of guns are hardly fringe opinions. The frontier may have shrunk, but rhetorically it is spreading. This is how the West has won.Two men in a boat ROBERT CRISS does not relish his role as Cassandra of the Mississippi. For years the geologist at Washington University in St Louis has warned policymakers about building houses and businesses on flood plains, walling off rivers with dams, locks, dykes and levees, disregarding the consequences of global warming on weather patterns and the use of outdated statistics for calculating the risk of a major flood. “The devil could not have come up with a better plot,” he says. Torrential rain started on December 26th and lasted three days, during which 9-14 inches (23-35cm) of rain deluged much of Missouri and parts of Illinois, according to the National Weather Service. Thousands had to evacuate their houses; businesses abandoned shops and stock. Amtrak stopped its local train service for four days and long stretches of the I-44 and I-55 interstate highways, as well as 200 state highways, were shut off. Twenty-five people died, mostly because they drove onto a swamped road and their cars flipped over. It will take months to rebuild what has been lost. Yet the bigger question is whether enough was done before the rains came to mitigate the impact of flooding. For Mr Criss the answer is no. He does not understand why the development of commercial and residential property was allowed on flood plains near St Louis, in particular as both the city and the county are losing population. The area should have been kept as farmland, which can absorb water, he argues, and should not be paved over: when the floods come, lost crops are far less costly than lost houses and businesses. Nicholas Pinter at the University of California, Davis adds that the Missouri and the Mississippi are flooding so severely because the middle stretch of the Mississippi (which joins the Missouri at St Louis) has more navigational dykes than any other river reach he knows. It has become a largely man-made construct that bears little resemblance to the river of 200 years ago, which changed shape with the volume of water flowing through it. Yet the statistics used by the Army Corps of Engineers and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to define flood risk are based on the average weather patterns, flooding and the changing shape of the river during the past 100 years. Unless the corps and FEMA update their statistical methods, they will continue to underestimate the flood risk for the region. Missouri policymakers have largely ignored the geologists’ warnings about floods. After the Great Flood in 1993, which destroyed around 100,000 homes and caused nearly $20 billion in damage along the Missouri and upper Mississippi, the Galloway Report, written by a group of experts appointed by the White House, called for federal flood-insurance programmes to discourage development in flood plains. It said that taxpayers should stop bailing out areas that flood regularly. And it recommended that the basins of the Missouri and Mississippi should be managed as one watershed. Very little of this has happened. “This misery will repeat itself,” predicts Mr Criss.Corridor patrol OFFICER Craig Davis reckons 2015 was a fairly peaceful year at Furr High School, on the hardscrabble east side of Houston. True, five of its pupils died violently, including the school’s first-pick quarterback, Michael Davis, who was murdered in a gang fight, and two schoolgirls who were killed in a bus crash. In the state that executes more people than any other, a recent old boy was also charged with three murders. Yet Mr Davis, one of the school’s two police officers, with a revolver, canister of pepper foam and a truncheon hanging from his belt, says he has known worse over his eight years at Furr: “It’s a tough place.” It was with violent schools like Furr in mind that Texas began stationing police officers in its schools in the early 1990s, which helped start a national trend. It proceeded to accelerate on the back of persistent concerns over law and order during the decade; in 1999, after 13 people were massacred at Columbine High School, in Colorado, the federal government launched a supportive funding programme, Cops in Schools. By 2007 an estimated 19,000 school policemen, known as School Resource Officers, were plodding the corridors of America’s schools, in addition to many regular police and private security officers. How many there are now is unclear; there has been little study of the phenomenon, a gap the Department of Education is struggling to fill. But there may be as many as ever, encouraged by yet more federal largesse in the form of a scheme launched under Barack Obama, in response to yet another school shooting, in Connecticut in 2012, in which 20 children were killed. Most American public high schools now have a permanent police presence. It is not clear why. Over the same 25-year period juvenile violent crime rose through the early 1990s but, like the overall crime rate, has since collapsed. Juvenile arrests are also at their lowest level for three decades and juvenile murders at a 30-year low. Gone, too, are excited apprehensions of a feral underclass of pre-teenage “superpredators”, a discredited phrase coined by John DiIulio, a Princeton political scientist. When asked in a national survey, in 2005, why they had brought police onto their campus, only 4% of school principals and the cops themselves cited violence as the main reason. About a quarter of the teachers instead cited media reports of violence elsewhere; a quarter of the cops said the school was unruly. The most popular response was “other”, a category that included the availability of federal funds (what school would not take free money?) or a belief that the policy had something to do with community policing. Preventing school shootings hardly registered; it is a rare sort of calamity, which, as it happens, the presence of armed officers does not prevent. There was a police officer at Columbine during its massacre. Moreover, such shootings tend to happen in schools dominated by middle-class whites, and according to researchers at the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), cops are far more likely to be placed in schools dominated by poor non-whites. The result, because police like to keep themselves busy, has been a disproportionately high number of arrests in such schools, pitching black and Hispanic juveniles into the criminal-justice system. Of 260,000 pupils referred to the police in the 2011-12 school year, 27% were black, though blacks represented only 16% of the student population. And those who become entangled in the justice system are likely to remain so. The opening of a juvenile criminal record—which may not be scrubbed clean until the age of 21—is an augury of further arrests, further convictions and eventual imprisonment, a spiral known to researchers as the “school-to-prison-pipeline”. “What started as an effort to keep guns out of schools has become a way of getting kids out of school,” says Harold Jordan of the ACLU. There are several reasons why the policy has gone bad, which vary from place to place. One is uncertainty about who is in charge, police or principals. Sometimes the cops answer to the school board, sometimes only to the police chief. Often the balance of power is contested in an ill-tempered battle between principals and police. The eagerness of weak, or ill-equipped, teachers to outsource classroom discipline to the cops is another part of the problem. This allegedly contributed to a recent much publicised case of police abuse in South Carolina, where a 16-year-old girl was thrown to the floor and dragged from the classroom by a police officer after she had refused to stop using her mobile phone. The internet has plenty more such horrors; including footage of a sobbing 5-year-old girl in Florida, handcuffed after she threw a tantrum. Draconian laws, inflexibly applied, make matters worse. Until recently in Texas it was a criminal offence to cause a rumpus on a school bus; in South Carolina, it still is one to cause a disturbance in school. In Pennsylvania, among other states, it is a criminal offence to take a weapon, including an almost-harmless pair of nail-scissors, into school, for which even a ten-year-old would face arrest. “It’s the stupidest, craziest thing I’ve ever seen, says Kevin Bethel, Philadelphia’s newly retired deputy-commissioner of police. After arrest—a fate until recently experienced by around 1,600 students in Philadelphia each year—the arrested child is taken to the district police headquarters for fingerprinting and processing, which takes about six hours, much of it spent in a prison cell. Minor offenders, including weeping ten-year-old scissors-carriers, are then let off with the sort of punishment a teacher might have demanded in the first place, such as lines or chores—though if they fail to carry these out, they may wind up in court, alongside more serious offenders. “What does it mean when we take a ten-year-old child into a cell block and we don’t really know why?” asks Mr Bethel. In graphics: America's guns There are patches of progress, however, typically where police chiefs, such as Mr Bethel, have responded to pressure from activists. In 2014 he instructed his officers to stop making arrests over relatively minor infringements, such as schoolyard fights or small amounts of cannabis possession, which accounted for around 60% of the total. Instead he developed an alternative procedure, whereby officers report the miscreants to their parents and then force them to attend lessons in how to behave. This brought arrests in Philadelphia schools down by 54% in 2014 and by another 60% in 2015. Mr Bethel’s aim was that there should be no more than 400 arrests each year. The biggest resistance to his changes comes from teachers. “I advised them I would no longer be their disciplinarian, and they were kind of shocked for a while,” he says. “Some balked, but many are getting on board.” Similar progress is apparent in Houston. As in Philadelphia, this has involved the local police chief responding constructively after his district’s juvenile-arrest record was highlighted by NGOs. When Bertie Simmons, Furr’s octogenarian principal, took charge in 2000, the school’s cops were running amok. “They were doing things with kids that you’d not believe,” she says. “Like grabbing them, shoving them against walls, cuffing them. I was appalled. You shouldn’t treat schoolkids like criminals.” Despite efforts to improve matters, by 2009 Houston was still arresting over 4,000 school students, more than any other school district in Texas. In 2013 Texas passed several laws to make that harder: it raised the qualifying age of some offences and, in effect, decriminalised relatively trifling ones, such as rowdy behaviour on buses. This, in turn, has helped the school district’s police chief, Robert Mock, to make his officers more forbearing; though spitting on the pavement remains a criminal offence, it rarely leads to arrests. Mr Mock says that the 210 school cops under his direction will probably carry out no more than 500 arrests a year—and Houston’s schools have grown no more violent as a result of this restraint. In a generally grim context, that is hopeful. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story gave officer Craig Davis the wrong name. Sorry.WITH its stone tower, Gothic arches and half-timbered walls, the Harvest Bible Chapel in Grimes, Iowa, would make a fine setting for an Agatha Christie murder. But on the religious right the church is notorious as the scene, in 2013, of a different crime. Back then the chapel was being used as a commercial wedding hall when its owners, Betty and Richard Odgaard, declined to host a gay marriage, citing their religious beliefs. Because the building was not legally a church at that point, the Odgaards fell foul of discrimination laws and—rather than celebrate gay unions—closed their wedding business. Today the building is a church again after its sale to a group of Christians—members of the 60m-strong community of Americans who call themselves born-again or evangelical Protestants. Its young pastor, Ryan Jorgenson, calls the Odgaards “heroes”. Like many evangelicals, he sees a pattern of bullying by secular foes and their allies in government. He worries about Christian employers having to fund health insurance that covers birth-control methods targeting fertilised eggs, and wonders if religious colleges will one day have to admit unrepentantly gay students. Mr Jorgenson enters 2016 in a fighting mood. Iowa is a good place to make such a stand. The Midwestern state hosts the first nominating contests of each presidential election cycle. Evangelical Christians typically make up 60% of the activists who brave ice and snow to attend Iowa’s Republican caucuses, which this year fall on February 1st. Most are also very conservative, and Iowa often hands victory to candidates who sound like fire-and-brimstone preachers. Yet their born-again champions seldom go on to win the nomination. A new book, “The Four Faces of the Republican Party” by Henry Olsen and Dante Scala, calculates that only about one in five Republican voters nationwide are “very conservative evangelicals”. In the past the religious right has also struggled to unite around a single, plausible candidate. This year, religious conservatives are determined to maximise their clout. Mr Jorgenson has done his bit. Like several other pastors he has endorsed Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a hardliner who has wooed Iowans with Bible-infused oratory and promises to fight for religious Americans. On January 5th Mr Jorgenson urged church-members to attend “Decision America”, a rally on the steps of the state capitol in Des Moines, launching a 50-state tour by the evangelist Franklin Graham, son of Billy. Mr Graham is no stranger to temporal power. He has backed ballot initiatives opposing gay marriage. He led prayers at the first inauguration of President George W. Bush. But this is the first election in which he will spend months urging Christians to register to vote. The country is in “big-time trouble”, he told a crowd of 2,600 hardy Iowans. The history of American Christianity is full of prayer meetings in which the faithful bewail a nation adrift, and vow—like the tribes of Israel before them—to stand fast in the face of tyrannical rulers. Mr Graham did not disappoint. As his audience murmured “Amens” and softly stamped feet against the cold, he recalled the prophet Nehemiah, who overcame exile and a wicked pagan king to return to Jerusalem and rebuild its walls. Mr Graham drew parallels with the present, telling Iowans: “The moral and political walls of our nation are crumbling.” Mr Graham will not be endorsing any politician or party. Other Christian bigwigs have held meetings with the aim of agreeing on a single candidate, to make best use of a primary calendar which sees early contests in a string of rural and southern states with lots of religious voters. A big Iowan evangelical organisation, the Family Leader, has endorsed Mr Cruz. So has James Dobson, the founder of Focus on the Family, a conservative pressure-group. Other candidates have not given up hope. Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon who has spent years on the Christian lecture circuit, has supporters—though fewer since his slight grasp of foreign policy was exposed. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida stresses his faith and stern views on abortion. Even Donald Trump, a much-married casino-builder, talks of his love for the Bible, and enjoys significant support from evangelicals. INFOGRAPHIC: Republican candidates court evangelical voters Steve Deace, a conservative talk-radio host from Iowa, suggests that evangelical Trump-voters are “frustrated with wimpy politicians and want a bad-ass”. Mr Deace describes listeners who want a president to stand up for religious liberty (or as he puts it, fight against the “rainbow jihad” of the gay-rights movement), and to prevent illegal immigration and terrorism. Mr Deace, a Cruz backer, asserts that religious conservatives in 2016 all want the same question answered: “Who is willing to fight?” Et in Iowa Yet even in Iowa, evangelicals are not monolithic. Jeff Dodge is a pastor at Cornerstone Church, a Southern Baptist mega-church in the college town of Ames. Mr Dodge is a conservative: he opposes abortion and would not conduct a gay marriage. But he is “frustrated” by pastors who endorse politicians and “froth” flocks up about issues like tax rates, about which the Bible has little to say. He puzzles over “Chicken Little” talk of persecution, noting that he preaches to 2,500 Christians each Sunday: “I don’t feel my culture is trying to muzzle me.” Most of all, church-members trust him as a guide to the Bible’s truths, he says: it would be presumptuous to offer his views as a private citizen. “I cringe” when candidates claim God’s support, he adds, noting that one of the ten commandments is: “Don’t take the name of the Lord in vain”. Born-again voters in the general election will be still more diverse: millions of evangelicals are black or from fast-growing Hispanic churches, and worry about government safety nets, poverty or immigrants’ rights as much as about abortion or gay weddings. Too many white evangelicals seem blind to that diversity, and sound like the chaplain corps of the Republican right. If they pick a champion who panders to that narrow identity, they will condemn themselves to irrelevance.
