IT WAS rowdy and disorganised. At one point it nearly degenerated into a brawl. But the opening on January 5th of Venezuela’s parliament, the first to be elected with an opposition majority in 17 years of autocratic rule, had the feel of a velvet revolution. The portraits of the late Hugo Chávez, the founder of the populist movement that still governs the country, and Simón Bolívar, the 19th-century liberator whom the chavistas claimed as inspiration, had been taken down. Speeches by opposition deputies, once routinely cut short by the bullying former president of the National Assembly, Diosdado Cabello, were heard in full. Dozens of police guards around the building leaned into their car radios to hear politicians rail against the authoritarian and incompetent rule of the current president, Nicolás Maduro. “This is a wake-up call,” said a soldier as he listened raptly to the proceedings.  The chavistas did not put up with the harangues for long. After less than an hour they walked out—in protest at supposed procedural errors by the new president of the assembly, Henry Ramos. Even then they could not escape interrogation. Parliament’s new masters had opened its doors to all journalists, not just pro-government ones as before. The normally cocky Mr Cabello, who led the walkout, looked distinctly uncomfortable when confronted by reporters who asked mildly testing questions on live television. Cilia Flores, Venezuela’s first lady, who is one of 54 chavistas in parliament, icily refused to answer one about two nephews who are facing narcotics charges in the United States.  Chavismo has been wounded, but it is far from defeated. Parliament aside, all the main institutions of government remain under its control. The setback to the regime has made it more authoritarian. Before parliament’s opening Venezuela’s Supreme Court had ruled that four of the incoming MPs from the state of Amazonas, three of them from the opposition Democratic Unity alliance (MUD), could not be sworn in. They are the subjects of investigations into possible electoral fraud. This ruling threw into doubt the two-thirds majority the MUD appeared to win in the election on December 6th. Such a “supermajority” would allow the opposition to begin the process of appointing and dismissing Supreme Court judges and to convene a convention to rewrite the constitution. The day after its opening parliament defiantly swore in the three MUD deputies, restoring the opposition’s two-thirds majority. Supreme weapon In the battle that now looms with parliament, the Supreme Court may become the regime’s main weapon. One of the last acts of the outgoing assembly was to stuff the court with 13 new pro-government judges. Mr Maduro has already suggested that all legislation that he disagrees with, including a proposed amnesty to secure the release of scores of political prisoners, will be deemed unconstitutional by the Supreme Court. “It is difficult to imagine that congress can have an institutional conflict against the Supreme Court and win,” says Luis Vicente León, a pollster.  The government may hope to provoke divisions within the MUD. Its representatives in the National Assembly are from a hotchpotch of 13 parties, united in their desire to defeat chavismo but often divided over the best means to do so. Mr Ramos, a cantankerous veteran from the Democratic Action party, which governed Venezuela before Chávez, was the choice of smaller parties within the MUD. They fear domination by the younger Justice First party, led by Henrique Capriles, who nearly won a presidential election in 2013. Mr Ramos is himself a divisive figure. Ahead of parliament’s opening session he confirmed that he would seek the constitutional removal of Mr Maduro from the presidency within six months, presumably by launching a referendum to recall him from office. Moderates in the coalition have resisted issuing such a clear challenge to the executive so soon. Time is working against the regime. The price of Venezuela’s heavy oil, virtually its only export, dipped to under $30 a barrel in December, its lowest since February 2004. Default on some of its $98 billion of foreign debt is “becoming hard to avoid,” says Barclays Bank. Over 2015 and 2016 the economy is likely to shrink by nearly 15%. Shortages of basic consumer goods will get worse. In the absence of official figures, analysts reckon that inflation is nearly 200%, the highest rate in the world. A decree by Mr Maduro, enacted before the new parliament opened, shows that the regime has little intention of doing anything new about the dire state of the economy. It strips the assembly of its right to appoint directors of the Central Bank, or even to question them. As the confrontation between president and parliament worsens, Venezuelans wonder what role the army will play. On the night of the parliamentary election in December, the country’s defence minister, Vladimir Padrino López, declared in an unscheduled appearance on state television that the army would “uphold the constitution”. Some analysts saw that as a warning to government hardliners to accept the results. The night before parliament opened, General Padrino López went public again. “The Bolivarian Armed Forces is not a means to subvert the constitutional order,” he tweeted, somewhat cryptically. The government’s eccentric claims about what is constitutional put the armed forces in an awkward position. “The military says it is going to defend the law, but what is the law?” wonders Mr León. Venezuela’s looming struggle is largely about the answer to that question.Mayor, and martyr POLITICS is a risky business in Mexico. Seven candidates in mid-term elections last June were murdered and 70 were attacked. In the past eight years, 40 mayors have been killed, says the National Federation of Municipalities. The latest murder is among the most shocking: on January 2nd Gisela Mota, mayor of Temixco, about 85km (53 miles) south of Mexico City, was killed in her home by several assassins just one day after her inauguration. It is fairly clear who killed Ms Mota, but not why. The suspects are thought to have links to Los Rojos, a drug gang. Police killed two and captured three. Ms Mota, a former congresswoman from the left-wing Party of the Democratic Revolution, had vowed to fight drug trafficking. Temixco is an important way-station on one of the main routes for moving drugs to Mexico City. But after only a day in office she hardly had time to threaten the region’s drug dealers. Graco Ramírez, the governor of Morelos, the state to which Temixco belongs, offers a different theory. He thinks Ms Mota was killed because she supported the state’s takeover of local policing, a policy known as mando único (single command). Mexico has 2,000 local police forces, in addition to state and federal constabularies. Many of them are short of funds and badly managed. Some, and the mayors who run them, are in league with the criminals. The state takeover of local policing was the big crime-fighting idea that Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, came up with after the disappearance in 2014 of 43 students in Iguala in the southern state of Guerrero. That appears to have been the work of local police acting in concert with a drug gang. The town’s ex-mayor has been charged with engaging in organised crime. Advocates of mando único claim that states can modernise police forces, co-ordinate them better and give them more money. Mayors will face less risk if they are not directly involved in police work. And the corrupt ones will have less opportunity to subvert it. The day after Ms Mota’s murder Mr Ramírez imposed mando único on 15 municipalities, saying the measure was necessary to keep order. If Ms Mota was killed by gangsters as punishment for supporting mando único, the murder triggered the action they sought to prevent. Critics of the policy say there is no proof that it modernises policing. Forces under state command are not immune to corruption. Two ex-governors of the state of Tamaulipas are wanted by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration. Before Ms Mota was slain, other mayors seemed to face greater risks. In the past decade more have been killed in the poor southern states of Michoacán and Oaxaca than anywhere else. Several mayors in northern Mexico, where drugs are dispatched to the United States, are afraid to work in the towns that elected them, says Bernardo Gómez of Misiones Regionales de Seguridad, a security consultancy. Mando único may offer them less protection than more and better bodyguards would. When a mayor is murdered, police should pursue not just the killers but their bosses, says Alejandro Hope, a security analyst. “If you kill a mayor and nothing happens, the next mayor will just give in.”CANADIANS obsessively compare their country with a certain neighbouring superpower. Often, the contrast is reassuring. Few Canadians would want the United States’ lax gun laws or its ridiculously expensive health care. Economic comparisons are usually more sobering. Canadians are less rich than Americans and have fewer globally famous brands. Silicon Valley exports high-tech disruption; Alberta’s tar sands produce pollution. For Canadians who feel economically inferior, a recent report comparing millennials on both sides of the border had cheering news. Canadians born in the 1980s are better off than their American peers. The study by TD Bank, called “Canadian and US Millennials: One of These Is Not Like the Other”, was headline news when it was published in December. Canadians aged 25 to 34 are more likely to have jobs than Americans of the same age (nearly 80% are employed, compared with less than 75% of Americans). American millennials are worse off than their compatriots from Generation X (the cohort that came just before them). In Canada millennials’ household incomes are 16% higher. Just over half are homeowners, compared with 36% in the United States. Much of the millennial advantage can be traced to Canadian paternalism—that of the state and that of the youngsters’ indulgent parents. Canada’s public universities charge much lower tuition fees than their largely private American rivals, so students graduate with less debt. More important is the contribution of millennial women, whose employment rate is seven percentage points higher than that of their American sisters. Their greater willingness to work has a lot to do with laws that oblige employers to give new parents paid leave of up to 50 weeks. The United States, by contrast, is one of the few countries that do not mandate paid maternity leave. Canada avoided the housing-market crash that struck the United States in the late 2000s, thanks to prudent banking regulation. That enabled parents to help their children buy their first homes. But this points to another factor, which is less cause for self-congratulation: a big part of Canadian millennials’ wealth is explained by the barely interrupted rise in house prices. Although banks are still prudent, low interest rates have encouraged house-buying and prices are reaching scary levels. If they drop, so will millennials’ spirits.  UNDETERRED by the rain, the crowd leaps to its feet shouting “We’re going to win” in Taiwanese as their presidential candidate, Tsai Ing-wen, begins her stump speech. Some rattle piggy banks to show that their party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), relies on, and serves, the little guy—as opposed to the ruling Kuomintang (KMT), backed by businesses and fat cats and one of the world’s richest political institutions. Taiwan’s voters go to the polls on January 16th in what is likely to prove a momentous election both for the domestic politics on the island and for its relations with the Communist government in China that claims sovereignty over it. Eight years of uneasy truce across the Taiwan Strait are coming to an end. Since taking office in 2008, the outgoing president, Ma Ying-jeou, has engineered the deepest rapprochement between Taiwan and China ever seen, signing an unprecedented 23 pacts with the mainland, including a partial free-trade agreement. It culminated in an unprecedented meeting in November between Mr Ma and Xi Jinping, China’s president, in Singapore. But if the rapprochement under Mr Ma was a test of whether closer ties would help China’s long-term goal of peaceful unification, it failed. For the past six months Ms Tsai, whose party leans towards formal independence for Taiwan, has been miles ahead in the polls, with the support of 40-45% of voters. The KMT’s Eric Chu has 20-25% and another candidate, James Soong, a former KMT heavyweight, about 15%. Taiwanese polls can be unreliable, and many voters are undecided. But if Mr Chu were to win, it would be a shock. Taiwan elects its parliament, the Legislative Yuan, on the same day. That race is closer. But the DPP’s secretary-general, Joseph Wu, thinks his party can win it too, either outright or in coalition with two smaller parties—and the polls suggest he may be right. If so, it would be the first time any party other than the KMT has controlled the country’s legislature since the KMT fled to the island at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949. The election result will have regional consequences, but the campaign itself is being fought on livelihood issues. The economy appears to have grown by only 1% in 2015, less than in 2014. Taiwan is doing worse than other export-oriented Asian economies such as South Korea. Salaries are stagnant, youth unemployment is up and home ownership is beyond the reach of many. One study found that the capital, Taipei, has become one of the world’s costliest cities relative to income, with the ratio of median house prices to median household income rising from 8.9 in 2005 to 15.7 in 2014—nearly twice the level of London. Concerns like these have dented the KMT’s reputation for economic competence. Self-inflicted wounds have not helped either. Most of the KMT’s bigwigs refused to run for president, fearing defeat. So its chairman, Eric Chu, put forward Hung Hsiu-chu, whose pro-China views proved so extreme that they nearly split the party. Mr Chu ditched her just months before the poll and ran for president himself. Ms Hung’s backers, many of them old-guard KMT voters, may abstain in protest. The party which for decades has dominated politics faces humiliation. That would have profound implications for China. For years, the Chinese Communist Party’s policy towards Taiwan has been based on patience and economic integration. But the election campaign suggests that integration is a liability and that time may not be on China’s side. In 1992, according to the Election Studies Centre at National Chengchi University in Taipei, 18% of respondents identified themselves as Taiwanese only. A further 46% thought of themselves as both Taiwanese and Chinese. Today 59% call themselves Taiwanese, while 34% identify as both—ie, very few consider themselves Chinese first and foremost. Patience doesn’t pay Among 20- to 29-year-olds, three-quarters think of themselves as Taiwanese. For them China is a foreign country, and the political ripples of this change are now being felt. In early 2014 students occupied parliament for three weeks in a protest against a proposed services deal with China. This proved to be a turning point: the KMT went on to be thrashed in municipal elections in late 2014. Some of the student leaders have formed their own party to contest the legislative election, joining 17 other groups and 556 candidates, who range from a heavy-metal front man to a former triad crime boss. The last time Taiwan chose a DPP president, Chen Shui-bian, in 2000, cross-strait tensions escalated. Given China’s increasing assertiveness in the region under Mr Xi, things could be even more dangerous now. China has been piling pressure on Ms Tsai. Mr Xi says he wants a “final resolution” of differences over Taiwan, adding that this is not something to leave for the next generation. China is demanding that Ms Tsai approve the “1992 consensus”, a formula by which China and the KMT agreed there was only one China—but disagreed about what that meant in practice. Ms Tsai has long said no such consensus exists, though when asked about it in a presidential debate, she called it “one option”. Ms Tsai is a very different figure from Mr Chen, who delighted in provoking China (and was later jailed for corruption). She is a low-key, English-educated lawyer schooled in international trade rather than in the rhetoric of Taiwanese nationalism. She has gone out of her way to assure China and America, Taiwan’s guarantor, that she backs the status quo and will be cautious. Many of her proposals, such as that Taiwan should expand its soft power through non-governmental organisations, seem designed to be uncontroversial. If her party takes control of the legislature, that would remove a source of instability: conflict with lawmakers made Mr Chen’s presidency even more unpredictable than it otherwise would have been. Yet whatever Ms Tsai’s intentions, a lot could go wrong. Taiwanese politics is famously raucous, and the DPP’s radicals seeking formal independence might yet cause problems. Mr Xi, in turn, could come under pressure from military diehards arguing that China has been too patient. In one of the last foreign-policy vestiges of the “one China” idea, China and Taiwan have similar claims in the South China Sea, a nerve-racking part of the globe. If a new government in Taiwan starts tinkering with its stance on the sea, China might easily take offence. The election of an independence-leaning president comes at a dangerous moment.Next for the chopping block: Tsukiji itself ON JANUARY 5th, in a pre-dawn ritual going back decades, a handbell rang to mark the year’s first auction at Tsukiji, Tokyo’s sprawling fish market. The star attraction was a glistening 200kg tuna, sold to a sushi restaurant chain for ¥14m ($118,000). But the sale was tinged with nostalgia and even bitterness. This time next year the wholesale market, the world’s busiest, will be gone. Squeezed between the Sumida river and the Ginza shopping district, Tsukiji is creaking at the seams. Some 60,000 people work under its leaky roof, and hundreds of forklifts, carrying everything from sea urchins to whale meat, careen across bumpy floors. The site’s owner, the city government, wants it moved. That is unpopular. Traders resent being yanked to a sterile new site to the south. The new market is being built on a wharf whose soil is contaminated by the toxic effluent from a former gasworks. The clean-up and negotiations delayed the move for over a decade. The final blow was Tokyo’s successful bid to host the 2020 Olympics. A new traffic artery will cut through Tsukiji, transporting visitors to the games’ venues. Part of the site will become a temporary press centre, says Yutaka Maeyasui, the executive in charge of shifting the market. Our time is up, he says, glancing around his decrepit office. The site has become too small, old and crowded. An earthquake could bring the roof down. Many traders below Mr Maeyasui’s office belong to families that have been here since the market opened in the 1930s, after the Great Kanto earthquake of 1923 levelled its predecessor. “You won’t find anyone here who supports the relocation,” says Chieko Oyoshi, who runs the tuna business her grandfather founded. Big supermarket chains and wholesalers already eat into her business by dealing directly with the ports and fish farms that supply Tsukiji. The move will kill whatever trade is left, she laments. One of the last links to the city’s mercantile past, Tsukiji has changed little in decades. Men lick pencil stubs before writing on scraps of paper. A new computer would die of loneliness. One of the few modern devices is a digital clock counting down the days till November, when most of the activity will fall silent, along with Tsukiji’s beautiful bedlam.Police patrol, Helmand-style IT IS just over a year since NATO formally ended its combat mission in Afghanistan. It left behind 13,000-odd soldiers to “train, advise and assist” Afghan security forces taking the lead in the fight against the Taliban. Of the foreign troops, America has provided about half (with a further 3,000 deployed on counter-terrorism operations against what remains of al-Qaeda). Twelve months on, the results of the so-called “transition” look grim. Both Afghanistan’s political condition and its security have sharply deteriorated. Determined to exploit the departure of Western forces, in 2015 the Taliban maintained their usual spring offensive much longer into the winter than in the past. The insurgents now control more territory than at any time since American forces kicked the Taliban out of power in 2001. Among recent blows were the short-lived but still shocking fall of the northern city of Kunduz to the Taliban in September; a raid last month on the south’s Kandahar airport, one of the most heavily defended bases in the country, that killed at least 50 people; and the deaths of six Americans near Bagram air base on December 21st. Worst of all has been the steady erosion of government control in Helmand province in the south. It had been recaptured from the Taliban in 2009-11, at considerable cost, including American and British casualties. Recently the Taliban have closed in from the south and north towards the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah. Of 13 districts in Helmand, five, including the key districts of Musa Qala and Sangin, are now controlled by the Taliban, with another five or more being contested. This week American special forces in the Nad Ali district came under heavy fire; one man was killed. Retaking Helmand, the heart of Afghanistan’s opium country, is a priority for the Taliban, who desperately want the money that drug-peddling generates. Out of nearly 400 districts across Afghanistan, the Taliban controls a tenth and contests another tenth. The growing intensity of the fighting is taking its toll on the 352,000-strong Afghan army and police. Last year they sustained 28% more losses than in 2014: 16,000 casualties, about 7,000 of them fatal. Some 6,500 civilians are also thought to have died. Insurgent casualties have shot up, too. The current Taliban fighting strength is believed to be between 40,000 and 60,000. The backdrop to the escalating violence is a largely dysfunctional government in Kabul, the failure of diplomatic attempts last year to start a peace process, splits within the Taliban and America’s lack of a long-term strategy for Afghanistan. The national-unity government that emerged 15 months ago has in many ways been an improvement on its predecessor, led by the erratic Hamid Karzai. President Ashraf Ghani and the “chief executive”, Abdullah Abdullah, the runner-up in a disputed election, get on reasonably well. In security matters, they welcome Western support. At home they have taken useful steps to curb corruption. But the fight for key government posts among rival supporters and ethnic groups has meant rudderless ministries and provinces without governors. Not least, the post of permanent defence minister still remains vacant. In government, a division appears to be opening up over Mr Ghani’s attempts to engage Pakistan. Many Afghans have long considered their southern neighbour to be a destabilising force. Even today it plays host to Taliban leaders. Mr Ghani wants Pakistan to help push the Taliban to the negotiating table, thus paving the way for peace and economic reconstruction. But after he received red-carpet treatment in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, in early December, his chief of the national security directorate resigned in disgust (though possibly before he was pushed out for a string of security failures). A new “Protection and Stability Council”, headed by a former warlord, Abdul Rasoul Sayyaf, has been set up as a rallying point against Mr Ghani’s emollience towards Pakistan. After Mullah Omar Yet despite promises from the Pakistani prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, and the powerful head of the army, General Raheel Sharif, that they will urge the Taliban to kill less and negotiate more, there is scant sign of progress. That may be because the spymasters of Pakistan’s “deep state” still prefer a weak, chaotic Afghanistan, or because Pakistan, itself locked in an existential fight with the Taliban’s sister outfit, the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan, may not have the control it once had. Meanwhile, a power struggle has been under way within the Afghan Taliban. When Mr Ghani’s government declared last July that the Taliban’s leader, Mullah Omar, had died in a Karachi hospital over two years earlier, it triggered a challenge to the authority of Mullah Omar’s deputy and de facto successor, Mullah Akhtar Mansour. While Omar was believed to be still alive, Mullah Mansour was able to crush dissent, while reportedly earning a fortune from the opium trade. But his part in the cover-up of the leader’s death, his perceived closeness to Pakistan and his interest in opening up a dialogue with the Afghan government before the news about Omar broke have all undermined his legitimacy. Others have challenged his leadership, while in some pockets Islamic State (IS) has been able to poach Taliban fighters and take root. To show that he is neither going soft on the government in Kabul nor a tool of Pakistan’s military spy agency, Mullah Mansour has had to redouble the ferocity of the insurgency. And so long as the Taliban think they are winning, they have no incentive to talk peace. Yet even after the departure in the past year of what Michael O’Hanlon of the Brookings Institution in Washington calls 100,000 of “the world’s best soldiers”, the Taliban have not made the breakthrough they were hoping for. Their recent victories in Helmand have been small. They rule over a mere 5% more of the country’s population than before. They threaten few cities of any size. And despite heavy losses, Afghan forces are mostly holding their own. It is, says Mr O’Hanlon, a “stalemate with a slight edge to the insurgency”. Meanwhile, President Barack Obama has been forced to break his ill-considered promise to remove all American troops from Afghanistan by the end of the year. Yet, to the dismay of his military advisers, he is still talking about cutting the force there to 5,500 before he leaves office in January 2017. That decision too is quite likely to be reversed. Mr Obama needs to consider how to help the Afghan government get through what is certain to be another tough year. He should give Afghan forces air support of the kind which, in Iraq, government forces are getting in the fight against IS. And, Mr O’Hanlon says, he should expand the training mission by providing another 3,000 mentors to work with the army. One reason for the setbacks in Helmand province is that there are too few trainers. What America cannot do is to improve the atrocious local governance that creates the grievances the Taliban exploit. At best, stabilising the security situation will allow more time for the well-intentioned Mr Ghani and Mr Abdullah to get their act together. That may seem a faint hope, but it is much better than the alternatives.IN THE recent history of relations between India and Pakistan, it has seemed an immutable law: that any apparent political breakthrough will be followed by a terrorist atrocity in India blamed on agents of the Pakistani state. The bloodiest of these—a murderous assault on Mumbai in 2008—brought a chill that has yet to thaw. And just last July, after India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, had met his Pakistani counterpart, Nawaz Sharif, at a regional summit in Russia and agreed that their national-security advisers should hold talks, terrorists attacked a police station in the Indian state of Punjab.    The latest turn in this cycle is remarkable both for the drama of the breakthrough and for the daring of the terrorist response. On December 25th Mr Modi, en route from Kabul to Delhi, made an impromptu stopover in Lahore in Pakistan. He dropped in on Mr Sharif, who was celebrating both his own birthday and his granddaughter’s wedding. No Indian prime minister had set foot in Pakistan since 2004, and much hugging, hand-holding and bonhomie ensued. It formed part of a series of diplomatic contacts intended to be followed by the launch of a “comprehensive bilateral dialogue”, with the details to be discussed at a meeting on January 15th in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, between the two countries’ most senior diplomats. That meeting is now in jeopardy. On January 2nd six gunmen in Indian army uniforms infiltrated a big Indian air base at Pathankot, near the Pakistani border, again in Punjab. Killing them all took over three days and cost seven Indian soldiers their lives. Indian analysts saw the hands of Pakistan-based Islamist groups with ties to the Inter-Services Intelligence, the ISI, Pakistan’s military spy agency. On January 3rd India suffered another attack, on its consulate in the city of Mazar-e-Sharif in Afghanistan. Again, many Indians blamed groups friendly with the ISI. The talks this month would in effect resurrect a “composite dialogue” pursued fitfully under Mr Modi’s predecessor, Manmohan Singh. Mr Modi presents himself as a very different sort of statesman from Mr Singh, who was cerebral, bureaucratic and mild-mannered to the point of diffidence. Mr Modi is both a chest-thumping nationalist and a compulsive hugger and hand-holder, whose diplomacy emphasises, quite literally, the personal touch. When in opposition, Mr Modi and his colleagues were fierce critics of Mr Singh’s alleged softness towards Pakistan. But in office he gives the impression of having inherited one of Mr Singh’s foreign-policy ambitions: to go down in history as the leader who made lasting peace with India’s neighbour. Mr Modi has boasted of “engaging Pakistan to try and turn the course of history”. Like Mr Singh, however, he now has to deal with the propensity of parts of the Pakistani state to dabble in terrorism as a way of disrupting talks or of furthering their own agenda. The United Jihad Council, an umbrella for militant groups fighting Indian rule of part of the divided and disputed state of Kashmir, said that it had organised the Pathankot attack. Many commentators were sceptical, blaming instead Jaish-e-Muhammad, a notionally banned Pakistan-based outfit nurtured by the ISI to harass India. It has a history of spectacular attacks, including one on Parliament in Delhi in 2001 that brought India and Pakistan to the brink of war. It was also guilty of the kidnapping and murder in 2002 of Daniel Pearl, an American journalist, and in 2003 even tried to blow up Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan’s military dictator. Yet its leader, Masood Azhar, is a free man. The fact that he and other leaders of terrorist groups are not in detention is proof, to India, of official Pakistani connivance in terrorism against it. It is Pakistan’s army, not Mr Sharif, that sets the country’s foreign and security policy. Yet under its present chief, General Raheel Sharif (no relation to the prime minister), it seems to have realised that it is not India that poses an existential threat to Pakistan; rather the greatest danger stems from the militant groups it has fostered itself to wage proxy wars in Kashmir and Afghanistan. To focus on quelling the Pakistani Taliban, in its strongholds in Pakistan’s western, Afghan borderlands, the army, too, has an interest in peace with India and a stable eastern front. Yet it is hard to imagine that extremists can cook up and execute elaborate plans such as the Pathankot attack without some level of official help. This suggests either that General Sharif is playing a double game, and that the army still wants to prevent rapprochement with India; or, perhaps, that the army and the ISI are internally divided. Our interactive map demonstrates how the territorial claims of India, Pakistan and China would change the shape of South Asia Now Mr Modi faces a dilemma familiar to Mr Singh and his predecessors. To proceed with talks in the face of such provocations looks weak and may encourage others. Yet conventional military options are limited, and nuclear ones unthinkable. And to call off dialogue gives the terrorists what they want. Not much to talk about In fact, initial reactions by Mr Modi and his colleagues to Pathankot were restrained. Mr Modi blamed not Pakistan but “enemies of humanity”. The foreign-secretary talks were not called off at once. Maybe Mr Modi calculated that India had more to gain internationally from appearing accommodating than from acting the victim, and that the domestic political cost would be small—after all, he is known as a “Hindu nationalist” who will not yield to Muslim-majority Pakistan. His political allies still talk about the eventual “unification” of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Yet all that is at stake at the moment is, in effect, talks about talks. Mr Modi, with his impeccable patriotic credentials, can make the concessions needed to hold them. But nobody expects issues festering since India’s partition in 1947—notably the status of Indian-administered, Muslim-majority Kashmir, which at times seemed tantalisingly close to resolution under Mr Singh—to be solved soon. Hard as it is, getting back to the table is the easy part. DISCRETION is not a trait often associated with the glitzy shopfronts of Hong Kong’s Causeway Bay, but the low-key entrance to a small bookshop belies the store’s recent notoriety. Tucked between a chemist and a clothes shop, Causeway Bay Books (pictured) has become the centre of a mystery involving alleged kidnappings by Chinese secret agents, and of a fierce debate in Hong Kong about the former British colony’s autonomy under Chinese rule. The door to the shop, up two flights of stairs, is now locked. The trickle of people going up are journalists and passers-by curious for news about five men connected with the shop who have disappeared in recent months. Many Hong Kongers fear that agents from China’s mainland may have been involved, and that the men were targeted because of the shop’s gossipy books. Titles recently on sale include “The Collapse of [President] Xi Jinping in 2017” and “Xi Jinping and the Elders: War at the Top”. When China took Hong Kong back from Britain in 1997, it agreed to give the territory a “high degree of autonomy”. Outspoken critics of the Communist Party remained free to air their views without fear of being “disappeared” by police, as commonly happens to their counterparts on the mainland. Hence huge public interest in this case. “The midnight knock on the door is not something we have had to worry about in Hong Kong,” wrote a columnist in the territory’s leading English-language newspaper, the South China Morning Post (recently bought by a mainland businessman). “But if we do now, that would be the end of our way of life.” Worries about skulduggery by the mainland’s agents have been growing since October, when four of the men disappeared. One of them was Gui Minhai, the owner of Mighty Current, a publishing house which controls the shop. Mr Gui, a Swedish citizen of Chinese birth, went missing while staying in Thailand. Three members of the shop’s staff—Lam Wing-kei, Lui Bo and Cheung Jiping—disappeared during visits to China’s mainland. Ominous clues But it was the disappearance of Lee Bo, a shareholder in the shop, that aroused the biggest concern because it occurred in Hong Kong itself. Mr Lee, who is a British citizen, failed to return home after visiting his warehouse on December 30th. His wife told a television news channel that Mr Lee had later telephoned her to say that he was “assisting in investigations” relating to the other disappearances. She said he had sounded harried, and, unusually for him, had spoken in Mandarin—the official language of mainland China—rather than in Hong Kong’s Cantonese tongue. Mrs Lee said her husband had called from Shenzhen, a mainland city adjoining Hong Kong. Yet police in Hong Kong said they had found no record of him having crossed the border. Mr Lee did not take his mainland travel permit, his wife said. The authorities in Beijing have done little to dampen speculation. Wang Yi, the foreign minister, told journalists that Mr Lee was “first and foremost a Chinese citizen”—implying that Mr Wang’s British counterpart, Philip Hammond, who happened to be visiting China this week, had no right to poke his nose in (Mr Hammond said British diplomats had “urgently inquired” about Mr Lee’s whereabouts). A newspaper published in Beijing, Global Times, accused the bookshop of selling works that “viciously attacked” the mainland’s politics and said Mr Lee was “well aware” of the “harm” these books were causing across the border. “Hong Kong cannot be a special base for hostile forces to carry out activities [aimed at] subverting the country’s political system,” it said. Officials in Beijing have long worried about Hong Kong’s role as a safe haven for outspoken critics of the Communist Party, and those who try to expose its secretive inner workings. There is speculation that the mainland authorities may have finally lost patience having got wind of reported plans by Mighty Current to publish a book about President Xi’s private life. Even the Hong Kong authorities—usually reluctant to hint at any disagreement with the mainland—are sounding a bit anxious. On January 4th the chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, told a hastily arranged press conference that any unauthorised encroachment by mainland agents would be an “unacceptable” breach of the Basic Law, the territory’s mini-constitution. But he said there was “no indication” of outside involvement in the case. On January 5th a Taiwanese news agency published a faxed letter purportedly from Mr Lee saying everything was “normal” and that he had gone to the mainland “using his own method”. His wife said the letter appeared genuine, and that she had withdrawn her request for police help in finding her husband. Many commentators believe that the letter was written under duress, however, and that it hinted at the abnormality of his crossing into the mainland. Mr Leung said investigations would continue into Mr Lee’s case. Mr Leung’s popularity has already badly suffered as a result of his endorsement of the mainland government’s refusal to grant full democracy in Hong Kong. He would risk even greater opprobrium if it became evident that he was turning a blind eye to mainland snatch-squads. Despite his efforts, he will find it hard to dispel the territory’s fears. WHATEVER image you may have of the reformists hoping to shake up China’s creaking economic system, it is probably not one of octogenarians who fiddle with their hearing aids and take afternoon naps. But that is a fair description of three of the country’s loudest voices for change: Mr Market, Mr Shareholding and the most radical of all, the liberal. With growth slowing, the stockmarket once again in trouble and financial risks looking more ominous, their diagnoses of the economy, born of decades of experience, are sobering. Wu Jinglian, Li Yining and Mao Yushi—their real names—were born within two years of each other in 1929 and 1930 in Nanjing, then China’s capital. Whether it was that or pure coincidence, all three grew up to demand an end to Soviet-style central planning and to propose, to varying degrees, capitalism in its place. Their influence has waned with age, but their powers of analysis remain sharp. And they do not much like what they see. Mr Wu is in some ways the most important of the group. He advised the government from the earliest years of China’s “reform and opening” in the 1980s, through the 1990s when the great China boom got under way (see timeline). He proposed that the Communist Party should declare China a “socialist market economy”, a twist of words (and a hugely controversial one—conservatives abhorred any positive mention of markets) that opened the door to private enterprise. But Mr Market, as he came to be called, thinks this kind of linguistic ruse has outlived its usefulness. Imprecise concepts have led to flawed actions, he warns. Though the private sector has flourished over the past couple of decades, the state still looms large, controlling financial flows and acting as gatekeeper for virtually all important decisions, from land deals to mergers. “Even a low-level bureaucrat can decide the life or death of a company. You need to listen to the party,” says Mr Wu, who now teaches at the China Europe International Business School in Beijing. Mr Wu notes contradictions in the official blueprint for reforming state-owned firms. The party promises to empower their boards, but still wants to retain authority over the appointment of top executives. “If you can’t solve this problem, it will be very difficult to develop effective corporate governance,” he says. Mr Wu argues that political change is now needed to shore up the economy: the government must stop meddling in markets and instead focus on developing the rule of law. Holding up a copy of his recent book, he chuckles softly. “All my ideas are in here. No one pays them much attention.” Getting heard is less of a problem these days for Li Yining, who has spent his entire academic career at Peking University. His former pupils include Li Keqiang, China’s prime minister. His big idea in the 1980s was that selling partial stakes in state-owned companies to the public would improve their performance—hence his nickname, Mr Shareholding. The party eventually took his advice, though the companies remain hugely inefficient. In diagnosing the problems of today, Li Yining is blunt: the previous few years of ultra-high-speed growth “did not accord with economic laws”. China wasted natural resources, damaged its environment, piled up excess capacity and missed opportunities to fix its economic model. Yet perhaps because of his connections to those in power, Mr Li is by far the most sanguine of the old guard of reformers. “The new normal”—President Xi Jinping’s favourite economic slogan—is shifting the economy in the right direction, by aiming for lower growth and structural changes. China's growth is slowing. A detailed look at what is behind the slowdown Mao Yushi disagrees. And unlike many economists cowed by a frostier political climate, he is unafraid to say so. Mr Mao started his career in the railway system, including a spell driving trains, before retraining as an economist in the 1970s. Always on the margins of Chinese academia, he founded the Beijing-based Unirule Institute of Economics in 1993, an independent think-tank (a rarity in China). He champions deregulation and courts controversy in his criticism of Mao Zedong’s disastrous rule. Some diehard Maoists call the softly spoken economist “Mao Yu-shit” online, playing on a homonym of his name. In Mr Mao’s view it is already too late for the economy. China has too many empty homes and its banks have too much bad debt. “A crisis cannot be averted,” he says. Mr Mao allows himself some optimism, however. The young generation is educated and open-minded. The waste of capital and resources of recent years implies that China still has good potential for growth, if it can operate more efficiently. But he believes that Mr Xi, while espousing reform, is strengthening the state’s economic grip. “He has the power and the determination to fix problems, but in many cases he does not properly understand the problems,” says Mr Mao. Such unvarnished, open criticism of Mr Xi is rare in China these days. Speaking in the living room of his apartment, its walls stacked high with books and yellowing newspapers, Mr Mao says that his age and experience give him, and the other elderly reformists, a bit of leeway. “If it was someone else speaking, they would probably be arrested. But to me, the government is polite.” If only it would pay more heed to the elders’ advice, too.“I AM the free and fearless. I am secrets that never die. I am the voice of those who will not bow…” The voice in question, raised in song amid the crowds packing Avenue Bourguiba, a promenade in Tunis, at the beginning of 2011, was that of Emel Mathlouthi. For a moment of calm in a month of clamour, she gave voice to the aspirations of hundreds of thousands of her compatriots. On January 14th those protesters forced Zein al Abidine Ben Ali, Tunisia’s dictator for the previous quarter-century, from office. What followed was not easy. Terrorism hindered both economic progress and deeper political reform. But in 2015 the country became the first Arab state ever to be judged fully “free” by Freedom House, an American monitor of civil liberties, and it moved up a record 32 places among countries vetted by the Vienna-based Democracy Ranking Association. In December Ms Mathlouthi sang before another spellbound audience—this time in Oslo, as part of celebrations surrounding the award of the Nobel peace prize to four civil-society groups that shepherded in the new constitution of 2014.    Sadly, that outcome remains a stark anomaly. There were six Arab countries in which massive peaceful protests called for hated rulers to go in the spring of 2011. None of the other uprisings came to a happy end. Libya and Yemen have imploded, their central states replaced in whole or part by warring militias, some backed by foreign powers, some flying the flags of al-Qaeda or Islamic State. Egypt and the island kingdom of Bahrain are now yet more autocratic, in some ways, than when the protests began. And Syria has descended into an abyss. Half its cities lie in ruins, much of its fertile land has been abandoned; millions have been displaced within the country, millions more have fled beyond it; hundreds of thousands have died; there is no end in sight. With the exception of its far east and west—the oil-rich Gulf and quietly prospering Morocco, aloof behind a border with Algeria that has been sealed for 21 years—the rest of the Arab world does not look much better. Iraq’s Shia south and Kurdish north and north-east are, in effect, separate countries, while in the war zone of its Sunni-dominated west the fearsomely brutal rule of the so-called Islamic State has taken root. The Algerians and Sudanese have emerged from civil wars to find themselves still beholden to opaque and predatory army-backed cliques. Palestinians, divided into rival cantons, are weaker and more isolated than ever. Jordan remains an island of calm preserved through fear: both the kingdom’s own people and the donor countries that prop it up are too spooked by the chaos buffeting its borders and flooding it with refugees to talk much of political reform. Change it had to come In short, Arabs have rarely lived in bleaker times. The hopes raised by the Arab spring—for more inclusive politics and more responsive government, for more jobs and fewer presidential cronies carving up the economy—have been dashed. The wells of despair are overflowing. The wealthy Gulf states have seen their incomes slashed by collapsing oil prices. The tighter immigration rules they have set up to replace expatriate labour from other Arab states with natives, or Asians, have hit the remittance flows through which they subsidised their poorer brethren. Demographic pressures are unyielding. Some 60% of the region’s population is under 25. Figures from the International Labour Organisation show that youth unemployment in the Middle East and north Africa, already a terrible 25% in 2011, has risen to nearly 30%, more than double the average around the world. Rent-seeking remains rampant, and standards in both public education and the administration of justice are still dismal. Economic growth is slow or stagnant; the hand of the security forces weighs heavier than ever, more or less everywhere. Sectarian divisions and class rivalries have deepened, providing fertile ground for radicals who posit their own brutal vision of Islamic Utopia as the only solution. The Arab spring seems therefore to have brought nothing but woe. It has become fashionable in some circles to ape Russia and Iran in blaming this failure on supposedly “naive” Western policymakers. Had Western powers not abandoned old allies such as Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak; had they not intervened in support of Libyan rebels; had they not presumed that the Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad was just another domino waiting to topple; had they not turned a blind eye to the danger of Islamist fanatics: then all would be well. This is tosh. To frame the uprisings of 2011 as a sequence of isolated events, each of which had a unique and optimal policy response, is to deny the historical reality of what happened. Such hindsight belies the actual experience of seeing an entire region—and the world’s most politically torpid region, at that—whirl into sudden, synchronised motion. It also denies agency to the actors themselves: to the crowds whose cries of “Enough!” reached critical mass; to the paranoid rulers whose responses exacerbated the protests. This is not to say that the events of 2011 had no precursors. Algeria’s Islamist uprising in 1991, two intifadas in Palestine, the “Independence revolution” that ousted Lebanon’s government in 2005, even the short-lived “Green revolution” in non-Arab but nearby Iran, all signalled the region’s desire for change. But the world’s democracies were, by and large, correct in judging that what they were seeing in 2011 was something broader, more potent and more difficult to steer than a set of national crises that happened to coincide. Nor were they naive to think that an empowered “Arab street” would seek to move its countries closer to global norms of good governance. That was the demand the demonstrators made in protest after protest, from the Gulf to the Atlantic. In judgment of all wrong The West’s naivety, which was shared—and paid for—by those hopeful demonstrators, lay in underestimating two things. One was the fragility of many Arab states, too weak in their institutions to withstand such ructions in the way that, say, South Africa did when apartheid fell. The other was the vicious determination with which established regimes would seek to retain or recapture control. Who could believe that a soft-spoken leader such as Mr Assad would prefer to destroy his country rather than leave his palace? Those were the truths that brought hope to the ground. Just as the spring itself was more than just a set of national events, so the current period of counter-revolution is an international matter. Conservatives across the region have received powerful backing from the Gulf. One early and stark example of this was Bahrain, where the ruling family called on fellow Sunni monarchs to help it crush a pro-democracy movement championed by its Shia majority. Last year’s intervention in Yemen by a Saudi-sponsored coalition can be seen in the same light. The Saudis are seeking not only to thwart Houthi rebels, whose Iranian backing they revile. They are trying to force a return to the status quo. The most internationalised conflict is the bitter civil war in Syria, where powers from the region and beyond contend through proxies. The war has long since metastasised into a monumental free-for-all involving dozens of belligerents. But it remains at its core a fight between aggrieved citizens and a narrowly based—and in Syria’s case largely sectarian—elite intent on keeping its hold on power. In Egypt, a nation-state of longer standing and greater stability, the ancien régime’s fight has—again with help from the Gulf—been won, for now. Egypt has long been seen as the region’s bellwether, and for good reason. Over the past five years it has provided the Arab spring’s most revealing story of failure; today it highlights the degree to which the tensions persist that brought about the uprisings. The world looks just the same In 2010, six months before the protests in Tahrir Square turned into the uprising (even Egyptian enthusiasts are now shy of calling it a revolution) that ousted Mr Mubarak, this newspaper warned of looming change in Egypt and suggested that there were three ways in which it might play out. The country might, like Iran in 1979, experience a popular revolution which would then be hijacked by Islamists. Like Turkey in the 2000s, it might become a genuine, if shaky and flawed, democracy, one with the power needed to tame the military-backed “deep state”. Or, like Russia, it might suffer a Putinist putsch, with the deep state reasserting control under a new strongman. We were too parsimonious. Egypt has, in a jumbled fashion, experienced not just one but all three of these outcomes. Its revolutionaries did overcome, if briefly, the security forces that underpinned Mr Mubarak’s rule. Egyptians then voted in a government headed by the Muslim Brotherhood—a government which, rather than shrinking the deep state, tried instead to insert party loyalists into its depths. (As it happens, this is also what Turkey’s Islamist-leaning government has been doing since 2011, with rather more success.) Popular anger against the Islamists, stoked and nurtured by the deep state, then brought Egypt to the Russian option in a soft coup that saw Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, a general and the minister of defence, installed as president in June 2013. Two and a half years later, Mr Sisi’s counter-revolution appears all but complete. Mr Mubarak and his cronies, not to mention the police responsible for killing and maiming hundreds in the clashes of 2011, are out of jail. Tens of thousands of Muslim Brothers, along with hundreds of secular revolutionaries, are imprisoned, in exile, or dead. Nearly 1,000 Islamists were killed when anti-coup protests were crushed in 2013. The police have killed scores more since then; others have died from torture or neglect in prison. Mr Sisi’s men have taken particular care to harass the technically adept young people whose social-media skills made the revolutionary experiment possible. And the state has made an unprecedented effort to control the courts, universities and media. A tailor-made constitution that grants sweeping powers to the president and the army, and electoral rules designed to produce a fragmented parliament, furnish it with the trappings of democracy. But it is a sham. The Mukhabarat (secret police) intervened in 2015’s elections to ensure supine legislative loyalty to the president. Not surprisingly, turnout was dismal, particularly among the young. Their disdain proved further justified when the government abruptly cancelled the results of December’s student-council elections in the country’s universities. Pro-revolution candidates had won across the board. Many Egyptians praise Mr Sisi for delivering the country from both Islamists and revolutionary hotheads. Many more now shun politics altogether, which from the autocrats’ point of view is almost as happy a result. The Muslim Brotherhood remains in shattered abeyance and more radical Islamists, who have mounted terror attacks and grabbed a chunk of territory in north-east Sinai, have not made broader inroads among the general public. Another uprising on the scale of 2011 is unlikely in the near future. But the effort to build a bigger, stronger “wall of fear” has further alienated Egypt’s people from a state that is not just cruel, arbitrary and unaccountable, but also both too incompetent and too broke to buy their acquiescence. Investors are put off by erratic policymaking, the overweening power of the army and Mukhabarat, and unpredictable, often vindictive courts. Egypt’s government debt remains colossal. The budget deficit has topped 10% every year since 2011; in mid-2015 Egypt’s combined domestic and foreign liabilities pushed past 100% of GDP. The currency is in decline—and so is tourism. Incidents such as the killing of a group of Mexican tourists mistaken for terrorists by the air force, or the government’s farcical handling of what appears to have been the bombing of a Russian civilian airliner on Egyptian territory in October, show the state to be inept. Mr Sisi’s benefactors in the Gulf, who have propped up his regime with perhaps $30 billion in cheap loans, central-bank deposits and fuel, are reputedly running out of patience and risk running out of money. Repeatedly bailed out in the past, Egypt has no more saviours-in-waiting. Tip my hat to the new constitution A recent tweet—“Has anyone tried switching Egypt off and turning it on again?”—sums up the despairing mood of this broken country’s people. For lack of an alternative, or an on-off switch, most have adopted a wait-and-see attitude, praying that Mr Sisi will lighten his grip or hoping for a palace coup to install a less military-minded ruler. “The cheapest option is internal change inside the regime,” says Abdel Moneim Abul Fotoh, a former Muslim Brother whose centrist platform captured 4m votes in the 2012 presidential election. “Revolutions are cumulative, and it will take time for pressure to accumulate.” But if the uprising changed little in the way things work, it changed much in how they are perceived. Hani Shukrallah, an Egyptian commentator, likens memories of Tahrir Square to King Hamlet’s ghost, a presence that may be intangible yet remains the driving force of the drama, and which mutely insists that something is rotten in the state of Egypt. What underlies the rot, in Egypt and elsewhere, is the failure of generations of Arab elites to create accountable and effective models of governance, and to promote education. After some 60 years of essentially fascistic rule—the forced rallying behind a bemedalled patriarch, pomp and parades and propaganda disguising the reality that the people have no voice—it was perhaps not surprising that the backlash, when it came, was inarticulate and lacked direction. The Arab revolutions produced few leaders, few credible programmes for action, and few ideas. But they did produce much-needed clarity about such things as what political Islam actually means in practice, where the Arabs stand in the world and with each other, and what the weaknesses and strengths of Arab states and societies are. Before it came to brief and inglorious power in Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood attracted believers with the simple but vague slogan “Islam is the solution”. Experience now prompts many more Arabs to ask, which Islam? If it is the arm-twisting, head-lopping version proclaimed by Islamic State (IS), which dismisses all Muslims but its own ardent followers as shirkers and sinners, there are few takers. If it means giving political power to more mainstream religious figures who cannot agree on points of doctrine, this does not look appetising either. Nor do the Muslim Brothers, who revealed themselves to be conservatives bent on capturing rather than reforming the state, hold much more of an appeal. Grid of grievances: Enemies, alliances and animosity in the Middle East For decades Arab opinion-makers have ascribed a host of regional ills to Western—and particularly American—meddling, even as its leaders turned habitually to the West for aid or military protection. And the West is hardly innocent; the biggest regional debacle until recent years was America’s spectacularly inept occupation of Iraq. But the morass left by that unforced error, along with the West’s ineffectual response to the Arab spring, have convinced all but a conspiracy-addled fringe that there is not much substance to talk of Western omnipotence, American hegemony or even a Zionist conspiracy. The West’s capacities have been revealed as limited and seldom effectively exercised. It is the region’s own weakness, rather than malign Western intent, that keeps sucking in outside powers. At the same time many Arabs have also seen, not for the first time but perhaps now more clearly than ever, how weak the links between Arab states actually are, despite decades of slogans proclaiming Arab unity. And they have seen how weak the states themselves are, and more sadly how weak many of their own societies are. Iraqis and Syrians are fond of saying that before the American invasion or the 2011 uprising there were no tensions between Sunnis and Shias. If this is true, though, such solidarity was very easily shattered. History ain’t changed If states’ weaknesses stand exposed, so do their workings. In Egypt and Tunisia, and even more so in Mr Assad’s Syria, no one used to know who in which of the many competing security agencies really controlled what, or how. They could not put their finger on the way that, say, a compliant judiciary fitted in to the overall shape of things. Now they can. In Egypt the current crop of thoughtful young revolutionaries shuns the street in favour of drawing up quiet plans for overhauling the police or reforming the judiciary. If another uprising starts, its demands will go beyond the removal of a figurehead and the election of a legislature kept well away from the levers of real power. Mr Sisi and Mr Mubarak: meet the new boss… And what else may be on the agenda for change? One place to look is to IS—which, in ghastly irony, is the only truly new model of government that the wave of revolutions has thrown up. The group is monstrous. Its “state” is in many ways a far nastier reproduction of previous autocratic regimes, overlaid with a brutal “Islamic” veneer that most Muslims find repulsive. Yet the fact that this ugly experiment survives at all, despite the world’s semi-united efforts to abort it, holds lessons for the region. Although IS’s laws are grotesque, other Arab states should take note that its emphasis on quick and firm justice appeals not only to Syrians and Iraqis desperate for order amid chaos. It responds to a burning public need to right decades of perceived wrongs. So does IS’s intolerance of corruption within its own ranks and its focus, even with limited means, on providing services such as health, education and social welfare. Unlike other Arab states, which tend to be hyper-centralised, IS grants broad powers to local administrators. These officials seek to regulate and tax commerce rather than to control it. Instead of assuming ownership of the oil industry, as nearly all other Arab states do, it sells the crude oil in its territory at the wellhead, subsequently exacting taxes from the people who go on to refine and transport it. An interactive guide to the Middle East's tangled conflicts The missing ingredients in this formula are obvious: a basic respect for human rights and for diversity, systems of accountability, a method of lawmaking that pays heed to the will and interest of the public and not simply religious texts or the whims of a so-called caliph. Such essential components of good governance are often lazily bundled together as part of a grab-bag labelled democracy. The Arab spring showed that it may be these constituent elements, more than such theatrics as toppling tyrants or holding noisy elections, that are the key to success. In the tense calm that has settled over countries such as Tunisia and Egypt, in the brittle peace that will no doubt eventually prevail across Iraq, Syria and Yemen, and during the continuing, ever-expectant pause endured by other Arabs as they wait for change, it is these kinds of institutional building blocks that need attending to. Arabs may take heart from the fact that in Europe, the supposedly revolutionary years of 1848 and 1968 produced little forward motion; indeed their immediate effect was to prompt a conservative backlash. A.J.P. Taylor, a historian, described 1848, a year of continent-wide insurrection against autocracy, as a moment when “history reached a turning point but failed to turn.” But in both cases revolutionary change did come, in protracted form, in the next generation. It was brought about less by street action than by quiet evolutions in culture, society and the economy, and by the building of new and stronger institutions. It is not as intoxicating as mass action in Tahrir Square. But if some future season of rebirth is to lead to a lasting summer, there needs to be some thoroughgoing climate change first.
