WHEN he was an undergraduate at Cambridge, Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury, was cox of a Trinity College rowing eight. Perhaps coincidentally, rowing metaphors flowed in September when he announced that he had invited all 37 global Anglican primates to Canterbury for a conference starting on January 11th, in what some see as a last-ditch attempt to save the Anglican Communion. One aide suggested that bishops should not spend so much time “trying to placate people and keep them in the boat, without ever getting the oars out and starting to row”. Frustrated that bickering is keeping Anglicans from their primary mission, the archbishop will need all his powers as a cox to head off a collision, or even the sinking of the global Anglican boat. The problem is a row between liberals, mainly North American, who want the church to allow same-sex marriage, and conservatives, who think it must not. Some leaders from each side are not on speaking terms. Archbishop Welby is said to want a looser affiliation, so that both groups can keep relations with Canterbury and continue to call themselves Anglican but not have to deal with each other. He has no “papal” powers to kick out any provinces; previous attempts to discipline those who defy traditional Anglican teaching have been stopped from below. The archbishop is “not so much trying to get closer unity”, says one informed cleric; “he is trying to prevent greater disunity.” The biggest danger is that some African conservatives, who take a traditional view of sexual ethics, will walk out and lead a breakaway movement. But liberal North Americans are also angry that Archbishop Welby has invited Foley Beach. He heads a group that has split off from the Episcopal church (the official American wing of Anglicanism) in opposition to its consecration of sexually active gay bishops, which the church first did in 2003. Mr Beach and others have formed alliances with conservative African leaders.   The archbishop’s pragmatic risk-taking represents a change from his two predecessors, who tried to encourage the two sides to work together. One way he has managed to get all the primates to attend (at the last big meeting in 2011 a third were absent) is to invite them to set the agenda. Used to spats in the Church of England at home, he has emphasised the need for “good disagreement”. He has also made clear to conservative Africans that, although he supports the church’s traditional stance on marriage, it must not translate into homophobia. In June he expressed deep concern about “the stress for the Anglican Communion” after the American Episcopal church started the procedure to enable its clergy to solemnise same-sex marriages. But he has also admonished bishops who support the criminalisation of gays. If he can steady the boat, says the cleric, it will be a miracle.  Corbyn against the bomb AS RESHUFFLES go, Jeremy Corbyn’s of his shadow cabinet this week was small—certainly a lot smaller than his aides had led the press to expect. Yet it was still momentous. In a marathon of meetings spanning three days, the Labour leader tightened his grip on the party and prepared the ground for a big fight over the renewal of the Trident nuclear deterrent. He did all this in four moves. First, he sacked Michael Dugher, the shadow culture secretary, apparently for criticising leftist groups close to the Labour leader and warning against a “revenge reshuffle”. Second, Mr Corbyn fired Pat McFadden, his capable and well-liked shadow Europe minister. Mr McFadden’s crime was to invite the prime minister, in a debate on the Paris terrorist attacks, to stress that the blame did not lie with the West (highlighting Mr Corbyn’s own ambivalence). Third, he chose to keep Hilary Benn as shadow foreign secretary, but to clip his wings. Unlike Mr Corbyn, Mr Benn was in favour of British military intervention against Islamic State in Syria. He reportedly kept his job only by promising not to break overtly with the leadership again. Mr Corbyn thus made clear his intent to fight on the territory of foreign and security policy, where in his decades as a backbencher he was mostly at odds with the party. This was made even plainer in his fourth, and most significant, move: switching Maria Eagle from the defence portfolio to Mr Dugher’s former job, and replacing her with Emily Thornberry, a known critic of Trident. All this belies two assumptions in the aftermath of Mr Corbyn’s election as Labour leader in September: that being so far to the left of most of his MPs, he would have to compromise frantically to keep his job, and that even so he would be ousted. Today things look different. The absence of a strong rival is clear. So is the reluctance of moderate MPs to cause trouble, although Mr Corbyn’s reshuffle did trigger the damaging resignations of three junior shadow ministers. And so are the size, the organising ability and the determination of Labour’s Corbynite wing to seize control of the party, greatly swollen by tens of thousands of new, left-wing members. An unexpectedly resounding victory in the Oldham by-election in December has also put Mr Corbyn’s critics on the defensive. That will not help Labour’s electoral prospects. But it also means that a force increasingly sceptical of Western defence and security policy has taken hold at the heart of British politics at a time when such matters are newly sensitive. Parliament will soon debate new measures to combat terrorism. British fighter aircraft are operating over Iraq and Syria. And MPs are due to vote later this year on renewing Trident. Mr Corbyn is evidently set on reinstating his party’s 1980s stance in favour of unilateral disarmament. His reshuffle suggests that, having been forced by his shadow cabinet to offer a free vote on Syria, he now wants to overrule his mostly pro-renewal MPs’ views on Trident. He will not do this without a fight, as the party is still formally committed to the nuclear deterrent. But the battle over Trident is one that Mr Corbyn looks increasingly capable of winning.BRITISH foreign aid has never been entirely altruistic. In the interwar years, it was often aimed at promoting growth in the colonies partly so as to boost industry at home. Margaret Thatcher’s government used aid to help British companies, with recipients encouraged to buy Leyland buses and Westland helicopters. So the recent announcement that aid would be used to promote British interests was hardly a ground-breaking one—but it was significant, nevertheless. Aid policy tends to be produced in a largely piecemeal fashion. There has been no big statement of intent since 2009. The new strategy is notable for two changes, besides a greater focus on the national interest. First, at least half of aid spending will go to fragile and war-torn countries. And second, the share disbursed by the Department for International Development (DFID) will fall from 86% to around 70% by 2020, with the rest being spent by other government departments and specialist funds. As Kevin Watkins, of the Overseas Development Institute, a think tank, notes, “the idea that you can have an aid policy that is totally ring-fenced from domestic politics is a bit of a fiction.” Acknowledging this is sensible, given public opposition to high spending on foreign aid. Other departments have much to bring to international development. And although aid is unlikely to bring quick improvements in conflict-ridden states, such countries undoubtedly deserve help. But making the changes will be tricky. The promotion of British interests in the 1980s led to projects that made little sense in economic or development terms, says Owen Barder of the Centre for Global Development, a think tank. There is a danger that, to make clear that aid benefits British interests, it could end up duplicating global programmes. Although short-term political interests can coincide with the needs of poor countries—funding for research into climate change and public health, for instance, can be funnelled to British universities and firms—greater transparency and oversight are needed to stop spending on projects simply because they are politically expedient. The government has confirmed that the Independent Commission for Aid Impact (ICAI), an official watchdog, will have responsibility for scrutinising all departments, not just DFID. Working in fragile countries provokes other worries. Corruption is more entrenched. Changing conditions often undermine projects, as near-empty refugee camps in Jordan show. DFID will have to be more willing to experiment, says Alison Evans of ICAI. “The government has been a bit silent on the costs of pushing more resources into fragile environments. Doing so will require a risk appetite not seen before,” she adds. Increasing aid spending via other government departments will also be challenging. There is a danger that mixed motives could undermine aid, says Richard Manning of Oxford University. DFID has greater expertise in project management and evaluation than other departments. And it is more transparent: Publish What You Fund, a charity that campaigns for aid transparency, rates DFID as very good, the Foreign Office as poor and the Ministry of Defence as very poor. Scrutiny by parliamentary committees and ICAI should help. The government has promised that all aid-dispensing departments will be rated at least “good” by 2020. But an aid strategy that was largely written by the Treasury will also require DFID to adapt. Although there are so far few details on exactly how its funds will be divided among departments, it is no surprise that many in DFID now see helping these other departments to spend aid well as a key part of their job.A man on a high street STATUES may fall victim to two types of event. One is the overthrow of a regime. In 2003, when American troops toppled Iraq’s leader, Saddam Hussein, jubilant Iraqis pulled down his statue in the main square in Baghdad. Similarly, in 2011 Libyan rebels broke the head off a statue of Muammar Qaddafi after taking one of his compounds in Tripoli. Both events were watched by millions, and are now seen as part of history. The second cause of statue-toppling is when a new young movement asserts itself, as early Roman Christians did. Rome was once filled with statues of pagan emperors. Many were melted down during the empire’s conversion to Christianity (a now prized statue of Marcus Aurelius, lightly brushed in gold, remains only because it was mistaken for one of Constantine, the first Christian emperor). This can be controversial. Last summer Islamic State terrorists smashed what they called idolatrous statues in the ancient ruins of Palmyra in Syria. Ukraine’s conflict with Russia has provoked a backlash against the country’s Soviet past: more than 500 statues of Lenin were dismantled between February 2014 and April 2015. Now a statue of Cecil Rhodes, a Victorian imperialist in South Africa, is under threat at Oriel College, Oxford. In the past two years, a movement in British, American and South African universities has campaigned to remove statues redolent of colonialism and slavery. Last year a statue of Rhodes was toppled at the University of Cape Town. In America, Jefferson Davis, the Confederacy’s president, has gone from the University of Texas in Austin; students at the University of Missouri are now taking aim at Thomas Jefferson. Yet Oxford students calling for the removal of Rhodes have received little support from academics, who argue that efforts to wipe out history are damaging to education. Nor are the protesters consistent. Rhodes may have been an imperialist and racist, but the Oriel statue reflects a large charitable donation. Nobody in Oxford has objected to the Codrington Library at All Souls College, named after a slave trader, or to Rhodes House itself, home of Rhodes scholars from around the world, who are paid for by the businessman’s estate. How ironic that the lead campaigner against the Oriel statue should be a black South African on a Rhodes scholarship.SINCE 2010 the British economy has grown by some 10% in real terms, faster than the rich-world average. Most economists reckon growth will stay strong in 2016. But is this all built on the shaky foundations of ever-rising debt? Recent data from the Bank of England found that outstanding household debt—including mortgages and credit-card lending—hit a record £1.5 trillion ($2.2 trillion) in November. Lending to households increased by 3.2% over a year earlier, the largest rise since late 2008. Some commentators fret that, as so often before, a debt-fuelled binge could come to a jarring halt. But dig deeper, and things seem more reassuring. What counts for sustainability is the debt stock relative to the incomes out of which repayments are made. After this adjustment the picture looks rosier (see chart). Britons’ household debt as a percentage of income peaked at 160% just before the 2008 crash, when average inflation-adjusted debt was roughly £64,000 per household. By 2014 that figure had tumbled to about 130%. Only in recent months has the household-debt ratio started inching up again. Borrowing may now be rising again, but those taking on new debt also seem to be the most able to repay it. The number of households struggling to service debt is falling, according to another report from the Bank of England. In 2008, 13% of Britons spent a hefty 30% or more of their pre-tax incomes on mortgage and unsecured debt repayments; now only 10% do. Other measures of financial distress—eg, how many people say they have difficulty paying their rent or mortgage—have also improved in recent years. Britons’ balance-sheets are looking healthier for several reasons. Worries about the economy may have encouraged some people to pay down debt rather than take out new loans, says Ruth Miller of Capital Economics, a consultancy. Interest rates have fallen to historical lows. Strict rules that came into force in 2014 have curbed excessive mortgage lending; for the country as a whole, house prices are still below their pre-crisis peak. Growth of mortgage debt has also been restrained, as banks increasingly insist on repayment mortgages, not interest-only ones, says Michael Saunders of Citi, a bank. In 2015 just 1% of new mortgages were interest-only, down from a third in 2007. And Britain’s recovery has been job-rich; unemployment is down to 5.2%, so fewer households are likely to find themselves suddenly unable to service their debts. Some borrowers would still be vulnerable in the (unlikely) event that interest rates rise suddenly. However, even then a financial crisis would not be inevitable, argues Simon Wren-Lewis of Oxford University. In 2007-08 British banks did not get into difficulties because of lending too much at home. Ben Broadbent of the Bank of England has estimated that British-owned banks lost 15 times as much on foreign mortgages as they did in the domestic market. The story seems similar now: the bank’s stress tests, which simulate a fall in house prices of 20%, suggest that the financial system would cope. It remains unsustainable for household debt to rise relative to incomes indefinitely. At some point, people will have to cut spending to pay it back. But for the time being rising debt may not be a bad thing, says Tony Yates of Birmingham University. It suggests that the banks have recovered (lending to small and medium-sized enterprises is looking perky as well). And with exports struggling, the government still cutting public spending and monetary policy already ultra-loose, he says, the last thing anyone needs is for consumers to embrace austerity as well. The British economy may be somewhat unbalanced, but at least it is growing.WHEN Ashok Sharma was called by the police early one morning in September 1993, he feared the worst. This was central Belfast at the height of the Troubles, more than two decades of conflict between nationalists and loyalists in Northern Ireland. Sure enough, on rushing to the site of his Indian restaurant on Dublin Road, he could see only “a big hole in the ground; it was completely gutted”. A huge IRA car bomb had exploded outside, aimed at a nearby loyalist building. It cost Mr Sharma £80,000 ($120,000) to do the place up again, less than half of which he got from the government in compensation. After opening in 1985, the Archana restaurant suffered bomb damage nine times. Yet Mr Sharma and his family, who came to Belfast in 1977, have stayed, even as many young people have moved away. His persistence is one reason why a new report from the Resolution Foundation on employment rates for people from ethnic minorities finds Northern Ireland the only region where such minorities outperformed the average, at 72% of their working-age population. (Ethnic minorities in Scotland, outside Glasgow, do better on employment rates, but still worse than the regional average.) In other areas of Britain, the disparity is far bigger; in the north-east outside Newcastle, for instance, only 48% of working-age Britons from ethnic minorities are employed (see chart). Minority report Researchers from the Resolution Foundation point out that the gap between the best- and worst-performing subregions for all working-age people is just 11 percentage points, but it more than doubles to 26 for the black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) group. If Britain is to achieve full employment, as the government hopes, this inequality must be put right, argues Laura Gardiner at the foundation. So can Britain learn from Northern Ireland? Certainly, Northern Ireland is somewhat anomalous. Its working-age BAME population is small, at about 20,000, or just 2% of the total. That may be only slightly less than in rural Britain, but the share rises to fully 40% in inner London. Moreover, the Troubles shaped immigration in a specific way. Many Indians and Pakistanis who came to Belfast in the 1970s and 1980s were professionals, taking up health-service and other jobs that were hard to fill because of the violence. That means they are probably better educated than their mainland equivalents. And many are entrepreneurs like Mr Sharma. Yet analysts maintain that laws passed in Northern Ireland to help end the Troubles, and specifically to bridge the sectarian divide between Catholics and Protestants, have helped ethnic minorities. They point to fair-employment legislation from 1989. This made applying for jobs a more “formalised process”, says Eileen Lavery of the Equality Commission, to make the workforce more representative of the population. “This should act in favour of those from ethnic minorities,” she argues. There is anecdotal evidence that it helps the 40,000 or so from eastern Europe, particularly Poland, who have come to the province to find work since 2004. Brenda Skillen, a Catholic convert to Islam who works in a local Muslim support group, says that section 75 of the 1998 Good Friday Agreement has also made a difference in promoting equality of opportunity for all, not just for Catholics. Reforms to policing and the criminal-justice system have made them fairer for everybody, she adds. There is still racism against ethnic minorities. But Northern Ireland’s particular history has meant that the authorities, having neglected diversity for so many decades, now take it more seriously than their counterparts in mainland Britain.“THIS is a message to David Cameron,” begins the unmistakably British-accented rant, “oh slave of the White House, oh mule of the Jews”. Waggling a gun, his features obscured by a balaclava, the man calls the prime minister an “imbecile” for deploying armed forces against Islamic State (IS). His melodramatic, almost adolescent conniptions would be laughable were it not for what follows: the execution of five kneeling men in orange jumpsuits, accused of being British spies. The video, released on January 3rd, ends with a cherubic boy aged perhaps four proclaiming, in a southern English accent: “We will kill kuffar.” Amid speculation about the man’s identity—newspapers named Siddhartha Dhar, a British-Indian—the tape elicited comparisons to earlier execution videos fronted by Mohammed Emwazi, a Briton known as “Jihadi John” who was apparently killed by a drone strike in November. Theresa May, the home secretary, told MPs this week that 800 Britons have now travelled to Syria and Iraq and about half have returned. Britain’s anti-terrorism strategy is evolving. Despite new powers to monitor suspects and seize their passports, exit checks at borders and dollops of money, the spooks are having to set priorities. The state’s capacity to restrain every individual minded to kill for an idea has natural limits. So the government is turning its attention to the sort of non-violent extremism that creates conditions for the violent kind. In the process it is tacitly conceding an awkward point: most British Muslims abhor extremism, but a distinct minority is ambivalent. One poll in November suggested that one in five had at least some sympathy with young Muslims fighting in Syria (although, as many reports omitted to add, the question did not specify for whom). Such thinking has been circulating in Whitehall for a decade, but the radicalising effect of IS and the exit of civil libertarian Liberal Democrats from the government in May have given Mr Cameron the impetus and political freedom to pursue it more forcefully (in Downing Street this is seen as one of the four main issues that will define his second term). So last July the anti-extremism “Prevent” programme was expanded to give public bodies like schools, universities and prisons a statutory duty to shield their charges and monitor them for signs of radicalisation. In a speech a month later Mr Cameron pledged more, adding: “Let’s not forget our strongest weapon: our own liberal values.” This sleeves-up, ideological onslaught on Islamism is so sensible that other European countries want to emulate it. Yet it faces problems. Grandstanding by the government (blimpishly labelling as “British values” principles like tolerance that are in no sense autochthonous), as well as by some Islamic bodies (the Muslim Council has railed unhelpfully against Prevent) and the press (prone to lazy talk of “the Muslim community” as an indivisible monolith) steers British Muslims away from anti-extremism initiatives. Figures from the National Police Chiefs Council suggest that less than 10% of Prevent tip-offs in the first half of 2015 came from Muslims. Jahan Mahmood, a former government adviser, knows this mistrust: “People think: ‘Shit, who is this guy?’” Suspicion among Muslims is matched by bewilderment among public servants. London teachers whom Bagehot asked about their new role said they felt overwhelmed; the complexity of modern British Islam is such that non-Muslim staff must resort to crude methods such as listening out for deaths in pupils’ families that might betoken youngsters on a foray to the Middle East. But often radicalisation happens online or outside the home (“If it is him, bloody hell am I shocked? I am going to kill him myself,” Mr Dhar’s sister said of reports that he might be the new Jihadi John). The authorities told one head that some pupils were at risk—but gave no names. Very little apart from ideology unites the jihadists, notes Innes Bowen, an analyst of British Islam. The answer is for schools and councils to work with Muslim leaders. But which? Sifting out those energetically committed to fighting radicalism can be beyond well-meaning but strained local branches of the British state. Consider the Prevent grants that end up in the hands of ideologically contentious groups. Or the revelation in November that a community centre in north London was inadvertently hosting proselytising sessions for IS. Or the blind eye turned by local authorities to the recent infiltration of some Birmingham schools by Islamists. Many of the more exciting anti-radicalisation initiatives are led by Muslims themselves and take place outside the Prevent framework. Mr Mahmood, wary of its brand, independently mentors young men. Alyas Karmani, a Bradford imam who has aptly compared the psychological function of IS guns to penis extensions, is similarly sceptical of Prevent. Abu Khadeejah, a Birmingham-based Salafist, posts theologically justified critiques of IS on his blog. Yet such types face intimidation and even physical danger. One anti-jihadist Muslim activist tells how a critic threatened him by drawing a finger across his throat. Of pens and swords What to do? In the short term the government should consider renaming and relaunching Prevent, a good programme with a bad reputation. But a generational struggle over ideas and minds requires a generational answer: a dramatic improvement in mutual understanding between different parts of an increasingly diverse society. That means more briefing on the nuances of British Islam for local authority figures (Ms Bowen’s book, “Medina in Birmingham, Najaf in Brent”, is a good start), arm’s-length liaison bodies for Muslim moderates uncomfortable about engaging with the state, efforts to reverse the decline of religious studies and better policing of fashionable but often unaccountable “faith schools”. One Prevent officer in London jokes that more students should be encouraged to study theology. Why not? In a battle of ideas, knowledge is the most powerful of weapons.OAK PARK, just outside Chicago, is known to architecture aficionados as the home of Frank Lloyd Wright, who built some fine houses there. This small suburban village also has another distinction: it is racially mixed. In the 1970s it vigorously enforced anti-segregation laws; today the “People’s Republic of Oak Park”, as it is sardonically known, is 64% white, 21% black and 7% Hispanic. “Oak Park stands out so much,” says Maria Krysan at the University of Illinois at Chicago. But it does not stand out quite as much as it used to. America remains a racially divided country, and Chicago is one of its most segregated cities. The south side is almost entirely black; northern districts such as Lincoln Park are golf-ball white; a western slice is heavily Hispanic. Yet the Chicago metropolis as a whole—the city plus suburban burghs like Oak Park—is gradually blending. For several reasons, that trend is almost certainly unstoppable. When it comes to race, appearances often deceive. Streets can appear black or Asian when they are actually full of black or Asian shoppers who live somewhere else. Statistics are more reliable, and the best measure is known as the dissimilarity index. This reflects the proportion of people of a given race who would have to move out of their census tract—an area of a few thousand inhabitants—and into another one in order to spread themselves evenly. In 1970 the black-white dissimilarity index for Chicago was above 90, meaning that more than 90% of blacks would have had to move in order to become integrated with whites. By 2000 the figure had fallen to 81. William Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, calculates that it now stands at 76. In 45 of 52 big American metropolises with sizeable black populations, black-white segregation has fallen since 2000, according to Mr Frey. Southern cities, which many blacks fled in the first half of the 20th century, are now less segregated than northern ones such as Chicago and New York; sunbelt cities such as Las Vegas and Phoenix are more mixed still. In 1980 the average black urbanite lived in a district that was 61% black. Now he or she lives in a place that is 45% black (see chart). Asians and Hispanics are neither more nor less segregated than they were, probably because two trends are cancelling each other out: as some members of those fast-growing groups move out of ethnic enclaves, they are replaced by new immigrants. Still, both groups are far more integrated than blacks: the Hispanic-white index of dissimilarity was 44 in 2010, and the Asian-white score just 40. America is unusual, both for its obsession with race and for its superb statistics. Poor countries lack the means to collect precise data, and many rich ones choose not to. Some, like France, are so high-minded that they hold race to be irrelevant; in others racial censuses smell uncomfortably like fascism. A few countries distinguish foreigners from natives, though, and there the trend is mostly the same as in America. In Sweden migrants from outside Europe have become less segregated since the 1990s, calculate Bo Malmberg and others at the University of Stockholm. By one measure, desegregation is happening fastest in Malmo, a city with lots of immigrants. In the Netherlands Sako Musterd, a geographer, calculates that foreigners have become less segregated from the native Dutch in Rotterdam. Amsterdam grew more segregated until the late 2000s, but now seems to be going the other way. The European country that stands out is Britain. Like America, Britain collects excellent data on race and ethnicity; also like America, it is becoming steadily more mixed. Gemma Catney at the University of Liverpool has shown that every ethnic minority became less segregated between 2001 and 2011 (the two most recent British census years). Black Africans, who had been among the most clustered, are spreading out especially quickly. Yet Britain’s streets are often quite different from America’s. Around West Ham football ground, in the east London borough of Newham, is a ward called Boleyn. Once largely white and British, it is now something else entirely. In the Ercan fish-and-chip shop, on the Barking Road, the managers complain that whites have moved to the suburbs, to be replaced by immigrants and ethnic minorities who have not developed a taste for fish fried in batter. “Only on match days you see English people around here,” says one. The supermarket next door has 27 national flags above the entrance. Ethnic Pakistanis, who may be immigrants or British-born, are now the biggest group in Boleyn. That is not saying much, though. Of the ward’s 16,000 inhabitants, just 2,500 were Pakistani at the time of the 2011 census, making them 16% of the population. Most of the remainder belonged to Britain’s largest ethnic groups—white Britons (who are 13% of the population), Indians, Bangladeshis, black Africans, black Caribbeans and white eastern Europeans. Boleyn also contains mixed-race people and members of groups that are rare in Britain as a whole, such as Filipinos and Sri Lankans. Newham has become astonishingly diverse, as have other working-class parts of London (see map). That has shaped its politics. Newham not only lacks powerful ethnic blocks; its politics is actually anti-ethnic. In Newham’s old town hall Sir Robin Wales, the mayor of the borough, talks proudly about removing ethnic newspapers from local libraries and refusing to subsidise street parties if they are designed to attract only one group. Sir Robin, who is a white Briton (specifically a Scot, and thus a rarity thereabouts), was easily re-elected in 2014, winning 61% of the vote. INTERACTIVE: Click/tap here to explore further with our ward-by-ward breakdown of each ethnic group. Perhaps Britain and America will become more segregated over time, with ghettos in new places. Perhaps many cities in countries that refuse to collect race data are quietly dividing. Perhaps—but probably not, because the forces driving integration are both powerful and widespread. The first is the drift of non-whites from city centres to suburbs and commuter towns. British and American suburbs are still mostly white, but less so than before. In 1990 just 47% of American Hispanics and 37% of blacks lived in suburbia; by 2010, 59% of Hispanics and 51% of blacks did. Cook County, which includes the city of Chicago, has lost 140,000 black inhabitants since 2000, while the surrounding rural and suburban counties all gained them. Whites are moving into some cities, including Chicago, though rarely as quickly as blacks are leaving. Some old suburbs have become heavily black or Hispanic—or, in Britain, south Asian. But for the most part suburbanisation leads to mixing. Ethnic minorities who leave city centres tend to be better-off and neither need nor want to live in enclaves. If they choose to move to a newly built suburb, as they often do in America, they will be blocked neither by racist housing laws, which have been abolished, nor by bigoted assumptions about the character of the neighbourhood. That is why the swelling, sprawling cities of the American south and west are so mixed. A second force for integration is immigration. In Newham the churn caused by immigrants arriving and then moving to better districts has thoroughly dissolved old colour lines. The same is true of parts of America, too. John Logan of Brown University says that whites often stay when Latinos and Asians move in to a district. After a while blacks move in too, taking advantage of the path paved by the Latinos and Asians—and whites mostly continue to stay. Logan Square, a handsome district in north Chicago with wide boulevards and big, stylish houses, seems set to become such a “global neighbourhood”. Its population is 42% white and 46% Hispanic. A powerful third force is love, which integrates families as well as places. In London whites and black Caribbeans marry or cohabit in such numbers that there are now more children under five who are a mixture of those two groups than there are black Caribbean children. Marriages between whites and Asians are growing, too. America is mixing just as quickly. In 2014, Mr Frey calculates, 19% of new American marriages involving whites and 31% involving blacks were mixed-race. The share for both Hispanics and Asians was 46%. The children of such unions can be hard to deal with statistically. So in the future the numbers will probably underestimate the speed of desegregation. All this is most welcome. But there is a fourth driver of racial and ethnic integration in cities, which is not so benign. Because big cities are such desirable places to live, and have failed to build enough new homes, they are now so expensive that people can barely afford to segregate themselves. In London property prices have risen so steeply that the average first-time buyer needs to raise a deposit equivalent to about 120% of annual income, according to Neal Hudson of Savills, an estate agent. In the 1980s it was enough to raise just 20-30%. Increasingly, people just buy property where they can. And along with the great weight of evidence showing that countries are becoming less segregated by race and ethnicity, there is also growing proof that they are becoming more segregated by income. One kind of separation might be replaced by another.Audio and Video content on Economist.com requires a browser that can handle iFrames. When, three years ago, it was revealed that white Britons had become a minority group in London, with just 45% of the population, there was much hand-wringing over “white flight”. The release of more fine-grained data since then has shown what is really happening. White Britons have abandoned almost no part of London. They remain the biggest ethnic group in huge swathes of the capital, partly because non-whites are themselves so diverse. But their numerical dominance is eroding, and in some places it is barely noticeable. White Britons are the biggest group in West Thornton, in south London, with just 17% of the population. This is not white flight—it is more a lazy shuffling of white feet away from the most immigrant-dominated areas. How British. European and American cities are becoming less racially segregated due to suburban sprawl, extortionate house prices and immigrants. Read "The great melting" here to find out more.THE whizzy gadgets for geeks to goggle at during CES, an annual consumer-electronics show in Las Vegas, have typically been small enough to pick up. But they have been joined in recent years by an increasing number of cars. The Detroit motor show, America’s biggest and glitziest, starts later this month, but many in the car industry now regard CES, which opened on January 5th, as a more important event. Mary Barra, GM’s boss, unveiled a new production version of its Bolt electric car at Las Vegas this week. Incumbent manufacturers are recognising the double threat posed by technology, as car-sharing takes off and driverless vehicles come closer. First, some people who might hitherto have wanted to own a car may no longer do so, cancelling out the growth the motor industry might otherwise have expected from the rising middle classes in developing countries (see chart). Second, technology firms may be better placed than carmakers to develop and profit from the software that will underpin both automated driving and vehicle-sharing. Some of these firms may even manufacture cars of their own. In a report ahead of the Las Vegas and Detroit shows, Morgan Stanley, an investment bank, said the motor industry was being disrupted “far sooner, faster and more powerfully than one might expect.” It predicted that conventional carmakers would scramble in the coming year to reinvent themselves. As if to demonstrate this, shortly before CES opened, GM announced a $500m investment in Lyft, a ride-sharing service. A rumoured tie-up between Ford and Google to produce driverless cars failed to materialise at the show, but even the rumours underlined the disruption that tech firms are bringing to the motor industry. And other partnerships were announced: Ford is teaming up with Amazon to connect its cars to sensor-laden smart homes. It was also revealed at CES that Toyota would adopt Ford’s in-car technology, which is a competitor to Apple’s CarPlay and Google’s Android Auto, to access smartphone apps and other features. That is not the only example of carmakers joining forces to avoid being beholden to the tech giants. In August BMW, Daimler and Volkswagen’s Audi division jointly bought Here, a mapping service, from Nokia, to ensure that carmakers have an independent provider rather than having to depend on Google Maps. Nevertheless, carmakers are also teaming up with tech firms because each has something the other needs. Building and marketing cars, and dealing with safety and emissions regulators, is tricky. Tech firms could copy Tesla, which has built its own electric cars for more than a decade. Apple, which is said to be planning an electric car, may try to have them made in the same way as it does its iPhones, outsourcing to a contract manufacturer. But a more obvious route is to ally with an established carmaker. Carmakers also have lots to learn. Most are working on making their vehicles either fully or partly self-piloting, and a number are running their own car-sharing experiments. But Google remains the leading exponent of autonomous driving. Its robotics, drones and search engine all contribute expertise that helps to guide a driverless car down the road avoiding pedestrians, obstacles and other vehicles, using computing power and sophisticated software to interpret masses of data received both from the car’s on-board sensors and from external sources through wireless connections. Yet if the tech firms have much to gain as they muscle in to the motor business, the carmakers are wary of what they have to lose. Profits may seep away towards the producers of the software and the owners of the data, and away from the makers of the hardware. Hitherto, new cars—even quite modest ones—have tended to be bought as status symbols and expressions of personal style, but if consumers become more interested in what software and entertainment systems a car can run, rather than what it looks like, the industry’s whole business model may come apart. Ride-sharing, car clubs and other alternatives to ownership are already growing fast. Young city-dwellers are turning their backs on owning a costly asset that sits largely unused and loses value the moment it is first driven. Carmakers insist that such consumers are merely deferring buying a vehicle, pointing to the fact that people continue to drive at an older age than they used to. But the pronouncements of motor-industry bosses suggest that doubts are creeping in. At CES Mark Fields, Ford’s CEO, said that it would in future be “both a product and mobility company”. Membership of car clubs, which let people book by app for periods as short as 15 minutes, is growing by over 30% a year, according to Alix Partners, a consulting firm, and should hit 26m members worldwide by 2020. Competition is intense. ZipCar, owned by Avis Budget, a conventional car-hire firm, is thriving. More carmakers are copying Daimler’s Car2Go and BMW’s Drive Now apps. Earlier this year Ford began testing both a car-sharing service in America and a car club in Britain. Daimler reckons its scheme is profitable. But such services are unlikely ever to match the returns, especially for premium makers, from selling vehicles. At the same time, app-based taxi services such as Uber and its Chinese counterpart Didi Dache, which are often cheaper and more efficient than conventional cabs, are also growing quickly. Once these are able to dispense with drivers for their vehicles, the taxi, car-club and car-sharing businesses will in effect merge into one big, convenient and affordable alternative to owning a car. So when will the fully autonomous car hit the showrooms? Google, whose cars have done 1.3m test miles (2.1m km) on public roads, once promised 2018, whereas most analysts reckoned the 2030s more plausible as carmakers introduced automated-driving features in stages. Now, Mr Fields is talking about autonomous cars being ready to roll by 2020. More conservative car bosses add five years. Barclays, another bank, forecasts that the fully driverless vehicle will result in the average American household cutting its car ownership from 2.1 vehicles now to 1.2 by 2040. A self-piloting car may drop off a family’s breadwinner at work, then scuttle back to pick up the kids and take them to school. The 11m or so annual sales of mass-market cars for personal ownership in America may be replaced by 3.8m sales of self-driving cars, either personally owned or part of taxi fleets, Barclays thinks. Driverless cars still have problems in bad weather. They may struggle to recognise that light shining off a puddle is harmless or guess that a pedestrian is about to step into the traffic without looking. But sophisticated systems for hands-free driving on motorways, and for automated parking, are already available on a number of manufacturers’ models. Fully driverless cars will ferry workers round GM’s technical centre in Detroit in late 2016. Convincing regulators to allow fully driverless cars onto the streets is the next hurdle. Insurers and consumers also need to be won round. If self-driving cars can be introduced first on private roads or designated areas of cities to prove their worth in avoiding accidents and reducing congestion, that might help. Within the industry, the big question is not whether this future will arrive, but whether tech firms or carmakers will grab the spoils. Will the sign on the dashboard say Ford (powered by Google) or Google (powered by Ford)?
