FORTY years ago America, still reeling from the 1973 oil crisis, banned most exports of crude oil. That prohibition was lifted by Congress in mid-December. The first shipment under the new rules set sail on December 31st from the Texan port of Corpus Christi. The renewed flow of crude is already changing how oil is priced. Not all barrels of oil are alike. Crudes can be viscous like tar or so “light” they float on water. Their sulphur content ranges from the negligible (“sweet”) to the highly acidic (“sour”). Though hundreds of grades are bought and sold, traders use a handful of benchmarks to make sense of the market. Brent, from the North Sea, is the current international standard. Americans prefer to use a similar grade known as West Texas Intermediate (WTI). WTI was once the main global benchmark. It has a number of advantages over Brent. For one thing, it arrives at the delivery point—Cushing, Oklahoma—by pipeline, and so can be sold in batches of variable size. Brent, in contrast, can only be sold by the tankerload. As Brent sees fewer, bigger transactions, generating continuous prices is tricky. The ever-shifting price of WTI can be observed directly, making it more transparent. And Brent is umbilically connected to a declining oil province. It comes from only a handful of oilfields, whereas a WTI contract can be satisfied by any suitable oil delivered to Cushing. WTI had one vital flaw, though. The export ban meant that it could detach from world oil prices if America produced more crude than expected, since the surplus could not be exported. For most of the late 20th century that risk was hypothetical, as America’s output steadily declined. But in recent years the shale-oil boom revived American production. A glut of crude emerged, first at Cushing and then by the cluster of refineries on the Gulf of Mexico. That pushed American crude prices below Brent. The spread peaked in 2011 at $28 a barrel. As the price of WTI began to say less and less about the state of the world market, traders spurned it in favour of Brent. Trading in contracts linked to Brent overtook those linked to WTI in early 2012. The resumption of American exports has changed all that. The two benchmarks now trade at more or less the same price. WTI has duly regained its position as the most traded oil benchmark. This back-and-forth, however, may prove a distraction compared with another shift in the oil market: its centre of gravity is moving inexorably eastwards. OPEC, a cartel of oil exporters, expects demand in Asia to grow by 16m barrels a day by 2040. If that happens, Asia would end up consuming more than 46m barrels a day—four times as much as Europe. As Asia grows, it will become the dominant force in the world market. A good benchmark has to reflect supply and demand for oil wherever it is used. WTI may continue to be influenced by bottlenecks in the American market. Brent reflects the market for oil in north-west Europe. That was once a positive, but as Europe’s share of global demand for oil declines, proximity to the continent is no longer the advantage it was. That suggests that an Asian benchmark will rise to the fore. The Shanghai International Energy Exchange plans to launch its own yuan-denominated contract this year. The new benchmark will have trouble getting off the ground. For one thing, China’s capital controls make it difficult for foreigners to buy the yuan needed to trade the contracts. The wild swings in China’s equity markets set an unnerving example for investors. But time is on its side.POLITICS is local but most problems are international. That is the fundamental problem for national governments caught between the twin forces of globalisation and voters’ anger. The European refugee crisis, for example, seems to cry out for a continent-wide solution. But the tide of migrants has been so vast that national governments have been tempted to put up barriers first, and answer questions later. The latest example saw Sweden introduce checks on those travelling from Denmark, leading the latter country, in turn, to impose temporary controls on its southern border with Germany. Anti-immigration parties have been gaining in the polls; with the exception of Angela Merkel, mainstream politicians want to head off the threat. The current system combines unchecked movement within the Schengen area (which does not include all members of the European Union) with external borders patrolled by national governments. There is no Schengen border force, but once inside, refugees can go anywhere within the Schengen countries. In a way, this looks like the same mismatch that has plagued the euro: a single currency without a unitary fiscal and political authority. Many economists have advocated much greater integration of the euro zone in the wake of the bloc’s crisis. The European banking system would be stronger if there was a comprehensive deposit-insurance scheme; the economy would be more balanced if there were fiscal transfers from rich to poor countries. But such plans are unpopular with voters in rich countries (who perceive them as handouts) and in poor countries (who worry about the implied loss of local control that reforms would require). All that the EU’s leaders have managed so far is to cobble together solutions (such as the Greek bail-outs) at the last minute. The impression of indecisiveness in Brussels has done nothing to make the EU more popular with voters—surging anti-immigrant parties are also Eurosceptic. At the global level, co-operation also seems more difficult. Gone is the unity of the G20’s summit in London in 2009, when leaders agreed on a co-ordinated stimulus in response to the financial crisis. The appetite for fiscal stimulus seems to have completely disappeared. Central banks are now heading in different directions: the Federal Reserve has just tightened monetary policy while the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan are committed to easing. The euro zone, which has a big trade surplus, seems happy to let its currency depreciate, adding to deflationary pressures elsewhere. Trade creates tighter links between countries, but global trade growth has been sluggish in recent years. The OECD thinks that trade grew by only 2% in volume in 2015. No longer is trade rising faster than global GDP, as it was before the crisis. In a widely expected but still depressing development, the Doha round of negotiations on a new global trade agreement has been abandoned, although the trans-Pacific deal did make it through. International agreements require compromise, which leaves politicians vulnerable to criticism from inflexible opponents. Voters are already dissatisfied with their lot after years of sluggish gains (or declines) in living standards. When populist politicians suggest that voters’ woes are all the fault of foreigners, they find a ready audience. With the global economic pie growing more slowly, the temptation is to try and grab a bigger slice of it—at the expense of everyone else. Furthermore, economic woes can lead to much more aggressive foreign policy. It is hard to believe that the fall in oil prices—and the effect on national budgets—has not played some part in the current turmoil in the Middle East. In the developed world, demographic constraints (a static or shrinking workforce) may limit the scope for the kind of rapid growth needed to reduce the debt burden and make voters happier. Boosting that sluggish growth rate through domestic reforms (breaking up producer cartels, making labour markets more flexible) is very hard because such reforms arouse strong opposition from those affected. The danger is that a vicious cycle sets in. Global problems are not tackled because governments fail to co-operate; voters get angrier and push their leaders into more nationalistic positions. And it is hard to see things changing this year, with no country likely to take the lead. America will be consumed by its presidential election, Europe by refugees and fear of terrorism, China by its adjustment to slower growth. No one is in charge. Economist.com/blogs/buttonwoodTHE American Economic Association’s annual conference, held each January, is ostensibly a gigantic teach-in, with lots of seminars featuring famous economists. But the three-day event, held this year in San Francisco with 13,000 attending, is also a big jobs fair. More than 500 employers—both universities and companies—were tied up in hotel rooms holding marathon interview sessions with freshly minted PhDs. The ballroom of the Marriott was set aside for a hundred more. It is a gruelling three days for candidates: one exhausted PhD likened it to speed-dating. It is also arduous for recruiters. Towards the end of the first day Alan Green and Christopher de Bodisco of Stetson University, a small private college in Florida, review the candidates they have seen so far. They are looking for someone with an interest in health and development. They plan to grill a dozen candidates each day before inviting the most promising ones to visit its campus and meet the rest of the faculty. The grandest universities use suites for comfort but also as a display of prestige. Plausible candidates are given a code to exchange for the hotel-room number in order to deter gatecrashers. The leading institutions speak to the best candidates; the rest to anyone they think they can get. “There’s no point in talking to someone who’s going to end up at Harvard,” says a professor at a British university. Yet the hierarchy can be disrupted. A star European PhD from a leading American school may have a homesick spouse or an ailing parent. Events may conspire in your favour. When the AEA conference was last held in San Francisco, in 2009, fiscal turmoil left American state universities cash-strapped. Universities in Europe took full advantage. They could hire—and perhaps keep—someone who would otherwise have gone to Iowa or Michigan State, says the professor. The financial crisis created shortages as well as opportunities. The IMF, which a year previously had planned to lay off staff because of the paucity of crises, swept up many of the PhDs in macroeconomics in 2009. Recruiters say the shortage of macro and finance experts has lingered: central banks and government agencies are keen hirers of these types. There are other bidders for talent. More than a dozen of the Marriott’s tables were reserved for Chinese universities, which increasingly follow an American-style economics curriculum and will pay the going global rate. Tech firms want the best number-crunchers for their big-data projects, and PhD economists have the right skills. Liberal-arts colleges like Stetson want faculty who can teach and do research across disciplines. They believe economics is the best grounding. The market for economists appears to be tightening as a result. Economics is one of two departments at Stetson (the other is engineering) in which hiring has become noticeably dearer, its recruiters say. University deans may gripe, but that is good news for the tired-looking PhDs trudging the corridors of San Francisco’s big hotels.Bankers will also ask to see an ID MOST banks wouldn’t lend to Roberta. She arrived in New York from Mexico with papers but no credit history. But Neighborhood Trust Federal Credit Union, which specialises in lending to immigrants, gave her advice and a $2,000 loan. She started out selling Mexican food from a cart. She now runs a food truck, employs five people and has plans to expand. Many immigrants, like Roberta, want to save or start a business. But they struggle to get finance. In America 23% of households headed by a non-citizen, and 35% of households where only Spanish is spoken, have no bank accounts—compared with 8% for the population as a whole. There are multiple barriers: not just low incomes, which make it hard to meet minimum-balance requirements, but also trouble with language, identification and trust. Neighborhood Trust is trying to change that. More than half its members are Latino, largely from the Dominican Republic, and many are undocumented. Most of the staff are themselves immigrants, and know their members well: they visit borrowers’ businesses often and offer workshops on financial literacy. The hands-on approach keeps default rates low. Other financial firms, in both America and Europe, are also finding new ways to serve immigrants. Some are like Neighborhood Trust—small and community-minded. Others are startups hoping for big profits. Oportun is a good example: the American lender has made loans of $1.9 billion since 2006, mostly to Latinos, using big data and clever algorithms to lend to those without a credit history. These firms have several tactics in common. The first is to make it easy to open an account—a process that is often unnecessarily slow and intimidating. Monese, a startup based in London, allows European migrants to open an account by phone with just a photo of a passport and a selfie. A second shared tactic is to make life easier for those, such as illegal immigrants, who may struggle to prove their identity. Banks can be fussy: in one survey half of unbanked Mexican immigrants in New York said a lack of documentation prevented them opening an account. But many American banks will accept taxpayer identification numbers and consular ID cards, which can be obtained irrespective of immigration status. In New York 12 financial firms, including Neighborhood Trust, accept a new card launched by the city government to help undocumented migrants access services—though no big banks do. Third, instead of waiting for immigrants to come knocking, these firms seek them out. Oportun, for instance, has branches inside shops in Latino neighbourhoods. Mission Asset Fund, a Californian non-profit group, assists informal savings groups in immigrant communities. As members make small, regular payments into a common pot from which they take turns to borrow, they are also able to develop a formal credit history. A final tactic is to tailor services to meet the particular needs of migrants. Extrabanca, in Italy, explicitly markets itself as a bank for immigrants. Many of its customers are from China, the Philippines and eastern Europe. It helps them deal with the red tape involved in renting a house or starting a business. Many American credit unions offer “citizenship loans” to cover the costs of naturalisation. Some offer illegal immigrants loans to pay the fees for amnesty schemes. Larger banks can be put off, at least in part, by regulation. Many have stopped offering international transfers in response to tighter rules on money-laundering and terrorist financing. In Britain, new laws bar banks from opening accounts for illegal immigrants. But some big banks are catching on. Scotiabank, in Canada, allows Chinese migrants to start opening an account before leaving home, through a partnership with three banks in China. Deutsche Bank woos Turkish customers in Germany with a service called Bankamiz (“Our Bank”), which offers bilingual tellers, free withdrawals at ATMs in Turkey and five free transfers to Turkey each year. Catering to immigrants can be profitable in the long run, suggests Sherief Meleis of Novantas, a consultancy. Banks can win customers who will be loyal for years to come. As Rafael Monge-Portaro, the boss of Neighborhood Trust, says of Roberta: “We trust her and she trusts us.”FOR those exhausted by the festive season, now is the time to book a holiday. Hotels in New York’s Times Square cost four times more on New Year’s Eve than they do just a week into 2016; a room at the cheapest four-star property in Cancún in Mexico on December 31st was half as dear by January 7th. The economics behind this price crash are simple: hotels are expensive to build and staff, and demand for them is seasonal. Only by ramping up prices at peak times can they be run profitably. But seasonality inflicts wider economic costs than eye-watering bills. Tourists find other destinations because rooms are full on their desired dates and, despite lower prices, inventory goes unused during the off-season. One-off events like sports tournaments, concerts and conferences can exacerbate the problem of mismatched supply and demand, by flooding cities with visitors for just a few days. The advent of the “sharing economy” should offer a solution. Just as Uber’s surge pricing draws part-time taxi drivers onto roads at rush hour, room-rental services like Airbnb, HomeAway and Onefinestay should allow a city’s supply of temporary accommodation to expand when more people want to stay there. Airbnb recently released data to support this hypothesis, showing that many of the site’s hosts list their homes specifically to cash in on periods of high demand (see chart). The shareholders’ meetings in Omaha, a Midwestern American city, of Berkshire Hathaway, a financial conglomerate, provide a good illustration. In 1980 12 people showed up to the first one, including the firm’s boss, Warren Buffett. These days, the gathering draws some 40,000, the equivalent of nearly 10% of the city’s population. Omaha’s few hotels have built their business models around this surge, jacking up prices to as much as $400 a night and imposing three-day minimum stays around the one-day event. This has outraged the frugal Mr Buffett, who has threatened to move the conference to Dallas. Happily, home-sharers have begun to offer some competition. In the three weeks before the 2015 meeting, 1,750 Omaha residents added new properties to Airbnb—the equivalent of three Omaha Hiltons, the city’s biggest hotel. That brought the number of Airbnb listings in the city to 5,000, of which 76% were occupied on May 1st at an average price of $209. Moreover, Airbnb hosts only charged 60% more during the meeting than in days before and after. The surge at hotels was 200% or more. Omaha may be an exceptional case, but it reflects a trend. Across the 31 specific events for which Airbnb shared data, the number of listings rose by 19% in the three preceding weeks. Three times as many stays occurred during the period of the events as in the weeks before and after. Even cities where supply has expanded slowly are seeing more stays. Airbnb bookings during the Volta art fair in Basel, Switzerland, last year were 268% higher than during the neighbouring weeks, even though listings rose by only 6%. The Airbnb figures do not spell the end of extortionate hotel prices. Spare-room rentals and hotels are not perfect substitutes: many visitors want the service and convenience of a hotel. Room rentals, naturally, have more of an impact in smaller cities than in big ones, which can more easily absorb an influx of visitors. Airbnb’s turnover in Paris during the 2015 French Open tennis tournament rose by a mere 4%. But by easing temporary supply squeezes, room rentals may change the economics of the hotel business, at least in smaller cities. If hotels can no longer double their prices when demand peaks, that could drive weaker properties out of business. Those that stay afloat may need to increase rates at other times of year, which could further depress off-season travel and hurt complementary businesses such as restaurants and taxis. Conversely, more room rentals should also mean that more money flows directly to residents every time small cities stage a tourist-magnet event. (Airbnb passes on around 85% of guests’ total payments to hosts, whereas hotels spend just 30-35% on labour.) At the margin, that might increase municipal governments’ appetite to host such events. Omaha 2024, anyone?“THE only function of economic forecasting is to make astrology look respectable,” John Kenneth Galbraith, an irreverent economist, once said. Since economic output represents the aggregated activity of billions of people, influenced by forces seen and unseen, it is a wonder forecasters ever get it right. Yet economists cannot resist trying. As predictions for 2016 are unveiled, it is worth assessing the soothsayers’ records. Forecasters usually rely on two different predictive approaches. One is theory-based, shaped by how economists believe economies behave. The other is data-based, shaped by how economies have behaved in the past. The simplest of the theoretical bunch is the Solow growth model, named for Robert Solow, a Nobel-prize winning economist. It posits that poorer countries should generally invest more and grow faster than rich ones. Central banks and other big economic institutions use far more complicated formulas, often grouped under the bewildering label of “dynamic stochastic general equilibrium” (DSGE) models. These try to anticipate the ups and downs of big economies by modelling the behaviour of individual households and firms. The empirical approach is older; indeed, it was the workhorse of government forecasting in the 1940s and 1950s. Data-based models analyse the relationship between hundreds or thousands of economic variables, from the price of potatoes to snowfall in January. They then work out how zinc sales, for example, affect investment and growth in the years that follow. Both strategies have faced withering criticism. DSGE models, for all their complexity, are typically built around oversimplifications of how markets function and people behave. Data-based models suffer from their own shortcomings. In a paper* published in 1995 Greg Mankiw of Harvard University argued that they face insurmountable statistical problems. Too many things tend to happen at once to isolate cause and effect: liberalised trade might boost growth, or liberalisation might be the sort of thing that governments do when growth is rising, or both liberalisation and growth might follow from some third factor. And there are too many potential influences on growth for economists to know whether a seemingly strong relationship between variables is real or would disappear if they factored in some other relevant titbit, such as the wages of Canadian lumberjacks. In practice, most forecasters combine the two approaches and inject, when necessary, a dose of common sense. The IMF, for instance, relies on a global model, built in part on economic theory and in part on data analysis. The global projections generated by that hybrid model are combined with country-specific details to produce country-level forecasts. The country forecasts are then checked for consistency against the global projections and adjusted when necessary—to make sure, for example, that most countries do not show strong trade growth when the global projection heralds a decline in trade. A recent analysis of the IMF’s forecasts by the organisation’s Independent Evaluation Office concluded that their accuracy was “comparable to that of private-sector forecasts”. But how accurate is that? Not very, Lant Pritchett and Larry Summers of Harvard University argued in 2014. Forecasters overestimate the extent to which the future will look like the recent past, they reckon. It is assumed that fast-growing countries will keep speeding along while the economic tortoises continue crawling. The IMF, for instance, reckons that China’s GDP growth will decline gently to 6% a year by around 2017, and then accelerate slightly. That is highly unlikely, say Messrs Pritchett and Summers: “Regression to the mean is perhaps the single most robust and empirically relevant fact about cross-national growth rates.” In other words, booming countries slow down and slumping ones speed up. The IMF publishes forecasts for 189 countries twice a year, in April and October, for the year in question and the following one. The Economist has conducted an analysis of them from 1999 to 2014, and compared their accuracy with several slightly less sophisticated forecasting methods: predicting that a country will grow at the same pace as the year before, guessing 4% (which is the average growth rate across all countries during the period) and picking a random number from -2% to 10%. For each method, the absolute difference between the actual and predicted growth rates is calculated and then averaged. The lowest average is taken to be the best performance. Encouragingly, the guesses produced by our random-number generator performed worst (see chart); it yielded predictions that were off by 4.4 percentage points on average. Predicting the previous year’s growth rate came last-but-one, as Messrs Pritchett and Summers might have foreseen. The projections the IMF made in October of the year being forecast, which were off by an average of 1.5 percentage points, unsurprisingly did best; by that point plenty of actual economic data are available. Yet the quality of the IMF’s forecasts deteriorates surprisingly quickly the further from the end of the year in question they are made. Those from April of the preceding year are only slightly more accurate than those generated using the average growth rate. No one expects the Spanish recession An important caveat is in order. Forecasts of all sorts are especially bad at predicting downturns. Over the period, there were 220 instances in which an economy grew in one year before shrinking in the next. In its April forecasts the IMF never once foresaw the contraction looming in the next year. Even in October of the year in question, the IMF predicted that a recession had begun only half the time. To be fair, an average-growth prediction also misses 100% of recessions. One model does better, though. Our random-number generator correctly forecast the start of a recession 18% of the time.   Sources: "The growth of nations", Gregory Mankiw, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995. "Asiaphoria meets regression to the mean", Lant Pritchett and Lawrence Summers, NBER Working Paper 20573, 2014.IN 1783 John Michell reasoned they must be out there. In 1916 Karl Schwarzschild calculated how big they would be. In 1930 Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar showed that big enough stars were doomed to become them. Yet it took until the 1970s to convince holdouts among astronomers that black holes actually exist. That was when studies of a celestial X-ray source called Cygnus X-1 revealed an object so massive that it could be nothing else. Even before that, though, black holes had caught the imagination of astronomers and public alike. The idea of something so dense that its gravitational attraction can stop light (or anything else) escaping from its surface is mind-boggling. Yet such holes are crucial building blocks of the universe. Most, if not all galaxies have one at their centre. Meanwhile, on Earth, the idea that something or someone has “fallen into a black hole” and thereby, from the speaker’s point of view, vanished, has become proverbial. In fact, black holes—or, rather, their surroundings—are often not black. The process of attracting and swallowing matter acts like a giant particle accelerator as the matter spins around the hole. As with such accelerators on Earth, this generates electromagnetic radiation, from radio waves to X-rays. A big black hole’s neighbourhood, with lots of spinning matter, can thus be very bright indeed. That neighbourhood is also a place where space and time themselves are warped more intensely than anywhere else in the observable universe. This chaos, and black holes’ restricted dimensions (even the “supermassive” ones in galactic cores are mere millions of kilometres rather than light-years across), makes studying them hard. But not impossible, as delegates to this week’s meeting of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) in Kissimmee, Florida, have heard. Blown on the steel breeze Whether galaxies formed around pre-existing black holes or the holes formed after those galaxies had come into being is not yet known. It is suspected, though, that their central black holes help regulate galaxies’ rates of star formation. Eric Schlegel of the University of Texas, San Antonio, brought some evidence to bear on this question. His instrument of choice is Chandra, a space telescope named after Chandrasekhar which detects X-rays. The object of Dr Schlegel’s interest is NGC 5195, a small companion galaxy of the Whirlpool, a well-known spiral galaxy (see above; NGC 5195 is on the right, dangling from one of the Whirlpool’s spiral arms). Looking at X-rays from NGC 5195 Dr Schlegel and his colleagues spotted two bright, arc-shaped features in the gas opposite the point where the Whirlpool’s arm reaches into NGC 5195 and material is pulled from it towards the galaxy’s central black hole. The shapes and orientations of these arcs suggest the hole has undergone a pair of explosive events caused by the overwhelming amount of material the Whirlpool is dumping on it. The shock waves from such explosions would sweep away dust and gas that are the raw material from which new stars are built. And NGC 5195 is indeed noticeably bereft of new stars—in contradistinction to the Whirlpool, which is rich in them. Dr Schlegel may thus have found a mechanism by which black holes can switch off star formation in their vicinities. Julie Comerford, of the University of Colorado, Boulder, described another such mechanism. She observes that galaxies often bash into one another and merge. The result of such a merger will have, at least for a time, two central black holes. Dr Comerford used data from Chandra and also from the Hubble space telescope, which sees visible light, rather than X-rays, to study such galaxies. She found that, on average, galaxies with two black holes in their cores put out more than ten times as much light as those with one. This extra light is created by the extra quantities of material sucked into their twinned cores. One consequence of all this light is to ionise (ie, to strip the electrons from) much more of the surrounding galaxy’s gas than would usually be the case, and then push this ionised gas out of the way. That provides a second way that the behaviour of a galaxy’s black-hole-inhabited core can switch off star formation in the rest of the star system. Working out how black holes affect galactic growth, though, is not the same as finding out what is happening in the vicinity of the holes themselves. Here, matter is circling close to a black hole’s point of no return, the “event horizon” whose radius was described by Schwarzschild’s calculations. And next month, JAXA, Japan’s space agency, will launch Astro-H, a telescope that will help to do this. It can detect X-rays of exceptionally high energies. As material slips ever closer to the event horizon, the precise details of its X-ray output are a signal of how it is moving. Astro-H will be able to measure this radiation, and thus infer that motion with unprecedented precision. This will permit researchers to measure unambiguously, for the first time, how fast a black hole is spinning. That, in turn, permits tests of Einstein’s general theory of relativity—the very theory that Schwarzschild used to put black holes on solid mathematical ground—that have remained out of reach until now. Shadows at night There is, though, a fundamental limit to such pursuits; there can be no way to peer within the event horizon. The best astronomers can hope for is to snap a detailed picture which shows not only the shadow cast by the horizon—an actual black void within the picture—but also the violent environment just outside it. That will require yet another bit of kit, and another spiral galaxy: the one that plays host to Earth. Feryal Ozel of the University of Arizona told the meeting about progress on the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT). This is designed to capture an image, built up from radio waves, of the Milky Way’s own supermassive black hole, dubbed Sagittarius A* because it is the brightest radio source in that constellation. Making such an image is hard. Sagittarius A* (or, rather, its event horizon) should be about 12m km across. That sounds big, but it is a twenty-billionth of the black hole’s distance from Earth. A telescope’s resolving power depends on the width of its aperture. The resolving power needed to see at that distance something even of the enormous size of Sagittarius A* therefore requires an extraordinarily large telescope. As a result the EHT is not a single facility but rather a collaboration between existing radio telescopes scattered across the world (see map). Together, these instruments perform a trick called very long baseline interferometry. At times when they are acting as part of the EHT, they will be pointed simultaneously at Sagittarius A*. The data thus gathered will then be shipped to a central facility in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on enormous disk drives, and there carefully combined in a way that makes it seem as if they had been collected by a single radio telescope with an aperture nearly as wide as the Earth itself. This should, if the EHT works as advertised, solve a number of outstanding mysteries about black holes: precisely how material falls into them, what causes the jets of material that sometimes squirt from near their polar regions, and just how good Einstein’s equations are at describing the most warped spacetime it is possible to see. That would be a rich haul of facts for a phenomenon that took two centuries to be taken seriously.Ripe for colonisation ONE of astronomy’s biggest changes of perspective in recent years has been the realisation that planets are abundant in the cosmos. But not everywhere. Collections of stars called globular clusters seem bereft of them. Globular clusters are roughly spherical collections of hundreds of thousands of stars. These, in turn, are among the oldest stellar inhabitants of galaxies. But though the Milky Way, the Earth’s home galaxy, has more than 150 globular clusters, so far only a single planet has been spotted in one: Messier 4 (see picture). Nothing daunted, Rosanne Di Stefano of the Harvard-Smithsonian Centre for Astrophysics and Alak Ray of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, in India, told the 2016 meeting of the American Astronomical Society why they think globular clusters are a good place to go hunting for advanced civilisations. First, the clusters’ very age means that life will have had the best chance of coming into existence and then climbing the ladder of complexity to the point where it can travel from star to star. Second, that age also means clusters have stopped being disrupted by life-destroying stellar explosions like supernovae and gamma-ray bursts. Third, the proximity of a cluster’s stars to one another means interstellar travel is not nearly as onerous as it would be for humanity. A spacefaring cluster-inhabitant would have to travel, on average, only about 1,000 times the distance from Earth to the sun to get to its nearest stellar neighbour. For humans, that distance is 275,000 times the Earth-sun distance. Not only does this make travel easier, it also makes communication practical. Messages between a home planet and its outposts could be sent and received with the same sort of delay as those between European countries and their colonies before the invention of the electric telegraph. This speculation does, of course, require the existence of many more globular-cluster planets than the lone example so far discovered. But Dr Di Stefano and Dr Ray are optimistic about that. Their models suggest that such planets will often be in stable orbits in the “Goldilocks” zones (not too hot and not too cold) of their host stars. It may be, then, that the galactic empires dreamed of by science-fiction writers were wrong only in scale, rather than concept. Colonising an entire galaxy was always going to be a big ask. Annexing a cluster, though, looks eminently doable.EVER since Marty McFly arrived in 2015 in “Back to the Future Part II” and discovered a levitating skateboard, people have tried to make one for real. But the film’s prediction, made in 1989, never quite came true. Although so-called hoverboards have created quite a public splash this Christmas (see Schumpeter) they do not really count. They use a wheel (or wheels) to do their “hovering”, with fancy electronics and stabilisers keeping them upright. A few boards that really do hover, employing magnets for the task, have been demonstrated—but these work only over appropriate metal surfaces. Various lash-ups, including one powered by four leaf-blowers that seems more hovercraft than hoverboard, have also appeared. Film of hoverboarders gliding across a car park in Los Angeles turned out to be an elaborate YouTube hoax. As 2015 turns into 2016, however, something resembling the real thing is going on sale. The ArcaBoard (pictured) does, admittedly, look like a giant iPhone case rather than a skateboard. But it truly does hover. It is 145cm long by 76cm wide (57x30 inches), is built from composite materials and contains 36 high-powered electric ducted fans of the type used to fly model jet aeroplanes. The fans are run by a pack of 72 lithium-polymer batteries, which provide just over 200 kilowatts of power. That, the manufacturers claim, is sufficient to lift and carry someone weighing 82kg (180lbs). In the ArcaBoard’s current configuration it can do this for six minutes. A beefed-up version is able to lift heavier people, but its flight duration drops to three minutes. The ArcaBoard has been developed by ARCA Space, a Romanian aerospace company founded in 1999 that recently moved its headquarters to Las Cruces, New Mexico. The firm has built a number of rockets and high-altitude drones, and has worked with the European Space Agency. The hoverboard arose from a discussion among the firm’s engineers about whether such a machine was possible, says Dragos Muresan, one of ARCA Space’s vice-presidents. They built a prototype and successfully rode on it. As enthusiasm for the idea grew, the company decided to put the device into production. The first hoverboards should be delivered in April.   The rider steers the board by shifting his body weight to provide yaw, but a built-in stabilisation system makes things easier. This uses a gyroscope and an accelerometer, connected to a computer, to keep the board level. It adjusts the thrust of individual fans in order to control the other two degrees of freedom of movement, pitch and roll. A proximity sensor on the board’s underside ensures it stays 30cm above the ground and a speed-limiter keeps its rate of progress below 20kph (12mph). Before adding such a hoverboard to next Christmas’s wish-list, however, you will want to consider the price: $19,900, plus an extra $4,500 for a fast-charger that can top up the batteries in 35 minutes rather than the six hours it would otherwise take. The gold-plated tag is hardly surprising, considering the hoverboard is made by rocket scientists using what they readily admit is pricey aerospace technology. Nevertheless, they hope to get the price down. The first mobile phones, after all, began as clunky, costly devices with limited performance. Now they are cheap enough for billions to own one. Imagine if (genuine) hoverboards went the same way.This map, just published in the American Naturalist by Kate Jones of University College, London, and her colleagues, shows, for any given part of the world, how many viral diseases bats and people share. That bats are reservoirs of illnesses which also affect people was brought to general attention by the recent outbreak of Ebola fever in west Africa. Ebola is spread by bats and, as the map shows, tropical Africa is the place with the greatest number of shared diseases. Dr Jones and her team used these data, culled from 453 studies carried out since the beginning of the 20th century, as the foundation of a model that also looked at things like population density and farming practices to pick out those areas at greatest risk of interspecies transmission. Adding these other factors in showed that a second risky place is south-eastern Asia, including south China. This was the point of origin of another disease outbreak, that of SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in 2002.
