BEFORE Donald Trump, there was Patrick Buchanan. More than two decades before Mr Trump kicked over the Republican tea table, Mr Buchanan, a former speechwriter and White House aide to Presidents Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, launched his own revolt against Republican grandees. He made bids for the Republican presidential nomination in 1992 and 1996, the first of which challenged a sitting president, George H.W. Bush. Like his billionaire successor, Mr Buchanan ran against free trade and called for restrictions on immigration. As early as 1991 he called for a fence on the border with Mexico (talk of a “great, great” wall would have to wait for Mr Trump). On foreign policy, the end of the cold war turned him into a non-interventionist. Mr Buchanan—who in 1972 accompanied Nixon on his trip to Maoist China—now concluded that America should shun foreign entanglements and defend only vital national interests. In January 1991 Mr Buchanan found himself speaking in New Hampshire during the American-led operation to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait, which he opposed. Stepping from the podium, he was given a message: America had just started bombing Baghdad. There goes my non-interventionist line, he recalls telling the watching governor of New Hampshire, Judd Gregg: it is “all over once the bombs begin to drop”. Mr Bush’s approval ratings rose to 90%. Yet by the time of the 1992 election the president was not saved by victory in the Gulf. Timing matters—a political lesson that Mr Buchanan learned early. He was one of the first aides to describe a new voter coalition that Nixon might assemble. This would unite business bosses with doctrinaire conservatives, southern whites, socially conservative Roman Catholics and middle Americans who liked such government safety nets as pensions for the old, but despised Democrats for seeming to condone social unrest—whether race riots, campus radicals or flag-burning protesters opposed to the war in Vietnam. In a memo of 1968 Mr Buchanan spoke of a “silent majority” to be won. Nixon made the phrase his own. Today Mr Trump calls his own supporters a “silent majority”, though his borrowing comes with a twist. In the late 1960s Nixon asked the “great silent majority” for their support. In 2015 the businessman assumes he has already sealed the deal. Printed signs handed out at his rallies declare: “The silent majority stands with Trump”. Asked about the slogan’s Nixonian overtones by the Washington Post, Mr Trump denied the connection, scoffing: “Nah. Nobody remembers that.” Speaking in his home in northern Virginia, Mr Buchanan does not grumble about Mr Trump’s swiping of his phrase. He is too interested in a new question of political timing. As a candidate, he was less successful than as an adviser. His high point was his win in the 1996 New Hampshire primary, after a populist surge that saw him declare: “The peasants are coming with pitchforks.” A full-size silver pitchfork (a gift from campaign aides) hangs in his wood-panelled study, alongside a souvenir mug that asks: “What would Nixon Do?” Back in the 1990s moderate Republicans agreed that Candidate Buchanan was doomed by his ferocious opposition to abortion, homosexuality and feminism: in 1992 he told his party’s national convention that America faced a “cultural war”. He also caused alarm with intemperate talk about Israel’s clout in Washington. Today, though, he argues that his timing was off when it came to three big issues: immigration, globalisation and non-interventionism. “Those issues are mature now,” says Mr Buchanan, rattling off statistics on undocumented immigrants in America (their numbers have more than tripled since 1991) and factory closures since such pacts as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was signed. At 77, Mr Buchanan writes newspaper columns and is a frequent public speaker. He reports that people “constantly” voice the same complaint to him: “This isn’t the country I grew up in.” He lists reasons why he thinks they are right: immigrants have reached even small communities, factory jobs have vanished and interventionist wars launched by George W. Bush left Americans “with ashes in our mouths”. Mr Buchanan was called a fringe candidate, a protectionist and an isolationist in the style of the America First Committee, which argued against declaring war on Nazi Germany. Now today’s frontrunner, Mr Trump, echoes his scorn for free-trade pacts and nation-building overseas, and praises Vladimir Putin (Mr Buchanan has long admired the Russian president’s ethno-nationalism). Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Mr Trump’s big rival on the hard right, recently said: “I believe in an “America first” foreign policy.” The silent majority, outnumbered Yet Mr Buchanan cannot conceal a thought that grieves him. Evidence to support his beliefs is, to him, now irrefutable. But if he was early in the 1990s, demographic and cultural shifts now make it too late to rally the conservative majorities that elected Nixon or Reagan. If given $100 to bet on the Republican nomination, Mr Buchanan would put at least $40 on Mr Trump and at least $30 on Mr Cruz, whom he compares to an earlier “down-the-line” conservative, Barry Goldwater (who lost the 1964 presidential election by a landslide). If he were Mr Trump, he would attack Hillary Clinton over free trade in rustbelt states such as Ohio, Pennsylvania and Michigan that are key to winning the White House. He would tell voters that “she and her husband” backed NAFTA and deals that “sent your jobs overseas”. No other Republican has Mr Trump’s potential to win some blue-collar Democrats, he says: “It is hard to see how Cruz, for example, takes Ohio.” For all that, he thinks the odds probably favour Mrs Clinton to win the election. Either way he sees a country “at war with itself ideologically and politically, culturally”, triggering a measure of foreign policy “paralysis”. If even half-right, it is a bleak prediction: America first nationalism, in a divided America.ONE afternoon eight months ago in the mountains of eastern El Salvador, Rosario Sánchez peered into a pit where forensic experts were at work. They were unearthing human remains—two skinny leg bones, several ribs and two halves of a skull. One held up a thin chain hardened with blood and soil. Ms Sánchez gasped. “My sister loved that necklace,” she said. Over three days in December 1981 soldiers from the Salvadorean army, who had been trained by the United States, machinegunned hundreds of unarmed men, women and children in the village of El Mozote and surrounding hamlets. It was the worst atrocity committed during the 12-year-long war between leftist guerrillas and El Salvador’s right-wing government, in which some 75,000 Salvadoreans died. No one has been punished for the massacre, and almost no one has been held to account for any other human-rights crime committed during the conflict. An amnesty law in 1993 shielded perpetrators on both sides from prosecution, and helped make a political settlement possible. As the exhumations in La Joya, near El Mozote, show, the amnesty is being called into question. El Salvador’s Supreme Court is considering a constitutional challenge to it. The court ruled in 2000 that the amnesty does not apply to violations of “fundamental” rights, but left it to judges and prosecutors to decide which crimes are grave enough to qualify. Some human-rights advocates argue that impunity for war crimes is one reason why El Salvador has the world’s highest murder rate, although other factors, such as the lack of economic opportunity, undoubtedly also play a role. “The same system that was incapable of investigating human-rights violations has found itself incapable of confronting post-war violence and crime,” says David Morales, El Salvador’s Human Rights Ombudsman. The country’s post-war reconciliation was in many ways exemplary. Both sides disarmed, the army shrank and the security forces were transformed into a civilian police. After the war’s end in 1992, a UN Truth Commission spent six months investigating “serious acts of violence”. It registered 22,000 complaints, 85% of them against the armed forces, paramilitary groups and right-wing death squads. Their left-wing foe, the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN), was accused in 5% of the cases. The commission’s report blamed the army’s elite Atlacatl battalion for the murder of six Jesuit priests in 1989 and for the El Mozote massacre, among other findings. For the leaders of post-war El Salvador, the commission’s revelations were justice enough. Five days after its report was published the government enacted the amnesty law. It is one of the few things on which both leftist and conservative politicians agree. “We chose peace over justice,” says Mauricio Vargas, a retired general who represented the army in the peace process. Without the amnesty, “the whole building comes crashing down.” Salvador Samayoa, who represented the guerrillas, warns that if the left demands trials of former military officers the right will go after ex-guerrillas, including the president, Salvador Sánchez Céren. He was a commander of the FMLN, which became a political party after the war. Other countries in Latin America, perhaps surer that their democracies are stable, are testing whether justice in the courts will jeopardise peace. In Guatemala, a UN–backed commission to investigate corruption has strengthened the justice system. That helped make it possible for prosecutors to bring several human-rights cases, including against the former dictator, Efraín Rios Montt. Colombia, which is close to a peace agreement with leftist FARC guerrillas, whom it has been fighting for more than 50 years, will not offer a general amnesty, although just how criminals will be punished has yet to be decided. Not even past The United States, once a haven for criminals from Latin America’s wars, has changed its stance. It is seeking to deport José Guillermo García, a former Salvadorean defence minister, on charges that he bears responsibility for the El Mozote massacre and the murder in 1980 of three American nuns and a lay worker. A proposed $750m aid package for three Central American countries sets as one condition that governments must prosecute soldiers and police officers suspected of human-rights violations, including past war crimes. In El Mozote daily reminders of the atrocity keep alive the demand for an accounting. One farmer, digging the foundation for a new house, recently uncovered skeletons of 15 of his relatives. He recognised his mother’s skull from the crown on a tooth. Still isolated and poor, the village trades on its tragedy: locals sell mementos of the massacre at stalls near the site and jostle to relate the story to tourists in exchange for small tips. The demand for justice is chipping away at El Salvador’s amnesty. In 1990 relatives of the victims, helped by Tutela Legal, a human-rights group, filed a suit at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Twenty-two years later the court ordered El Salvador’s government to investigate the massacre, punish the culprits and compensate victims’ relatives. El Salvador’s then-president, Mauricio Funes, admitted the state’s responsibility and, weeping publicly, begged forgiveness. A trickle of aid to El Mozote followed: a clinic, computers for the school and road repairs. But the messy conduct of the exhumation shows how little official enthusiasm there is for investigation and punishment. The human-rights unit of the attorney-general’s office, which promised in 2013 to investigate El Mozote and seven other massacres, put in charge of the dig a systems engineer with no formal training in excavation. Work started in the rainy season, when floods threatened to damage DNA evidence. The villagers received no advance notice, and at first no counselling from psychologists. Instead of healing wounds, the investigation reopened them, their lawyers said. The intervention of the government’s forensics agency, the Legal Medicine Institute, improved matters, and showed that the government’s apparent hostility to the investigation is not uniform. The agency assigned three Canadians—two anthropologists and an archaeologist—to help with the excavation. The attorney-general’s office sought to undermine the three women, claiming that they were unqualified. The director of the human-rights unit, Mario Jacobo, declined to comment on the conduct of the excavation. He recently lost responsibility for it. A judge suspended it after two weeks of digging, and said it should resume under the direction of the Legal Medicine Institute. Work is likely to restart in early 2016. Although opinion may be shifting, many Salvadoreans are loth to unpick an amnesty that has served the country well in many ways. There is speculation that the Supreme Court will strike a compromise: uphold the amnesty law, but compel prosecutors and judges to pursue violations of fundamental rights, rather than leaving the decision to them, as its earlier ruling did. On November 23rd six members of the United States House of Representatives sent a letter to legislators in El Salvador urging them to choose a “new attorney-general focused on defeating corruption and organised crime”. This was widely interpreted as a slap at the incumbent, Luis Martínez, who hopes to be re-elected by El Salvador’s Congress. The families of El Mozote hope that pressure to investigate and punish today’s crimes will lead to prosecutions for past atrocities. In December laboratory tables in the San Salvador headquarters of the Legal Medicine Institute were covered with the bones of Ms Sánchez’s murdered relatives. Brittle and brown, they lay among bundles of tattered clothing and stacks of rusted coins. Other tables displayed larger, lighter-coloured bones. They belonged to unidentified victims of recent gang violence. The government—and probably still most Salvadoreans—think going after today’s murderous gangs should be the priority: 95% of murders are unsolved. To the survivors of El Mozote, both groups of victims are entitled to the same justice.Nice sash, horrible inheritance MAURICIO MACRI, who took office as Argentina’s president in December, has wasted little time in undoing the populist policies of his predecessor. On December 14th he scrapped export taxes on agricultural products such as wheat, beef and corn and reduced them on soyabeans, the biggest export. Two days later Alfonso Prat-Gay, the new finance minister, lifted currency controls, allowing the peso to float freely. A team from the new government then met the mediator in a dispute with foreign bondholders in an attempt to end Argentina’s isolation from the international credit markets.  This flurry of decisions is the first step towards normalising an economy that had been skewed by the interventionist policies of ex-president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner, who governed before her. They carry an immediate cost, which Mr Macri will seek to pin on the Kirchners. Some of the new president’s other early initiatives are proving more controversial. The economic reforms seem to be working. Farmers who had hoarded grain in the hope that the tariffs would be lifted are now selling, replenishing foreign-exchange reserves that had been drained to defend the artificially strong peso. The newly freed currency fell by more than 30%, a further boost to exporters. It has stabilised at around 13 pesos to the dollar. “Substantive” talks with holdout bondholders starting in early January could lead to a return to credit markets in 2016. But the devaluation has pushed up the inflation rate, already more than 25% when Mr Macri took office. To rein it back, on December 15th the central bank raised interest rates on short-term fixed deposits by eight percentage points to 38%. The government hopes to persuade business and trade-union leaders to keep tight control of prices and wages. But that may prove difficult: the unions are fragmented and little disposed to help Mr Macri, a centre-right politician; businesses may balk at holding down prices. Barclays, a bank, expects the economy to contract by 1.1% in 2016. But increased foreign investment should lead to renewed growth of 3.5% in 2017. Mr Macri’s attempts to bring fresh talent into institutions dominated by Ms Fernández’s kirchneristas have run into resistance, from both foes and allies. On December 14th, with the Senate in recess, Mr Macri temporarily appointed by decree two Supreme Court judges. He then booted out the chief of the media regulator, Martín Sabbatella. In both cases his motives were worthy. He wants independent jurists in the courts. Mr Sabbatella had clashed with Grupo Clarín, a big media group. Mr Macri thinks his removal will strengthen press freedom. But critics say he misused his authority. On the judges, at least, he has relented. He will now wait for the Senate’s approval. Touring northern Argentina, where 20,000 people have been displaced from their homes by floods, Mr Macri blamed the former president, saying she had failed to invest in flood defences (see article). For now, Argentines are likely to believe their new president. However, if the economic slowdown is prolonged, the honeymoon will not be.THE bronze statue of a teenage “comfort woman” in Seoul, South Korea’s capital, is intended as a daily rebuke to the Japanese embassy opposite. The figure represents one of many thousands of Korean women who were forced to serve as prostitutes in wartime military brothels catering to imperial Japanese soldiers. Citizens’ groups paid for the figure to be erected in 2011 when relations between Japan and South Korea were at a nadir. Well-wishers bring her flowers, shoes and, in stormy weather, even a hat and raincoat. Yet now the statue is meant to move elsewhere as part of a landmark agreement struck between the two countries on December 28th to try to settle their dispute over comfort women once and for all—and transform dangerously strained relations. Of former sex slaves who have come forward in South Korea, only 46 survive. Under the deal, South Korea will set up a fund for them into which the Japanese government will pay $8.3m for their medical and nursing care. The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has expressed “sincere apologies and remorse” for their suffering, which was appalling. In all, there were tens of thousands of comfort women. Many were raped dozens of times a day, beaten and infected with venereal diseases. It is a big change for Mr Abe, who has in the past questioned whether the comfort women were coerced at all. But he hopes to have found what the two countries’ foreign ministers called a “final and irrevocable” resolution to an issue that has poisoned the relationship for years. South Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye, hailed the deal—hastened by the two leaders’ first bilateral meeting in November—as a key to improved relations. The administration of Barack Obama is cock-a-hoop that its two closest Asian allies are making up. It had long pressed South Korea to do so. Better relations between the two should help America’s strategy to balance China’s rise. But some South Korean policymakers had also grown uneasy that relations with Japan were at a dead end and—though they would not say it out loud—that Ms Park sometimes seemed to hew too closely to China. Meanwhile, a stronger trilateral relationship with Japan and America would help in dealing with dangerous North Korea. It has taken time for Ms Park to see all this, and her family history helps explain why. Her late father, Park Chung-hee, was a star officer in the Japanese imperial army, and later the South Korean dictator who normalised relations with Japan. These were liabilities for the cautious Ms Park as anti-Japanese hysteria grew. A question now is whether a deal will hold. Some of Japan’s loony ultranationalists will feel betrayed by Mr Abe. But he is too politically dominant at home to be worried by that. Besides, the government can argue that saying sorry does not imply legal responsibility, which was settled in Japan’s normalisation treaty with South Korea in 1965. “We didn’t give an inch,” says a government adviser. Indeed, one observer critical of Japan’s attitudes towards history, Tessa Morris-Suzuki of the Australian National University, says that the agreement rows back from the landmark Kono statement of 1993, Japan’s first official acknowledgment of wartime coercion. For it refers only to the imperial army’s “involvement” in the recruitment of comfort women, while excluding references to the use of deception or force. The agreement is more likely to face problems in South Korea. Groups representing the survivors say that the women were not consulted, and at least one of them has already railed against it as a betrayal. South Korean activists will oppose moving the statue, something Japan cares deeply about. Calls may grow for Mr Abe to come and make a personal apology to survivors, rather than through Ms Park. Whether he would swallow his pride to do so is unclear. Chung-in Moon of Yonsei University in Seoul says it is a fragile deal born of diplomatic necessity. Make it work Yet both sides have good reason to try to make it stick, for the bilateral relationship could quickly improve, on military matters as well as others. For instance, an agreement to share military intelligence that was scuppered in 2012 could be revived. The benefits could also show in trade diplomacy, with Japan and America working together to bring South Korea into the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free-trade grouping recently agreed among a dozen countries. With luck, the idea of two democracies in a dangerous corner of the world not talking to each other will soon look too absurd to go back to.Voiding the topic ain’t gonna stop it BRIGHTLY coloured plastic flowers greet patients at the reception desk of Nguyen To Hao’s abortion clinic. Yet the mood in her waiting room is grim. Ms Hao, an obstetrician and gynaecologist, says that many of her patients are teenagers who know shockingly little about sex or its consequences. Some young women with late-term pregnancies are sent to a nearby hospital for abortions; others carry their pregnancies to term and leave their newborn babies in the care of Buddhist monks. Unwanted pregnancies could be avoided if only Vietnam had better sex education in secondary schools. A Vietnamese adage claims that avoiding discussions of sex is the surest way to “prevent the deer from running”. Yet the deer are “already running”, Dr Hao insists, and the government is failing to guide them. Vietnam’s abortion rate is not known for certain, but is thought to be among the world’s highest. According to researchers at the Central Obstetrics Hospital in Hanoi, the capital, two-fifths of all pregnancies in Vietnam end in abortion—double the government’s tally. Ignorance about sex and contraception is one glaring factor. Some women who have abortions never meant to get pregnant. Others desperately wanted a boy, since male children keep the family bloodline going and are traditionally expected to look after their elderly parents. Sex-selective abortions have been illegal since 2003, but the ban is hard to enforce. Ultrasounds are widely available. Nguyen Thi Hien, a mother of two in Hanoi, says that for $75 doctors at the capital’s private clinics are happy to tell couples the sex of their fetus. So for every 100 girls, 111 boys are born in Vietnam, according to the UN Population Fund—a sex ratio at birth nearly as lopsided as neighbouring China’s. Vietnam’s Communist Party worries that this sex imbalance will leave a generation of men struggling to find a mate. As in other societies with lots of frustrated single men, that may mean more trafficking and prostitution, more rape and a greater risk of political instability. Vietnam’s reproductive and demographic policies are in flux. China’s recent decision to relax its one-child policy may prompt Vietnam to reconsider its own (more loosely enforced) two-child policy, says a former official from Vietnam’s health ministry. The ministry is now soliciting public comments for a revision of that law, and the National Assembly may take it up this spring. It is not a moment too soon. A whopping two-thirds of the country’s 90m people are of working age. That gives Vietnam a chance to boom economically over the next three decades. But the “demographic dividend” may then stop abruptly. Fertility rates in some Vietnamese cities have fallen to below the population replacement rate, a trend that could eventually lead to a shortage of workers, as Japan and other rich countries have learnt to their cost. The difference is that Vietnam risks growing old before it grows rich. The new population law, in its current wording, would not help. It proposes to leave the two-child policy in place and ban abortion after 12 weeks, down from the current limit of 22 weeks, except in cases of rape. That may send even more pregnant Vietnamese into shadowy abortion clinics. In September some 17 public-health professionals complained about the proposed law in a letter to the health minister. Such pressure may prompt the government to extend the proposed 12-week limit. However, the population-control measures being mulled by the ministry contain another troubling feature: a pre-natal focus on “population quality”. That sounds harmless enough, but the underlying idea, according to a foreign health-policy expert in Hanoi, is that health officials could encourage mothers to abort fetuses showing signs of disability. Some in the ministry have also proposed lifting the two-child policy in cities while continuing to enforce it in the countryside—ie, encouraging the better-educated and better-off to have more children while denying the same right to poor folk, including ethnic minorities, who view their children and grandchildren as their only social safety net. That would allow the bureaucrats in charge of the two-child policy to keep their jobs. But the idea is regressive, unfair and needs to be junked.He’s backed by a fat budget SITTING on the floor with neighbours, Sakariya uses a mobile phone to flick through photos of his son. In one, Kholid stands dressed in his school uniform. In another he sits hunched over his university work. In a third he is dead—lying cold on a mortuary slab. The picture was taken in March, only hours after soldiers surrounded a group of men at a construction site in Toh Chud, their home in Thailand’s restive south. Seven bullet holes perforate his chest. Kholid was one of four to die that day—victims of a botched operation seeking to collar murderous separatists who for years have dreamed of resurrecting an independent sultanate in Thailand’s southern borderlands. Nearly two dozen villagers were detained and interrogated but later released. The men who were shot may have tried to run, perhaps for fear of being found with soft drugs on them. A fact-finding panel says the killings were an error. Compensation is promised. But what the families want is justice, says Mohammad, another parent whose son is among the dead. Toh Chud up in the hills had mostly managed to escape the nightmares suffered by so many communities in Thailand’s southernmost provinces. Of 2m-odd people in the region, over four-fifths are ethnic-Malay Muslims. Hotheads among them have long agitated against the Thai government in Bangkok and its policies of assimilation—denying the region autonomy, for instance, and even recognition of the local Malay language. In 2004 secretive insurgent groups began a campaign of exceptionally violent attacks on security forces as well as on their own Buddhist neighbours. Since then about 6,500 people have died in this lush coastal strip, most of them civilians. Terrorists have bombed shops and restaurants and murdered scores of schoolteachers, who are seen as agents of the state; victims’ bodies are sometimes beheaded or set alight. Moderate ethnic-Malays considered to be collaborators are also targets. On December 13th an ethnic-Malay Thai soldier and his father were blown up in a graveyard, where they had gone to bury his mother.  State violence has done much to boost the body count. The apparent legal immunity enjoyed by trigger-happy soldiers and pro-government vigilantes continues to radicalise new generations of combatants. Kholid’s family say his killers placed an assault rifle next to his body to make him look like an insurgent. Over the past decade seven Thai governments, swept in and out of power by broader political problems, have grasped for a resolution. Officials say that regional autonomy of the type that has soothed Islamist insurgencies in Indonesia and the Philippines is off the table. But so are smaller concessions, such as formal recognition of the region’s odd Malay language. Some argue that the fat budget the security forces get to prosecute the conflict gives them little incentive to end it. Three checkpoints clog the road out of Pattani, a seaside town, each manned by a different force. Some energy has gone into boosting the deep south’s economy, which depends greatly on its rubber trees. Though it remains far poorer than Bangkok, the region is not as hard-up as some other far-flung parts of Thailand. But locals tend to compare their fortunes with those of ethnic kin across the border in Malaysia, where laws grant the Malay majority a host of advantages over ethnic-Chinese and Indian minorities. Christopher Joll, an academic, says the region is like “meat in a sandwich”, squeezed by inflexible nationalisms from either side. Thailand’s ruling junta, which had said it would try to fix the conflict by the end of 2015, trumpets progress. Lured by the promise of fresh peace talks, a gaggle of once-shadowy separatist groups has formed a common political wing. The violence has ebbed markedly in recent months. But Don Pathan, a local security analyst, speculates that militants may be swapping frequent small assaults for better planned and more lethal ones. As for dialogue, hardliners within BRN, the most powerful rebel group, say they will play no part in the junta’s proposed talks. Peace-builders on the ground complain that it is getting harder to discuss unpopular solutions. The army has long refused to countenance international mediation, one of the separatists’ principal demands, for fear of legitimising separatist claims. And it is hardly likely to consider devolving powers when it is busily recentralising the state, in part to neuter the government’s opponents in other provinces and in part to keep a lid on the dissent which may follow a looming royal succession. Matt Wheeler of the International Crisis Group, a research outfit, thinks the generals are simply “kicking the can down the road”. Yet that carries two risks. Although the insurgents have largely rejected international jihadism, some people fret that Islamic State’s flashy propaganda may yet find an audience among the region’s unhappy young. Lately someone in cyberspace has been adding Thai subtitles to the jihadists’ video-nasties. In graphics: Explaining Thailand’s volatile politics A deeper worry is that the bubbling southern war may fuel Buddhist chauvinism. Perhaps a tenth of Thais are Muslim, most of them living well-integrated lives far from the conflict zone. On a recent public holiday girls in black headscarves cycled cheerfully around the Haroon mosque, one of Bangkok’s oldest, which was festooned with royal flags. Yet Thailand’s Muslims are gradually growing more conservative under the influence of Middle Eastern doctrines, which unnerves their Buddhist compatriots. And some people think that Buddhist authorities are growing more strident as the influence of Thailand’s royal establishment, which has traditionally checked them, begins to wane. In October a senior Buddhist monk said that Thais should set fire to a mosque every time southern “bandits” kill a monk. The locals gathered at the house in Toh Chud worry that outsiders are seeking to sow division. Unlike nearby ghettos, their village of 300 households includes 30 Buddhist families, and the tragedy in March has tightened their village bonds. On the day of the raid local Buddhists helped to conceal one young man who had escaped the soldiers’ cordon. As lunch approaches, Somkhuan, a Buddhist who once served as village headman, joins the group for a smoke. When his daughter got married he threw two parties, his neighbours recall enthusiastically, one of them halal. Such good relations are not a big deal, Somkhuan says: it has always been this way. But what if Toh Chud started to become the exception?NARENDRA MODI likes to make a splash abroad. On December 25th he turned up in Pakistan, the first visit by an Indian prime minister in more than a decade, for an impromptu summit with his counterpart, Nawaz Sharif. At home, though, Mr Modi appears less impressive. Despite his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)’s thumping general-election victory in 2014, his promises of business-friendly reforms are stuck. The passage of an all-embracing value-added tax, known as the goods and services tax (GST), has become the litmus test of his liberalising credentials. It is the one reform that both the BJP and the opposition Congress party ostensibly agree on. Raising funds for both the federal government at the centre and the states, it is meant to replace a monstrous excrescence of taxes, duties, surcharges and cesses levied by the centre, the states and local authorities—a system that fragments the economy and gives huge scope for corruption by officials and politicians. Replacing most taxes with a GST would, for the first time, create a single market in India—of 1.3 billion people. The latest and perhaps most promising attempt to pass the necessary constitutional amendment failed with the closing of the winter session of parliament in December. Mr Modi will try again in the budget session, which opens in February. But if he is to succeed, he will have to overcome India’s cynical politics. The economy grew at a pleasing annualised rate of 7.4% from July to September—faster than China’s. Yet many economists cast doubt on the official figures, and Mr Modi’s attempt to boost manufacturing is not making much progress. Indeed, the best chance of turning his slogan of “Make in India” into reality is through a single market—“Make in India by Making One India”, as a recent government report put it. The existing system, senior officials say, taxes production more than consumption and, in effect, subsidises importers at the expense of domestic producers. Perversely, trade between states is taxed, through a central sales tax of 2%. Some states also impose duties on products entering from elsewhere in India. Lorries are held up at internal checkpoints (see picture). An executive from a prominent Indian firm explains that, because trade between one state and another is subject to the central sales tax while the transfers of inventory are not, his company has set up warehouses in every state to avoid the tax. And because duties paid on inputs often cannot be claimed back, there is a “cascade” of taxes levied upon previous ones. Among other things, it discourages investment in machinery. “The entire ecosystem”, he says, “works to optimise tax, not productivity.” One study suggests that a “flawless” GST—with a single rate for all goods and services, and minimal exemptions—could boost Indian growth by anything between 0.9 and 1.7 percentage points a year. Another benefit would be to create a paper trail and an incentive for firms to declare transactions in order to claim tax credits, so reducing overall tax evasion. Attempts to streamline indirect taxes date back to liberalisations in the 1990s, yet moves towards forms of value-added taxes have been partial at best. A version of a more encompassing GST bill was passed by the lower house in May. Unwisely, it postponed imposing the tax on oil products (a vital input) till an unspecified future date. It exempted alcohol entirely. That these two categories currently account for a large share of states’ revenues (and of illicit party funding) is no coincidence. The bill also still stipulates a temporary central sales tax, of 1%, on interstate trade. Even this watered-down law has been stuck in Parliament’s upper house, where the BJP lacks a majority. When Congress was in office, its own attempt to introduce a GST was blocked by the BJP. Now it acts as the spoiler. Congress rightly objects to the central sales tax. But its demand that the constitution should enshrine a maximum rate for the GST of 18% makes little sense. (A third demand is for a different mechanism to resolve disputes over the working of the tax.) For more than a year Mr Modi haughtily ignored the opposition. He no doubt hoped that the momentum from his general-election victory would carry him to wins in subsequent state elections, automatically sending delegates to the upper house and giving him a majority there, too. But lately the BJP has been defeated in key places, most recently in Bihar, the third-most-populous state. So Mr Modi has become a bit humbler. He belatedly invited Sonia Gandhi, president of Congress, and Manmohan Singh, his predecessor as prime minister, to tea in the hope of finding a deal on a GST. A committee led by the finance ministry’s chief economic adviser, Arvind Subramanian, offered some concessions: scrapping the central sales tax and setting two bands for the GST (a standard rate of 17-18% and a lower 12% rate for certain sensitive goods) which are within Congress’s declared ceiling. The committee also proposed that alcohol as well as property transactions should be subject to the GST; in return, states could levy “sin taxes” on things like alcohol and tobacco of up to 40%. Taxing times The committee’s report appeared to bring a much-improved GST bill within reach. But Congress took to disrupting the upper house. The cause of its rowdy outrage at first was the government’s “intolerance” of minorities (especially Muslims); then a minister’s allegedly derogatory remarks about low-caste dalits; then the BJP’s supposed “vendetta” in a court wrangle involving Mrs Gandhi, her son Rahul, and the allegedly corrupt disposal of a failed party newspaper; and lastly the party’s demand that the finance minister, Arun Jaitley, should step down over claims of corruption in cricket. Congress might have claimed victory in forcing Mr Modi to see sense over the GST, even as it challenged his excesses. Instead it chose obstructionism. If he is to secure any economic legacy, Mr Modi may now have to spend more time on the art of buttering up opponents at home rather than fellow leaders abroad.
