We invite applications for the 2016 Richard Casement internship. We are looking for a would-be journalist to spend three months of the summer working on the newspaper in London, writing about science and technology. Applicants should write a letter introducing themselves and an original article of about 600 words that they think would be suitable for publication in the Science and Technology section. They should be prepared to come for an interview in London or Washington, DC, at their own expense. A stipend of £2,000 a month will be paid to the successful candidate. Applications must reach us by January 29th. These should be sent to: [email protected]ON JANUARY 20th those who see themselves as the global elite will gather in the Alpine resort town of Davos to contemplate the “fourth industrial revolution”, the theme chosen by Klaus Schwab, the ringmaster of the circus known as the World Economic Forum. This revolution will be bigger than anything the world has seen before, he says. It will be a tsunami compared with previous squalls. It will be more disruptive. It will be more interconnected; indeed, the revolution will take place “inside a complex ecosystem”. Not only will it change what people do, it will change who they are. Anybody who is tempted by this argument should read Robert Gordon’s magnificent new book. An American economist who teaches at Northwestern University, Mr Gordon has long been famous in academic circles for advancing three iconoclastic arguments. The first is that the internet revolution is hyped. The second is that the best way to appreciate the extent of the hype is to look at the decades after the civil war, when America was transformed by inventions such as the motor car and electricity. The third is that the golden age of American growth may be over. In “The Rise and Fall of American Growth” Mr Gordon presents his case for a general audience—and he does so with great style and panache, supporting his argument with vivid examples as well as econometric data, while keeping a watchful eye on what economic change means for ordinary Americans. Even if history changes direction, and Mr Gordon’s rise-and-fall thesis proves to be wrong, this book will survive as a superb reconstruction of material life in America in the heyday of industrial capitalism. The technological revolutions of the late 19th century transformed the world. The life that Americans led before that is unrecognisable. Their idea of speed was defined by horses. The rhythm of their days was dictated by the rise and fall of the sun. The most basic daily tasks—getting water for a bath or washing clothes—were back-breaking chores. As Mr Gordon shows, a succession of revolutions transformed every aspect of life. The invention of electricity brought light in the evenings. The invention of the telephone killed distance. The invention of what General Electric called “electric servants” liberated women from domestic slavery. The speed of change was also remarkable. In the 30 years from 1870 to 1900 railway companies added 20 miles of track each day. By the turn of the century, Sears Roebuck, a mail-order company that was founded in 1893, was fulfilling 100,000 orders a day from a catalogue of 1,162 pages. The price of cars plummeted by 63% between 1912 and 1930, while the proportion of American households that had access to a car increased from just over 2% to 89.8%. America quickly pulled ahead of the rest of the world in almost every new technology—a locomotive to Europe’s snail, as Andrew Carnegie put it. In 1900 Americans had four times as many telephones per person as the British, six times as many as the Germans and 20 times as many as the French. Almost one-sixth of the world’s railway traffic passed through a single American city, Chicago. Thirty years later Americans owned more than 78% of the world’s motor cars. It took the French until 1948 to have the same access to cars and electricity that America had in 1912. The Great Depression did a little to slow America’s momentum. But the private sector continued to innovate. By some measures, the 1930s were the most productive decade in terms of the numbers of inventions and patents granted relative to the size of the economy. Franklin Roosevelt’s government invested in productive capacity with the Tennessee Valley Authority and the Hoover Dam. The second world war demonstrated the astonishing power of America’s production machine. After 1945 America consolidated its global pre-eminence by constructing a new global order, with the Marshall Plan and the Bretton Woods institutions, and by pouring money into higher education. The 1950s and 1960s were a golden age of prosperity in which even people with no more than a high-school education could enjoy a steady job, a house in the suburbs and a safe retirement. But Mr Gordon’s tone grows gloomy when he turns to the 1970s. Economic turbulence increased as well-known American companies were shaken by foreign competition, particularly from Japan, and as fuel prices surged thanks to the OPEC oil-price rise. Economic inequality surged as the rich pulled ahead of the rest. Productivity growth fell: having reached an average of 2.82% a year between 1920 and 1970, output per hour between 1970 and 2014 grew by an annual rate of no more than 1.62%. America today faces powerful headwinds: an ageing population, rising health-care and education costs, soaring inequality and festering social ills. What chance does the country have of restoring its lost dynamism? Mr Gordon has no time for the techno-Utopians who think that the information revolution will rescue America from such “secular stagnation”. His attitude to the IT revolution is much the same as that of Peter Thiel, a venture capitalist, who famously said: “We wanted flying cars but instead we got 140 characters.” America has already harvested the fruits of the IT revolution. The growth rate increased each year in the decade after 1994, but the spurt did not last and it has since fallen back since. Now Mr Gordon thinks that Moore’s law is beginning to fade and the new economy is turning into a mirage. He can be forgiven for giving such short shrift to Davos types who have no sense of history: driverless cars will change the world less than the invention of cars in the first place. He is also surely right that America faces unusually heavy challenges in future. But he goes too far in downplaying the current IT revolution. Where the first half of the book is brilliant, the second can be frustrating. Mr Gordon understates how IT has transformed people’s lives and he has little to say about the extent to which artificial intelligence will intensify this. He also fails to come to terms with the extent to which, thanks to 3D printing and the internet of things, the information revolution is spreading from the virtual world to the physical world. Mr Gordon may be right that the IT revolution will not restore economic growth rates to the level America once enjoyed. Only time will tell. But he is definitely wrong to underplay the extent to which the revolution is changing every aspect of our daily lives. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of Living since the Civil War. By Robert Gordon. Princeton University Press; 762 pages; $39.95 and £27.95.The Rift: A New Africa Breaks Free. By Alex Perry. Little, Brown; 448 pages; $30. Weidenfeld & Nicolson; 320 pages; £20. FEW African leaders arouse such divided opinions as Paul Kagame, president of Rwanda since 2000 but its de facto leader since 1994, when his Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), a rebel group, seized power and ended the country’s genocide. For many observers Mr Kagame is an ascetic, an austere moderniser who has pulled his country back from its descent into barbarism and overseen reforms aimed at improving its governance and boosting the economy. Critics contend that his forces have killed thousands of people and that his government ruthlessly suppresses opposition, murdering dissidents both at home and abroad. For Alex Perry, who spent time with Mr Kagame while he was Africa bureau chief for Time magazine, neither of these Manichean views is quite right; nor are they quite wrong. After confronting Mr Kagame with allegations that his rebel forces had killed 25,000 people in reprisal massacres after the genocide, the president “growled that the real story was how many people the RPF didn’t kill,” Mr Perry writes. “We had to battle extreme anger among our own men,” he quotes Mr Kagame as saying. “So many had lost their families and they had guns in their hands. Whole villages could have been wiped out. But we did not allow it.” Mr Perry’s ability to capture the complexities of stories in which there are no clear heroes nor outright villains echoes again and again through his latest book, “The Rift”. Written with a clear eye after criss-crossing the continent, he offers telling glimpses of an Africa that defies stereotyping. The author is at his strongest when he describes just how many people have done Africa a disservice, even when setting out to help. He stands in the ruins of the Somali capital, Mogadishu, talking to a mother whose child dies of malnutrition before his eyes; the famine was largely caused by Western governments blocking the flow of food aid to Somalia in the belief that this would weaken the grip of the Shabab, a jihadist group. In another chapter Mr Perry describes how United Nations (UN) peacekeepers working in South Sudan shuffle paperwork in air-conditioned bungalows or jog around their sprawling camps wearing Lycra, while outside the gates large bulldozers are shovelling bodies into mass graves. “They saved our lives late,” says one refugee who described repeated rebel attacks on a refugee camp just a few minutes away from a large UN base whose peacekeepers did not venture out. “They did not risk until it became peaceful.” Yet the clarity of Mr Perry’s reporting, which is reason enough to read his book, is not matched by the metaphor of “The Rift”. The book revolves around the idea that, much as a new continent is slowly cleaving itself away from the rest along the Rift Valley, so too a new Africa is being born from the old. Aside from a few pages at the end where Mr Perry writes of African innovations, including ways of reversing desertification, the book does not quite live up to its promise.Eisenhower’s Armies: The American-British Alliance during World War II. By Niall Barr. Pegasus; 544 Pages; $35. MANY writers have explored the relationship between Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill. Just as rich, but sometimes overlooked, are the complexities of British and American military co-operation during the second world war. Niall Barr, a military historian at King’s College London, sifts through the squabbles and triumphs; his is an authoritative and highly readable account. It was, he writes, the first time that two armies had worked together so closely in wartime. During the first world war, America’s top general had irked Britain and France by insisting on maintaining a separate army. In the second world war the British and the Americans adopted a unified command structure, clearing the way for the appointment of Dwight Eisenhower (pictured) in 1943 as Allied Supreme Commander. However, one lingering benefit of the earlier structure, Mr Barr notes, is that it gave American officers like George Marshall and George Patton an independence and authority that would prove invaluable in the strike against Hitler. The transatlantic military alliance did not restart auspiciously. As Hitler rolled through Europe, some Americans wondered if Britain could hold out. One military observer questioned whether the British army could handle the “high centralisation and co-ordination demanded by the machine age.” Britain urgently sought American aid, which often fell short. Even before Lend-Lease, America sent Britain rifles leftover from 1919, still packed in grease, with bullets of the wrong calibre, which made them useless. “Eisenhower’s Armies” is packed with such nuggets. When cultures mixed, the British came across as snobby, the Americans as braggarts. Tensions grew in England as better-paid American soldiers arrived ahead of the cross-Channel invasion, depressing local troops. “Morale is a psychological problem like sex, and therefore the Britisher is almost ashamed to talk about it,” said one anxious British general. On the battlefield, British troops often shaved daily; Americans grew stubble. British drinks baffled the Americans. “All they seem to be doing is brewing tea,” stormed one American officer in the Netherlands, incredulous that British troops had been made to pause rather than push forward to aid another division. Among the generals, rivalries ran deep. Commanders from both nations wanted to be the first to grab big prizes such as Berlin. America’s swaggering General Patton disliked Brits, including Field Marshall Bernard Montgomery, a vital but flawed commander. Montgomery in turn scorned Eisenhower, who for his part had the unenviable task of soothing egos and balancing political concerns with military ones. Eisenhower had to deal with Churchill, who nosed into military affairs more than American politicians did. Disagreements arose over strategy, most prominently over whether to make the first big joint operation a cross-channel invasion (the Americans’ choice) or a strike into the Mediterranean (Britain’s choice). The rise of America is a prominent theme. Before the war, its army was smaller than Romania’s. But as the nation rearmed and GIs poured overseas, Britain felt its standing begin to wane. British brass felt “pipped at the post”, Mr Barr writes, by their huge, ever-more-powerful ally. In August 1944 Eisenhower was forced to reassure Churchill that America had no desire to “disregard British views, or coldbloodedly to leave Britain holding an empty bag in any of our joint undertakings”. Tensions were clearly rife. But in the end, Mr Barr offers high praise for the fundamentals of the partnership. The “sheer depth, scale and scope of the alliance between Britain and the United States during the second world war is hard to comprehend, even now,” he writes. Seven decades into the special relationship, no test as grave as a world war has resurfaced; but on countless vital matters, from Afghanistan to Syria, the alliance endures, made stronger by discussion and debate.1946: The Making of the Modern World. By Victor Sebestyen. Pantheon; 438 pages; $30. Macmillan; 456 pages; £25. IT WOULD be hard to imagine a more depressing moment than the first year after the end of the second world war. The guns had mostly fallen silent, but millions were still dying from famine, disease or civil strife. Large areas of Europe and Asia lay in ruins. Vast numbers of refugees were on the move. Many people wondered how their economies could ever be revived. Britain was, in effect, broke; Berlin’s water supply was still polluted by corpses. Japan, an island nation vitally dependent on trade, had lost 80% of its merchant marine. The Marshall Plan, which would use funds provided by America to coax European industries back to life, lay in the future. As Victor Sebestyen points out in his new book, “1946”, optimists were in short supply. “Very few people at the end of 1946 believed that recovery was around the corner, or even that it was possible,” he writes. The main change that year was the start of the cold war. As Mr Sebestyen argues, it was a Soviet-sponsored coup in an obscure corner of Iran at the beginning of the year that first prompted policymakers in the West to question Moscow’s motives. Stalin stepped up his campaign against internal dissent; the Gulag camps began to fill again. Civil wars in Greece and China pitted communists against defenders of the old order, reflecting global tensions as much as internal ones. All this helps to explain why 1946 was the year when Winston Churchill, by then out of office, gave a speech in America that made “Iron Curtain” a household phrase. Mr Sebestyen would have been well advised to shape his narrative around this theme. Instead he bombards the reader with short, staccato chapters, in rough chronological order. One moment he is in Japan, as Emperor Hirohito renounces his divinity (on the orders of General Douglas MacArthur, supreme commander for the Allied powers). The next he is in Calcutta, where sectarian riots are hastening British withdrawal from the subcontinent and foreshadowing the horrors of the partition to come. The author would have done better to spend more time on moments that deserve sustained analysis (like the resumption of hostilities between China’s communists and nationalists) and less on events that had little lasting significance (such as the first American nuclear tests on Bikini Atoll in the Pacific). But these are quibbles. Mr Sebestyen deserves praise for illuminating a low point in modern history. Mass shootings in America are a scandal, but the number of gun-related homicides (a little over 12,000 in 2015) would have excited little notice amid the hardship of the immediate post-war world; 6,000 people died and a further 15,000 were injured in communal riots in Calcutta in just three days in the summer of 1946, itself a drop in the bucket compared with the bloodletting of the Chinese civil war. Terrorist attacks have a huge impact thanks to the power of modern media, yet the number of deaths they cause is modest in comparison with previous eras of violence. In Lwów,” Mr Sebestyen notes, “the story that a mother driven mad with hunger killed and ate her two children barely made the newspapers.” The one place that approaches the levels of despair experienced in 1946 is Syria, where nearly five years of civil war have resulted in 250,000 deaths and millions more being forced to flee. Inter-state wars have become more rare, but civil conflict, proxy battles and genocide still cause great misery.Leonhard Euler: Mathematical Genius in the Enlightenment. By Ronald Calinger. Princeton University Press; 669 pages; $55 and £37.95. LEONHARD EULER is hardly a household name. Born in Switzerland in 1707, he was one of the most productive and influential mathematicians ever, yet surprisingly little has been written about him. Ronald Calinger’s major new biography aims to set this right. Sir Isaac Newton (and independently Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz) had introduced calculus a generation or so earlier. But it was Euler whose work really established calculus as the basic tool of the mathematical sciences. Euler also carried forward another aspect of Newton’s legacy, by showing that Newtonian theories of motion and gravitation gave incredibly accurate predictions of the motions of the Moon and other planetary phenomena. He made advances across an astonishing range of subjects, from the very pure to the very applied, in a way that would be impossible today. His publications covered physics, astronomy, acoustics, ballistics and gunnery, cartography, navigation and shipbuilding, optics and the theory of music, as well as number theory and the foundations of calculus. Euler’s gifts were remarkable. He had great energy and an exceptional memory; he could recite the entire text of Virgil’s “Aeneid” by heart. His productivity was equally amazing. Over his career, he wrote more than 850 publications, including 18 books. His collected works run to more than 80 large volumes, and have been appearing steadily since 1910 (a few volumes remain to be published). Euler was born in Basel, but his career followed the great royal powers of Europe. At the age of 19, he made the seven-week journey to Russia to take up a post at the St Petersburg Imperial Academy of Sciences, which the emperor, Peter the Great, had set up as part of his plan to modernise Russia. Euler was heavily involved in practical scientific matters, such as the construction of accurate maps of the Russian Empire and studies of floods, fire and shipbuilding. But he also pursued interests including number theory, infinite series and the shape of the Earth. A notable breakthrough happened in 1735, when he announced his solution to the famous Basel Problem. This asked for the sum of the infinite series 1 + 1/4 + 1/9 + 1/16 +... and had resisted the efforts of mathematicians for nearly a century (the answer is pi²/6). While in St Petersburg, Euler married. He and his wife had 13 children, though only five made it past early childhood. Euler also started suffering from headaches, and his eyesight deteriorated steadily. He lost the sight of one eye in his early 30s, and was nearly blind by the age of 60. In 1741 he was hired away to Berlin. Frederick the Great wanted to build a new Royal Prussian Academy, populated by the superstars of science and philosophy. Euler had hoped to lead it, but he did not fit in. His scientific reputation was undeniable, but he had neither the refined manners nor the sparkling wit that flourished at Frederick’s court. Writing to Voltaire, Frederick played both on Euler’s eminence and his disability, calling him the “great Cyclops of geometry”. As relations with Frederick soured, Euler decided to move again. In 1766 Catherine the Great (it was an age of Greats) hired Euler back to St Petersburg. Despite being almost blind, he became a central figure in the academy there, publishing more than 400 articles, a major three-volume work on lunar motion and “Letters to a German Princess”, one of the earliest and most successful popularisations of science for a general audience. Mr Calinger’s book is an impressive work of scientific biography. It is long, but it gives a fascinating portrait of Euler, his work and the world around him. For the reader who seeks more, a huge array of Euler’s writings can be found online at the Euler Archive. As Pierre-Simon Laplace, another 18th-century mathematician, reportedly said: “Read Euler, read Euler, he is the master of us all.”Rewriting history Drawing Blood. By Molly Crabapple. Harper; 352 pages, $29.99 and £20. MOLLY CRABAPPLE is an angry young woman. The 32-year-old American illustrator is a cross between a photojournalist chasing hot spots and a 19th-century écrivain engagé who champions causes with art. Her drawings of the Occupy Wall Street protest in 2011 became the visual anthem of the movement. She has applied her dark, curvy illustrative style to document Guantánamo prisoners, Lebanese snipers, gay refugees in Beirut and protesters of police violence in Ferguson, Missouri. Ms Crabapple has already published two volumes of her artwork. “Drawing Blood” is a personal narrative of her maturation as an artist. Born Jennifer Caban in Far Rockaway, Queens, she always sought to shed childhood. At 17 she gathered every photo of her younger self, burned them, and the next day left for Europe and north Africa with pen and pad. Her adopted name comes from a character modelled after her in a play written by a friend.   In New York in the 2000s she could not sell her art, so she sold herself. She worked as a nude for clubs, private parties, music videos, art classes and amateur “photographers” (essentially, live porn). Her proximity to the steamier parts of the city eventually got her into the Box—a Manhattan nightclub infamous for its secretive, highly sexualised burlesque—where Ms Crabapple became the in-house artist; a modern-day Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. The Box was Ms Crabapple’s artistic boot camp, not simply to depict the surreal, but to capture the asymmetries of power: bankers quaffing pricey champagne while the true gods, in her view, were the naked performers. In time, she grew disillusioned with her decadent, sexualised art that in effect prostituted her talents. She burned to put her nib to political and social issues. When the Occupy movement sprang up, she became its unofficial chronicler. Since then she has journeyed into dark corners to document people’s plights for Vice, Fusion and the New York Times—giving victims not just a voice, but a face. “Drawing Blood” sparkles as an artistic coming-of-age memoir of an artist who represents her generation as much as depicts it. Some readers may be shocked by her walk on the wild side. Like Joan Didion, another American writer, Ms Crabapple’s toughness comes from her willingness to accept her vulnerability as much as from her talent and unique eye. “Drawings, like photojournalism, [can] distil the essential,” she writes. “Unlike photography, though, visual art has no pretence of objectivity. It is joyfully, defiantly subjective. Its truth is individual.” Correction: In the original version of this article, we referred to Ms Crabapple drawing Libyan snipers. They were Lebanese. Sorry.
