Mexican marines recaptured Joaquín Guzmán, also known as El Chapo (Shorty), the boss of the Sinaloa drug gang, who had escaped from a high-security prison last July. Security forces raided a house, fought a gun battle in which five people died and tracked down Mr Guzmán after he had slipped away through a tunnel. Mexican officials said a meeting in October between El Chapo and Sean Penn, an American film star, in a jungle hideout had helped them trace the fugitive. See article.  Venezuela’s Supreme Court ruled that actions by the National Assembly, the first with an opposition majority in 17 years, will be “absolutely null” because the legislature had sworn in three opposition MPs in defiance of an earlier court judgment. The three MPs duly stood down, reducing the opposition’s majority to below the two-thirds needed to summon a convention to rewrite the constitution.    Meanwhile Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, reshuffled his cabinet. Luis Salas, a left-wing sociologist who does not think that printing money causes inflation, will be in charge of economic policy. The first of 8,000 Cubans stuck on Costa Rica’s border with Nicaragua resumed their journey to the United States. Under an agreement, 180 migrants were flown to El Salvador and will proceed north by bus. In November Nicaragua, a friend of the Cuban government, blocked the migrants’ progress. See article.  The man who fell to earth Barack Obama used the last state-of-the-union speech of his presidency to lament the rise of political bickering and to call on his successor to build a “clear-eyed, big-hearted” America. He also defended his domestic record, pointing to the 14m jobs that have been created since he took office in 2009 at the outset of the financial crisis. See article.  The Supreme Court overturned Florida’s system of letting juries advise a judge about whether murderers should be sent to death row, ruling that under the constitution the jury itself must impose the death penalty. Iran arrested ten American sailors who had strayed into its waters in two boats. They were rapidly released, thus averting any threat to the deal between Iran and six world powers over its nuclear weapons. The UN is expected soon to certify that Iran has dismantled its programme, leading to a relaxation of sanctions. See here and here.  Changes Tunisia’s moderate Islamist Ennahda party became the biggest in parliament after lawmakers in President Beji Caid Essebsi’s secular party resigned over the role of his son in the party. The secular party, Nidaa Tounes, rules in coalition with Ennahda. Ten people were killed in an attack by two female suicide-bombers on a mosque in Cameroon. The attack in a town near the border with Nigeria is thought to have been orchestrated by Boko Haram, a jihadist outfit. A UN aid convoy reached the Syrian town of Madaya, where 40,000 people have been cut for the second time from food supplies for months. It ain’t easy In China police detained a Beijing-based Swedish human-rights activist, Peter Dahlin. He is thought to be the first foreigner arrested in China in a crackdown that has seen about 300 defence lawyers and human-rights experts apprehended since July. Several are said to have been charged with “subversion”. A group of gunmen attacked Jakarta, also setting off bombs in a shopping district close to the presidential palace. Security forces battled the attackers in the streets, shooting several of them dead. Islamic State had recently threatened to carry out an assault on the Indonesian capital. Pakistan said that it had arrested several Islamist militants from Jaish-e-Mohammad, believed by India to be responsible for a deadly recent assault on an air base in the Indian state of Punjab, in which seven troops were killed. India may view the arrests as a conciliatory gesture by Pakistan to revive fledgling peace talks between the two. Sorrow Germany said it would make it easier to deport asylum-seekers who commit criminal acts, after hundreds of women reported being sexually assaulted by migrants in Cologne on New Year’s Eve. The city’s police chief was sacked over his forces’ failure to intervene and for reporting that the festivities had been “relaxed”. Some 1.1m asylum-seekers entered Germany in 2015, and similar numbers are expected in 2016. See here and here.  A suicide-bombing near Istanbul’s Blue Mosque killed ten German tourists. Turkish authorities said it had been carried out by an IS terrorist recently arrived from Syria. Turkey has stepped up its participation in NATO operations against IS. In a move likely to further hurt Turkish-Russian relations, Turkey arrested three Russian citizens it said were linked to IS. The European Union launched an investigation into whether new laws in Poland that aim to muzzle the media and the courts are legal under rules introduced in 2014 to protect the EU’s values. The prime minister in the recently elected government headed by the conservative Law and Justice party insisted that “democracy is alive and well” in Poland. See article.  Artur Mas stepped down as president of Spain’s Catalonia region, after five years in the job during which he pushed for independence. His successor is Carles Puigdemont, an even more ardent secessionist who refused to swear allegiance to Spain’s constitution. See article.  In Britain junior doctors walked out in a dispute over new contracts, which are intended to improve out-of-hours care for patients. The health minister has threatened to impose the new terms if no agreement is reached. It was the first strike by doctors in 40 years and was supported strongly by the public, according to polls. The disruption led to the cancellation of one in ten operations scheduled on the day and many more before and after the strike. See article.  The leader of Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist Party, Arlene Foster, was confirmed as the new first minister, replacing Peter Robinson following his resignation. She is the youngest person to hold the province’s most senior political job, and also the first woman. Anxiety over the global economy weighed heavily on world stockmarkets, which have not had a good start to the year: the S&P 500 is down by more than 7% since January 1st. Market volatility in China is the source of much of the concern; the People’s Bank of China has heavily intervened to prop up the yuan in the offshore market. Officials gave assurances that the financial system was stable, after a circuit-breaker mechanism that automatically halts trading when stockmarkets plunge was abandoned just a week after it was introduced. See article.  China’s exports fell by 1.4% in December from the same month in 2014 and imports dropped by 7.6%. The figures were less bad than had been expected, though at $4 trillion, total trade for all of 2015 was 8% lower than in 2014. Under pressure Oil prices touched 12-year lows of $30 a barrel, which also soured market sentiment. With oil-industry margins under strain, BP shed another 4,000 workers. Petrobras, Brazil’s state-owned oil company, which is mired in a corruption scandal, cut its five-year investment programme by 25%. One analyst forecast that oil would drop to $10 a barrel. Nigeria’s oil minister called on OPEC to hold an emergency summit. But the energy minister for the United Arab Emirates said there was no need for a meeting, as OPEC’s strategy is working. See article.  Having relied on oil exports for a big proportion of its revenue, Russia’s government was reportedly reworking its budget to reduce spending by a further 10% and ordering state departments to carry out “stress tests” in which they assume a further fall in oil prices. GoPro, a maker of wearable action-cameras and a wannabe media company, reported disappointing quarterly results following disastrous sales of its Hero4 Session camera, the price of which has been slashed by half. As its share price nosedived, GoPro said it was cutting 7% of its workforce. Golden years Five months after it launched a hostile bid, Shire secured a deal to buy Baxalta, for $32 billion, the latest big acquisition in the drugs industry. Last year the value of takeovers in the health-care industry amounted to $673 billion. Shipments of personal computers fell to 276m last year, the first time the figure has dropped below 300m since 2008, according to IDC. PCs are losing out to mobile devices, but the strong dollar and a slowing Chinese market were two other factors that hurt sales in 2015. The bright spot was Apple, which this week also said that 10m people have signed up to the music-streaming service it launched six months ago. It took Spotify six years to attain that number of subscribers. Airbus took 1,036 in net orders for aircraft last year, beating Boeing’s tally of 768. But following several years of robust growth, orders were down significantly compared with 2014 for both companies. Although it trailed in sales, Boeing delivered more jets to customers: 762 to Airbus’s 635. See article.  In its latest broadside against “sweetheart” tax deals, the European Commission ordered Belgium to recoup €700m ($760m) in illegal tax breaks given to at least 35 companies. One of them is Anheuser-Busch InBev, a global brewer which has its headquarters in Belgium and is in the process of taking over SABMiller. Last October the commission ruled against the tax arrangements accorded to Starbucks in the Netherlands and Fiat in Luxembourg. America’s Treasury said that it will require title-insurance companies to identify the individuals behind all-cash purchases of luxury homes in New York and Miami made by shell companies. This is in response to reports that the upper reaches of the property market are awash with illicit foreign money. Greece recorded annual inflation of 0.4% in December (using the EU’s calculations), ending 33 months of deflation. Steven Cohen reached a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission over a charge of failing to supervise an employee at his hedge fund who was convicted of insider trading. Mr Cohen is barred from investing clients’ money for two years, ending a lengthy government investigation. He neither admits nor denies wrongdoing. Sound and vision Proving that it is no dinosaur when it comes to snapping up American film companies, Dalian Wanda, a Chinese conglomerate, agreed to buy Legendary Entertainment, which produced “Jurassic World” and other recent box-office hits, for $3.5 billion. Later this year Legendary will release “The Great Wall”, which was shot entirely in China with a budget of $135m.More KAL's cartoonsFOUR months ago, the body of three-year-old Aylan Kurdi washed up on a beach in Turkey after he, his brother and his mother drowned while trying to reach Greece. A photograph of Aylan quickly became the defining image of the masses of refugees fleeing Syria’s civil war. The picture helped cement a brief consensus that the Middle Eastern migrants risking death to get to Europe should be allowed in to apply for asylum. Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, announced that her country would accept asylum applications from any Syrians who reached its borders. Much of Europe seemed on the verge of joining the project. But Europe never joined. The task of absorbing the migrants has been left to Germany and Sweden, with a bit of help from the Netherlands and a few other countries. German and Swedish eagerness to welcome so many refugees has gradually been worn down. Now the events of New Year’s Eve in Cologne and other German cities may have buried it for good. That night, gangs of young men, mainly asylum-seekers, formed rings around women outside Cologne station and then robbed and sexually assaulted them. More than 600 women reported to the police that they had been victimised. After Cologne, when Europeans think of refugees, many no longer picture persecuted families or toddlers. Instead they see menacing young men imbued with the sexism that is all too common across the Middle East and north Africa. Sex and the citadel Such fears, though overblown, are not absurd, and will not be allayed by pointing out that the alleged attackers in Cologne so far identified are mostly Moroccan or Algerian, not Syrian. There really is a cultural gulf between rich, liberal, secular Europe and some of the countries from which recent migrants come. It is impossible to conduct surveys in Syria right now, for obvious reasons, but a 2013 Pew poll of Muslims around the world makes sobering reading. More than 90% of Tunisians and Moroccans believe that a wife should always obey her husband. Only 14% of Iraqi Muslims and 22% of Jordanians think a woman should be allowed to initiate a divorce. And although Arab societies take a harsh view of sex crimes, women who venture alone and in skimpy clothing into a public space in, say, Egypt can expect a barrage of male harassment. Seeking safety: A flow diagram of asylum applications and rejections Migrants are no more likely to commit crimes than natives. But it would be otherworldly to pretend that there is no tension between the attitudes of some and their hosts. European women cherish their rights to wear what they like, go where they like and have sex or not have sex with whom they please. No one should be allowed to infringe these freedoms. However, it does not follow from this that Germany was wrong to offer a haven to Syrian refugees. The moral imperative has not changed since Aylan washed up on that beach. Half of Syria’s cities have been blasted to rubble, hundreds of thousands of people lie dead and tens of thousands are starving in towns under siege. Thousands more refugees arrive in Greece every week. Those who would shut them out must explain where they should go instead. Rather than succumbing to moral panic, Europe needs to work out how to manage the flow of refugees and help them assimilate. A good place to start would be to insist that they obey the law. Police in Cologne clearly failed to take on the harassers. Perhaps they did not recognise what was going on quickly enough, or were afraid of being accused of racism. Or it may have been simple incompetence. Women have complained for years that German police are slow to stop sexual harassment in the drunken crowds at the Munich Oktoberfest. Whatever the precise nature of the failure, it needs to be fixed. Security cameras in public places would make it easier to convict those who hide in crowds—Germans should overcome their queasiness about such surveillance. With luck, the police will learn from their mistakes and work out how to prevent such incidents. Molesters should be punished. Asylum-seekers who flout the law should face prison or deportation. No one can be sent back to Syria, but Mrs Merkel is right to argue that Morocco and Algeria are safe enough (see article). Europe's safe lists: Which countries does Europe consider safe for migrants to return to? Work and family When it comes to assimilating new arrivals, Europe could learn a thing or two from America, which has a better record in this regard. It is not “culturally imperialist” to teach migrants that they must respect both the law and local norms such as tolerance and sexual equality. And it is essential to make it as easy as possible for them to work. This serves an economic purpose: young foreign workers more than pay their way and can help solve the problem of an ageing Europe. It also serves a cultural one: immigrants who work assimilate far more quickly than those who are forced to sit around in ghettos. In the long run most children of migrants will adopt core European values, but the short run matters too. Migrants who take the most hazardous routes into Europe, for example by crossing the Mediterranean in leaky boats, are disproportionately young men (see article). Overall they make little difference to Europe’s sex ratio, but in some areas and age brackets they may skew it. This is a problem—districts with more young single men than women are more prone to violence, especially if those men are jobless. That is why it is daft to restrict the ability of refugees to bring their spouses and other family members to join them, as Denmark’s government is now doing. The process of absorbing refugees will be neither quick nor easy, but it is the right thing to do and will ultimately benefit Europe. Ideally, all European countries would do their part. It is scandalous that so few have agreed to take more than a handful of Syrians, and that European governments have yet to agree on a beefed-up border agency to police the EU’s external frontiers. Even in Germany, there is a risk that Mrs Merkel will be forced to abandon her policy of compassion. If she is to salvage it, she must take the lead again, spelling out how Germans can make Willkommenskultur work—and how the newcomers themselves must adapt to basic European values.“WHAT if we could just be China for a day?” mused Thomas Friedman, an American columnist, in 2010. “…We could actually, you know, authorise the right solutions.” Five years on, few are so ready to sing the praises of China’s technocrats. Global markets have fallen by 7.1% since January 1st, their worst start to the year since at least 1970. A large part of the problem is China’s management of its economy. For well over a decade, China has been the engine of global growth. But the blistering pace of economic expansion has slowed. The stockmarket has been in turmoil, again. Although share prices in China matter little to the real economy, seesawing stocks feed fears among investors that the Communist Party does not have the wisdom to manage the move from Mao to market. The rest of the world looks at the debts and growing labour unrest inside China (see article), and it shudders. Nowhere are those worries more apparent—or more consequential—than in the handling of its currency, the yuan. Faulty forex China’s economy is not on the verge of collapse. Next week the government will announce last year’s rate of economic growth. It is likely to be close to 7%. That figure may be an overestimate, but it is not entirely divorced from reality. Nevertheless, demand is slowing, inflation is uncomfortably low and debts are rising. The bullish case for China depends partly upon the belief that the government can always lean against the slowdown by stimulating consumption and investment with looser monetary policy—just as in any normal economy. Yet China is not normal. It is caught in a dangerous no-man’s-land between the market and state control. And the yuan is the prime example of what a perilous place this is. After a series of mini-steps towards liberalisation, China has a semi-fixed currency and semi-porous capital controls. Partly because a stronger dollar has been dragging up the yuan, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has tried to abandon its loose peg against the greenback since August; but it is still targeting a basket of currencies. A gradual loosening of capital controls means savers have plenty of ways to get their money out. A weakening economy, a quasi-fixed exchange rate and more porous capital controls are a volatile combination. Looser monetary policy would boost demand. But it would also weaken the currency; and that prospect is already prompting savers to shovel their money offshore. In the last six months of 2015 capital left China at an annualised rate of about $1 trillion. The persistent gap between the official value of the yuan and its price in offshore markets suggests investors expect the government to allow the currency to fall even further in future. And, despite a record trade surplus of $595 billion in 2015, there are good reasons for it to do so, at least against the dollar, which is still being propelled upwards by tighter monetary policy in America. The problem is that the expectation of depreciation risks becoming a self-fulfilling loss of confidence. That is a risk even for a country with foreign-exchange reserves of more than $3 trillion. A sharply weaker currency is also a threat to China’s companies, which have taken on $10 trillion of debt in the past eight years, roughly a tenth of it in dollars. Either those companies will fail, or China’s state-owned banks will allow them to limp on. Neither is good for growth. The government has reacted by trying to rig markets. The PBOC has squeezed the fledgling offshore market in Hong Kong by buying up yuan so zealously that the overnight interest rate spiked on January 12th at 67%. Likewise, in the stockmarket it has instructed the “national team” of state funds to stick to the policy of buying and holding shares. One step back, two forwards Yet such measures do nothing to resolve a fundamental tension. On the one hand, the state understands that the lack of financial options for Chinese savers is unpopular, wasteful and bad for the economy. On the other, it is threatened by the ructions that liberalisation creates. For Xi Jinping, the president, now in his fourth year in charge, that dilemma seems to crop up time and again (see Briefing). He needs middle-class support, but feels threatened by the capacity of the middle class to make trouble. He wants state-owned enterprises to become more efficient, but also for them to give jobs to the soldiers he is booting out of the People’s Liberation Army (see article). He wants to “cage power” by strengthening the rule of law and by invoking the constitution, yet he is overseeing a vicious clampdown on dissent and free speech. Daily dispatches: China's stockmarket mess It is easy to say so now, but China should have cleaned up its financial system and freed its exchange rate when money was still flowing in. Now that the economy is slowing, debt has piled up and the dollar is strong, it has no painless way out. A sharp devaluation would wrong-foot speculators. But it would also cause mayhem in China and export its deflationary pressures. The poison would spread across Asia and into rich countries. And because interest rates are low and many governments indebted, the world is ill-equipped to cope. Better would be for China to strengthen capital controls temporarily and at the same time to stop stage-managing the yuan’s value. That would be a loss of face for China, because the IMF only recently marked the yuan’s progress towards convertibility by including it in the basket of currencies that make up its Special Drawing Rights. But it would let the country prepare its financial institutions for currency volatility, not least by starting to scrub their balance-sheets, before flinging their doors open to destabilising flows. Mr Xi could embrace more complete convertibility later, when they were less vulnerable. One reason the PBOC is rushing towards convertibility, despite the risks, is that it feels that it must seize the chance while it has Mr Xi’s blessing. But better to retreat temporarily on one front than to trigger a global panic. That might also lead to some clearer thinking. There is a contradiction between liberalisation and party control, between giving markets their say and silencing them when their message is unwelcome. When the time is right, China’s leaders must choose the markets.  [UPDATE: On January 16th, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the UN’s nuclear watchdog, confirmed that Iran had complied with its commitments to rein in its nuclear programme. Within hours, nuclear-related sanctions were duly lifted. In a surprise side deal, the Iranians simultaneously released from prison four Americans of Iranian descent (Amir Hekmati, a Marine veteran; Jason Rezaian, a reporter from the Washington Post; Saeed Abedini; and Nosratollah Khosravi-Roodsari). In return, America released seven Iranians who were being held for violating sanctions.] IN HIS valedictory state-of-the-union address Barack Obama devoted only a few lines to his main foreign-policy achievement: the accord with Iran to restrain its nuclear programme. The words he chose, however, could almost be a summary of the Obama doctrine, if there is such a thing. Contrasting his record with that of predecessors who got bogged down fighting unwinnable wars, Mr Obama said that there was a “smarter approach” based on “patient and disciplined strategy” and mobilising “the world to work with us…that’s why we built a global coalition, with sanctions and principled diplomacy, to prevent a nuclear-armed Iran.” Mr Obama is justified in hailing the Iran deal as a diplomatic triumph. Some time next week “Implementation Day” is almost certain to be declared. That is the moment when Iran is deemed to have complied with all its obligations in dismantling those parts of its nuclear programme that would soon have put it only weeks away from being able to build a bomb. All nuclear-related sanctions will be lifted or suspended (see article). The speed with which Iran released two US Navy patrol boats and their crews, after they had unintentionally entered Iranian waters on January 12th, was a measure of how America’s relationship with Iran has changed. A call from John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, to his Iranian opposite number, Mohammad Javad Zarif, defused an incident that would once have escalated into an international crisis. The co-operation that Iran has shown in decommissioning its enrichment centrifuges, removing the core of its heavy-water reactor and shipping out most of its low-enriched uranium stockpile has surprised arms controllers. Yet, just as critics of the deal are wrong to describe it as a disaster in which Iran got everything it wanted, its supporters (including this newspaper) need to be realistic about it, too. The smooth progress towards Implementation Day is largely because the president, Hassan Rohani, and Mr Zarif are desperate to get sanctions lifted. They want to see $100 billion of Iranian assets unfrozen before parliamentary elections next month, in which they hope their faction will oust some of the hardliners who oppose them. Although both back greater engagement with the West for economic reasons (and appear to have the conditional support of the supreme leader, Ali Khamenei), nothing else about Iran’s behaviour shows the slightest sign of change. It still hangs gay people, locks up dissidents and stokes sectarian conflict around the Middle East, most destructively in Syria. Long time coming: Iran's atomic agreement A dose of reality Supporters of the nuclear deal must also recognise that the smiling Mr Rohani sees it in purely transactional terms: by renouncing the pathways to a bomb, Iran gets cash and trade. Hardliners in the regime still loathe the deal. Iran remains committed to expanding its nuclear programme to “industrial scale”, which it will be able to do, even if the agreement holds, after 15 years. It continues to lie about the military aspects of that programme, which lasted until 2009. And there is every chance that, with the $100 billion in its pocket, Iran will start to test the resolve of Mr Obama and whoever comes after him. It is understandable that Mr Obama sees the deal with Iran as a vindication of his approach to foreign policy. At worst, it helped avoid a war and bought some time, though it is still unclear how much. At best, the deal may help strengthen forces in Iran that favour limited reform. But it will require constant policing and it is not a solution to the Iranian nuclear problem, let alone a reset of Iran’s fraught relationship with the West.IT IS more than two-and-a-half centuries since Benjamin Franklin grouped a number of electrically charged Leyden jars together and, using a military term, called them a “battery”. It is 25 years since Sony released a commercial version of the rechargeable lithium-ion battery, which now sits snugly in countless smartphones, laptops and other devices. In an era of robots and drones, artificial intelligence and virtual reality, the lithium-ion battery lacks futuristic glamour. Its deficiencies are quotidian and clear: witness the scrum of people around charging stations at airports. Yet few areas of technology promise as great an impact in as short a time. Increasingly, lithium-ion batteries are vaulting out of pockets into power tools, vehicles, homes and even power stations. Carmakers in America, China and Japan are rushing to secure supplies of lithium to prepare for a more electric future (see article). Such is the scramble, that the metal, used in small quantities in each battery cell, today is one of the world’s only hot commodities. The price of lithium carbonate imported to China more than doubled in the last two months of 2015. Until now, the limits on the use of batteries have been storage capacity, cost and recharging times. But large-scale production is overcoming these hurdles. The head-turner at this week’s Detroit motor show was not a car but a battery—that of the 2017 Chevrolet Bolt, which General Motors’ boss, Mary Barra, said had “cracked the code” of combining long range with an affordable price. Tesla, an electric-car maker, is promising to start mass production of lithium-ion batteries this year in a giant “gigafactory” in Nevada. BYD, a Chinese rival, is hot on its heels. In ten months last year Chinese firms sold more electric vehicles than Tesla has since 2008. A further emphasis on batteries is a big part of China’s 2016-20 five-year plan. Rising power Electric cars are not the only source of demand. Batteries are also playing an increasingly important role in providing cleaner power on and off electricity grids. In South Africa, Australia, Germany and America, Tesla this year will start selling a $3,000 Powerwall for homeowners to store the solar energy from their roofs. Utilities are going even further. They are installing millions of lithium-ion battery cells into power plants to regulate supply at times of peak demand, and when it fluctuates because of intermittent wind and solar energy. California has ordered its electricity firms to install non-hydroelectric storage capacity, capable of delivering 1.3GW for short periods at times of peak demand, within five years. That compares with total American power-generation capacity of more than 1,000GW, but is still more than double the 0.5GW of short-term output that can be delivered by batteries plugged into grids around the world today. In 2016 a solar plant equipped with batteries will be installed in Hawaii, promising power after sunset at prices cheaper than diesel. There is still a long way to go. As yet lithium-ion batteries do not have the capacity to store grid-scale power for more than a few hours. Costs are still too high; and the recent price spike in lithium will encourage researchers beavering away on other types of battery. Yet the more cells that are made, the more understanding and performance improve. Rising demand and higher prices will eventually also generate more lithium supply. Increasingly, lithium is becoming to batteries what silicon is to semiconductors—prevalent, even among worthy alternatives. In one form or another, the lithium-ion battery is the technology of our time. Clarification: The original version of this article referred to the output of battery storage systems without making it clear that the figures quoted refer to power output in GW, not total storage capacity in GWh. This was amended on February 3rd.IN MUCH of the world, ever fewer couples are marrying before having children. Two out of five births in the OECD club of rich countries—and two out of three in Latin America—are now outside marriage. The way the law treats the children of unmarried parents varies hugely. In some Islamic states they are turned into orphans when their mothers are executed for fornication. In China they enjoy so few rights (to public services or even an identity card) that nearly all are aborted. Even in countries that no longer discriminate directly against children of unmarried parents, laws that distinguish between married and cohabiting couples may harm them (see article). Some places, such as England and much of America, offer couples a binary choice: get married or the law will treat the two of you as unrelated. Others, such as France and the Netherlands, allow couples to choose from a range of “marriage-lite” contracts that incorporate some aspects of marriage, such as tax breaks or asset-sharing after splitting up. In a third group, including Australia and New Zealand, couples are automatically given many of the rights and duties of marriage after they have lived together for a certain number of years. The advantage of the first option is simplicity. Either you make a formal commitment to each other or you don’t. The snag is that many people don’t, and some are left high and dry if they split up or one partner dies. If one cohabiting partner dies intestate in England, for example, the other may inherit nothing. Any legacy will be subject to inheritance tax, unlike bequests between spouses. If only one partner’s name is on the deeds of the family home, the other may be thrown out. These problems suggest that option two—offering couples a wider choice of legal contracts—makes more sense. In France the pacte civil de solidarité is popular. It is much like a marriage but easier to end: either partner can dissolve it with a registered letter or by marrying someone else. Similarly, more than half of unmarried Dutch couples formalise their relationship with a “cohabitation agreement”, which can be tailored to specify how assets and expenses will be shared after a break-up. Alas, even in countries with several marriage-like options, many couples pick none. If they split up or one dies, they are then treated as legal strangers, just like unmarried English couples. So some governments plump for option three: if a couple lives together long enough, the law treats them almost as if they were married—unless they explicitly choose another option. When a long-term cohabitation ends in Australia or New Zealand, rules for alimony, property-sharing and inheritance mirror those when a marriage is dissolved. Pushing people into a contract without their consent sounds troublingly illiberal. Unfortunately, many cohabiting couples are oblivious to the risks when they fail to regularise their union. In countries where long-term cohabitation confers none of the rights and duties of a marriage, many people mistakenly believe that it does. Polls suggest that more than half of Britons believe that long-term cohabitees are in a “common-law” marriage; no such institution exists. Many Americans think that seven years together gives a relationship legal standing; it does not. Children have rights, too Where no children are involved, the state should not second-guess the decisions—or non-decisions—of adults. But to avoid harming children, it is reasonable to set a default that offers more stability. So couples should be allowed to choose from several options to suit their circumstances. If they make no choice, and there are children, the default should change. This paper would treat long-term cohabiting parents like married ones for the purposes of inheritance and post-breakup maintenance and asset-sharing—unless they explicitly opt out.
