MOST Americans do not hate government. Nor do they trust it to reverse all misfortunes. Instead, suggests Richard Hanna, a centrist Republican in the House of Representatives, they want government to be like their plumber. “They just want the damn toilet to flush. You know: ‘I don’t want to marry you, I don’t want to see you, I just want your bill and then go home’.” Congressman Hanna’s pragmatism is a good fit for his district, an unflashy swathe of upstate New York, best known for factories that make Remington guns and Chobani yogurts, and which has split its votes 49-49% between the two main parties in recent presidential elections. A successful builder before his election to Congress in 2010, Mr Hanna worries about the national debt and the over-regulation of business. He likes the Republican focus on personal responsibility (Democrats are all about victimhood, he grumbles). But he is not anti-government. Unlike many party colleagues, he supports federal investment in crumbling roads and bridges, expanded early-childhood education for the poor and policies to tackle climate change. In 2015 he was one of just three House Republicans to defend federal funding for Planned Parenthood, a health-care organisation that offers abortions. He backs gay marriage: a Catholic of Lebanese descent, he cites Jefferson’s tolerance of moral and religious beliefs that “neither pick my pocket nor break my leg”. Trumpeting his willingness to work across party lines (“Compromise is not treason,” he likes to say), Mr Hanna won re-election rather handily in 2012. He looked so safe in the 2014 general election that Democrats did not run a candidate. Yet this year he will retire from Congress. His reasons are partly personal: he is about to turn 65 and has two young children. Mostly, he is discouraged by how little his centrist voice counts in Congress—not least because his party has moved “far to the right”. Musing in his Capitol Hill office—a fridge of Chobani samples humming in one corner—Mr Hanna blames several forces. First, gerrymandering: the drawing of district boundaries by both parties to create a House in which more than nine in ten members glide to re-election. Then comes such technology as micro-targeting, giving campaigns the ability “to reach into everybody’s mind and figure out exactly what it takes to get them down to the polls”—rather than craft policies with broad appeal. Lastly comes “crazy” campaign spending, notably by anonymously funded outside groups that “carpet bomb” candidates with attack ads. Mr Hanna is not, as it happens, a martyr to this system. In 2014 he beat off a primary challenge by a Tea Party hardliner with the help of a gay-rights group that spent hundreds of thousands of dollars on his race. Throwing fairness to the winds, that group, American Unity PAC, ran ads falsely calling Mr Hanna’s rival a high-tax lefty. It worked, even after conservative talk-radio stars endorsed Mr Hanna’s challenger: the congressman narrowly won a primary in which just 30,000 party loyalists voted. Nonetheless, Mr Hanna regrets what the system has wrought. Too many Republicans and Democrats have safe seats, so fear only primary contests, in which activists select party candidates for the general election. And with deep-pocketed ideologues on the loose, he charges: “Local communities don’t elect their representatives sometimes. These outside groups come in and do it.” Though Mr Hanna is not a big fish, his decision set off ripples. On January 5th a centrist Democrat, Steve Israel, announced that he is retiring after eight terms representing a district stretching from the New York borough of Queens to affluent suburbs on Long Island. Mr Israel caused a splash: he is a former chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, overseeing House races nationwide. Mr Israel says he is leaving to write novels—he earned acclaim for his first book, “The Global War on Morris”, a satire in which Morris Feldstein, a timid Long Island nebbish, is mistaken for a terrorist. But he admits to frustration at the “relentless grind” of fundraising, and a lack of colleagues open to cross-party deals. In that, he was influenced by the departure of Mr Hanna, “one of the last moderate Republicans”. The flight from the District Like Mr Hanna, Mr Israel sees a system that disenfranchises the moderate middle. He calls money “corrosive” to democracy. He is good at fundraising, collecting nearly $20m for Democrats over the years. He spent thousands of hours dialling for dollars from stuffy cubicles a few blocks from Congress (federal property may not be used for fundraising), working from call-sheets with personal details about his prey: past donations, their spouses’ names, or where he last met them. A single House race may now easily cost $1.5m. The effects are straightforward: politicians must devote time and access to special interest groups, donors and lobbyists when they should be serving constituents. Gerrymandering is not inevitable. Mr Israel notes that his state has many swing districts after non-partisan maps were imposed on New York by a court in 2012. The old campaign chief adds a partisan point about unintended consequences. Once a decade state legislatures redraw most congressional districts. Republicans set out to control that process in 2010. It was a plan they carried out “almost to perfection”, he concedes. But he argues that Republican success has come to haunt them, as incumbents in super-safe seats spend time warding off primary challenges from the right, with policies that he calls “largely irrelevant to swing voters”. Lurking within his partisan jibe is a nugget of wisdom for both parties. Lots of Americans worry more about paying bills and their children’s futures than ideological purity. Parties can grow by wooing them. Congress used to be full of members like Mr Hanna and Mr Israel: moderates who reflected the middle-class, middle-of-the-road districts that elected them. They are an endangered species, and worth heeding. Congress will not be saved without them.“HE’S probably the youngest Cuban in Costa Rica,” reckons Elisabet, as her son nuzzles close for an afternoon feed. With some 8,000 Cubans in the country, many camped near the border with Nicaragua, that would be quite a distinction. She and her husband are typical of the throng. They flew from Havana to Quito in February 2015 when she was six months pregnant. When their son was strong enough, they journeyed north by bus, lorry and boat. Nicaragua, a friend of Cuba’s communist government, blocked their further progress. Now Elisabet, who would not give her surname, waits with about 100 compatriots in the village of La Garita—watched over by three laid-back policemen and a couple of horses—for news of how and when they can resume their journey to the United States. It should not be much longer. On January 12th 180 Cubans were flown from Liberia in northern Costa Rica to San Salvador, the capital of El Salvador. They are to proceed by bus to Mexico, and thence to the United States (see map). This disjointed itinerary is the result of an agreement among several Central American countries and Mexico to allow the migrants through while discouraging new arrivals. If the first trip goes well, the rest of the Cubans in Costa Rica will be airlifted out. A similar arrangement may be made for about 1,000 stuck in Panama after Costa Rica shut its southern border in December. Future arrivals will get no such help, say the countries involved. The journey of Elisabet and her fellow migrants is the latest in a series of exoduses that began with the Cuban revolution in 1959. More than 43,000 made it to the United States in the year to September 2015, a rise of 80% over the previous 12 months. The latest wave could be the last big one. Two forces propel them. The first is Cuba’s well-known deficit of prosperity and freedom, which in some ways is getting worse. Most Cuban workers are still employed by the government, which pays an average salary of about $30 a month. Even with nearly-free housing, education and health care, “el salario no alcanza” (the pay’s not enough), Cubans are wont to say. The libreta (ration book) once gave families access to enough food, drink and tobacco; now it covers less than a quarter of their basic needs. In a lucky month a sliver of chicken or fish may appear in the bodegas where the ration books are accepted. In December Raúl Castro, Cuba’s president, gave a speech warning Cubans to brace for more hardship in 2016. Cuba’s modest economic liberalisation and the unfreezing of relations with the United States since December 2014 have provided some with the wherewithal to leave. The government recently allowed citizens to sell their homes, enabling some to pay the $7,000 or so needed for tickets, bribes and transport to the United States. Others have money from American families and friends. Such high costs mean that most of the recent migrants are better off than average. An exodus of doctors prompted the government in December to reimpose a requirement that they ask for permission to leave the country. The second push factor is the fear that, as relations improve with the United States, the American welcome to émigrés will cool. The Cuban Adjustment Act of 1966 gives Cubans a one-year route to residency in the United States. Many have taken up the offer. In 1980 125,000 Cubans joined the mass evacuation known as the Mariel boatlift, after the harbour where the voyages started. A later agreement with the Cuban government introduced the “wet foot/dry foot” policy, under which Cubans reaching American soil may stay, but those picked up at sea are sent back. The Cubans parked on the Nicaraguan border fear that door may soon close. With reason. The American government has no plans to change the policy. But, points out Marc Rosenblum of the Migration Policy Institute, a think-tank, attitudes are hardening. Cubans who came in earlier waves were seen as refugees from tyranny. Newcomers flourishing Green Cards travel back and forth between the two countries, taking advantage of looser restrictions on travel introduced by Barack Obama. The contrast with the rejection of migrants from countries such as Honduras and El Salvador, who are fleeing appalling crime and poverty, is becoming harder to defend. Cuba’s neighbours are slamming their doors. In December Ecuador, bowing to pressure from Cuba’s government, imposed a visa requirement on Cubans, in effect closing off the most popular route to the United States. The decision triggered rare protests by hundreds of Cubans near the Ecuadorean embassy in Havana. Costa Rica cracked down on people-smugglers in November; Nicaragua repelled border-crossers with truncheons and tear gas. The airlift to San Salvador is supposed to clear out the last group of migrants, not encourage new ones. The $555 they will have to pay the company arranging the trip would cover the cost of plane tickets directly to the United States. But no country wants to make things easy for people passing through their territories without valid visas. Those who cannot afford the fare say they expect help. Costa Rica’s foreign ministry has said their poverty will not be an obstacle, but warns that it will send new arrivals back home. Once the Cubans arrive at Guatemala’s border with Mexico they are on their own. They will be regarded as “illegal foreigners”, says Mexico’s National Institute of Migration, just like migrants from El Salvador and Honduras. In practice, they will be treated very differently. To reach the southern state of Chiapas Cubans cross the Suchiate river openly by bridge; those from Central America swim furtively across. The difference, say Mexican officials, is that Central American governments demand their citizens’ return, whereas Cuba does not. Another reason, no doubt, is that the United States lets the Cubans in but turns away the others. The Cubans will be given 20 days to leave Mexico, plenty of time to reach the border. Those awaiting passage in Costa Rica doubt they are among the last. “If America changes its law,” says Generoso Machado, who was caught by Costa Rican agents after trying to cross the frontier illegally, “Cubans will go somewhere else.” At midnight on New Year’s Eve it is customary for Cubans to walk about their neighbourhoods carrying suitcases, a sign of yearning to travel in the year ahead. As long as Cuba stays poor and despotic, the tradition will thrive.Unfree at last ON THE evidence of Sean Penn’s interview with him, published in Rolling Stone magazine, Joaquín Guzmán, Mexico’s most successful exporter of narcotics to the United States, is not a thoughtful man. If he were, he would reflect on the many ironies that attend his recapture on January 8th, after two escapes in 15 years from high-security prisons. Mr Guzmán knew he had a good story to tell, which is why in October he met Mr Penn, a Hollywood actor, in his jungle hideout in Mexico’s drug-producing “Golden Triangle”. His first escape, in 2001, was reportedly in a prison laundry cart; his second, in July 2015, was through a mile-long tunnel, built by engineers whom he had sent to Germany to learn the craft, he told Mr Penn. Between relatively brief spells in prison Mr Guzmán, better known as El Chapo (Shorty), bloodily built his Sinaloa drug gang into Mexico’s most powerful. He was apparently hoping that his showbiz contacts would lead not just to an article but to a film. In an unintended plot twist, El Chapo’s contacts with Mr Penn and Kate del Castillo, a Mexican actress, helped the Mexican authorities get a fix on his position. Eventually, they closed in on him in a safe house in Los Mochis, a coastal town. Five of his henchmen were killed in a shootout with marines. Mr Guzmán fled the fight through another tunnel, but was apprehended on the town’s outskirts. That will make for an even better movie. Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, and American law-enforcement authorities, which are keenly interested in El Chapo, must now decide how to make the most of his downfall. The signs are that they will do so together.   Mr Guzmán’s second escape, not much more than a year after his recapture, was a low point for Mr Peña. It came after the president’s tone-deaf response to the killing of 43 students from Ayotzinapa, in the southern state of Guerrero, and allegations of a conflict of interest, denied by the president, connected to a house purchase by his wife. His approval ratings fell to levels lower than those of any recent president. The officials in charge of the prison from which Mr Guzmán escaped were arrested; Mr Peña’s security chief lost his job. The recapture in Los Mochis will help accelerate a revival of the president’s fortunes that was already under way. The government has avoided disasters recently. Mr Peña’s economic reforms are beginning to help ordinary people. Mobile-phone charges have fallen thanks to measures to increase telecoms competition, for example. His poll ratings are climbing. El Chapo’s arrest should also encourage closer co-operation between Mexican and American law-enforcement authorities. That relationship suffered after Mr Peña became president in 2012. He drastically scaled back his predecessor’s policy of extraditing drug bosses to the United States, and imposed centralised control on contacts between Mexican law-enforcement agents and American ones. After El Chapo’s second escape, Mr Peña changed tack. Extraditions were stepped back up. Among the deportees was Edgar “La Barbie” Valdez Villarreal, who is nearly as notorious as Mr Guzmán. He pleaded guilty to narcotics charges in a court in Atlanta this month. The two countries’ attorneys-general, both appointed last year, are co-operating. Mexican authorities say El Chapo will be extradited to the United States, beyond reach of his collaborators and Mexico’s corruptible prison guards, although it could take years. For most Mexican crime victims the drug lord’s capture will not provide much relief. The influence of the Sinaloa gang, a traditional drug-distributing operation, may well wane. But that is likely to open opportunities for more dangerous groups, such as the Zetas and the Jalisco New Generation gang, which make their money largely from extortion and kidnapping, says Alejandro Schtulmann of EMPRA, a political-risk consulting firm. El Chapo was an American obsession, but the priority for Mexican authorities should be groups that terrorise the locals, he says. Mr Peña, who tweeted “mission accomplished” after Mr Guzmán was nabbed, deserves his moment of celebration. Now he must press ahead with the fight against lawlessness and corruption.THE sign above the door at Cong Caphe, a hip coffee shop in downtown Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, bears a bright-red communist star. Inside, the brick walls are covered in memorabilia from the era of the Vietnam war: rusty canteens, an old transistor radio and snapshots of Viet Cong soldiers trudging off to fight the Americans. Yet the aesthetic is not so much patriotic as a cheeky send-up of communist ideology. The 20- and 30-something Vietnamese who drink here, spending the fruits of an increasingly capitalist economy, feel far removed from the hardships suffered by their parents and grandparents, while they applaud ever-closer ties with America. With its scooter-driving young and an economy growing at nearly 7% a year, Vietnam seems like a country in a hurry. In many ways, the ruling Communist Party is trying to keep up. Not far from the coffee shop, windows the size of a cathedral’s illuminate the new building housing the National Assembly, Vietnam’s parliament. Sunbeams pour from skylights into the marble foyer. In a one-party state where symbols matter, the building’s airiness suggests that the rulers are trying to project an image of modernity and transparency. Yet as Nguyen Vu Nam, a manager at Cong Caphe, points out, young Vietnamese do not pay much heed to who runs the party. Personnel changes among a generally grey and faceless collective leadership have never seemed to matter much. This month party bigwigs will make a fresh bid for relevance. On January 20th they convene for a five-yearly congress, the highlight of Vietnam’s political calendar. More than half of the 16-member Politburo, the party’s ruling council, are meant to retire, to be replaced by younger officials. The country’s three most senior jobs—of state president, prime minister and party general secretary—are all up for grabs. That so much remains mysterious so close to the event suggests that this year’s negotiations are unusually tense. The man to watch is Nguyen Tan Dung, Vietnam’s prime minister for ten years and probably its shrewdest and least uncharismatic politician. At 66, Mr Dung is past the party’s usual retirement age. But he is said to want to remain in high office by taking the role of party secretary, while perhaps relinquishing his current office to an ally. Mr Dung would doubtless reinvigorate a job which has lately begun to look dusty. He may wish to carve out an authority that begins to approach the dominance enjoyed by Xi Jinping in China. But such a move would be unusual. It would rattle a political system which, until now, has discouraged domineering personalities and has valued consensus. Mr Dung’s backers say that Vietnam’s present challenges call for strong and consistent leadership. The economy is much mended after bad debts from cosseted state enterprises threatened the banking system. The country stands to gain from a sheaf of trade agreements negotiated in 2015, including the American-led Trans-Pacific Partnership. Yet progress towards many essential reforms, including the privatisation of state firms, has been slow. The economy is overdependent on commodities, especially coffee and rice, as well as on foreign investors. It will be essential to broaden and deepen Vietnam’s economy before its biggest present advantage, a young and cheap workforce, is spent. As for politics, managing the country’s tricky relations with China is the biggest challenge. Vietnam is economically dependent on its northern neighbour, with which it has a big and growing trade deficit. At the same time, China’s assertive claims to islands and underwater resources in contested parts of the South China Sea have outraged even moderate Vietnamese. Those born since the country ditched its planned economy in the 1980s are growing more outspoken, for example on social media. Vietnam cannot afford to have bad relations with China, but at the same time its leaders must be seen to be defending Vietnamese territory. Fighting ferrets Most intellectuals paying attention to the party congress would like to see Mr Dung retain some authority, since he has been the strongest voice against Chinese bullying. He is also the clear choice among local and foreign business folk, though for different reasons. They see Mr Dung as behind the flurry of trade deals and recent efforts to lift caps on foreign ownership. They say he is unusually knowledgeable about industry, well-advised by Western-educated staff and knows what investors want to hear. Yet whiffs of cronyism taint the prime minister as much as they do other comrades. His son’s political career has seen suspiciously swift advancement, while a flashy Vietnamese-American son-in-law owns the country’s McDonald’s franchise. Scandals have sprouted at state enterprises that Mr Dung had championed. Nor do civil libertarians think that he is more inclined than other leaders to unshackle the censored press or end the thuggish treatment of dissidents. As the party congress approaches, its outcome appears ever less certain. Mr Dung was once thought a shoo-in for party leader. Yet a loose-knit faction opposed to him may even manage to oust him entirely from the leadership. The fighting springs partly from competing networks of patronage, and partly from modest ideological differences between conservatives and the prime minister’s relatively reformist pals. Some officials worry that Vietnam’s growing chumminess with America will only make China more confrontational. A handful of them even seem to fret that Mr Dung’s liberalising instincts could end up threatening the party’s hold on power. But that would be conjecture. For all the light streaming into the new parliament building, Vietnam’s Communist Party remains a dark sack full of ferrets.Another day in the People’s Paradise A POWERFUL army usually depends on a strong economy. Not in North Korea. Per head, the country has more soldiers than any other: 1.2m out of a population of 25m. As well as a huge conventional arsenal, it also has a dozen nuclear warheads and spends perhaps $3 billion a year on a nuclear programme that involves rocket launches and nuclear tests—the latest took place last week, the fourth since 2006. Yet the performance of the economy over the past four decades has been little sprightlier than that of the Great Leader, Kim Il Sung, since he was embalmed in 1994. North Korea suppresses most economic data. But as far as we know, from the 1950s to the 1970s its economy outgrew capitalist South Korea, as a Stalinist state marshalled all resources towards production. Today the North’s per capita GDP is only one-40th of the South’s—a wretched $600 a year or so, by UN estimates. The blame rests squarely with the Kim dynasty’s ruinous policies. Yet the regime of Kim Jong Un, the third Kim on the throne, pays no penalty for the people’s suffering. Rather, it funnels money to itself, the elites and the nuclear programme. In a recent paper for South Korea’s Asan Institute, Nicholas Eberstadt of the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, DC tries to estimate the scale of North Korea’s economic catastrophe. Given the paucity of data, Mr Eberstadt used “mirror statistics”: estimates of the country’s trade divined from other countries’ records. He then made adjustments for population growth and inflation. It is no straight proxy for output, but useful nonetheless. Mr Eberstadt found that North Korea’s per-capita exports last year were no higher than at their peak in the late 1970s, while per-capita imports were two-fifths lower. North Korea’s economic underperformance is remarkable for a country that is neither a failed state nor at war, he says. What went wrong? The collapse of the Soviet Union, upon which the North had long relied for cheap machinery and oil, certainly hit it hard in the 1990s. Weakened by bad weather, centrally run agricultural production collapsed in the 1990s, leading to a famine in which hundreds of thousands of people died. International sanctions in response to North Korea’s nuclear bomb-testing have also hurt. But the biggest problem, Mr Eberstadt argues, is that North Korea has the worst business environment of any functioning state: worse even than Cuba, Venezuela or Zimbabwe. It has no property rights or rule of law, no legal private trade and a currency prone to confiscation: in 2009 the government wiped out small traders’ savings by declaring old banknotes invalid and swapping only a few for new ones. A striking feature of the North’s economic decline is the quantities of foreign aid that accompanied it. North Korea has a long history of shaking down donors—first the Soviet Union, then, after 1991, America and South Korea, and most recently China. The total amount of transfers is impossible to quantify. But Mr Eberstadt estimates the sum from the North’s two biggest historical backers, Russia and China, by taking its balance of trade deficits with each of them as an approximation of net resource flows into the North—assuming that the surplus is a debt that will not be repaid. That surplus amounts to $45 billion, in today’s money, between 1960 and 2013. The money seems to have helped the Kims live like god-kings and still have enough left over to pay the army, the secret police and various suppliers of nuclear materials. Yet Rüdiger Frank, an economist at the University of Vienna, thinks that increased supplies of hard currency may also have helped the informal markets for food and basic supplies that burgeoned as a response to the famine. These black markets are the single most benign transformation in North Korea in the past few years. Most North Koreans now depend on them for their livelihoods. The state usually turns a blind eye, since its central planning system, which is supposed to apportion goods, has broken down. Besides, the elites demand their cut. Fantasy reunification: What the two Koreas would gain from each other if Kim Jong Un's regime fell Some see in such markets the seeds of deeper economic reform. And Mr Kim seems keener than his father to promise prosperity to his people, and even a modicum of leisure. North Korea’s capital, Pyongyang, now boasts a dolphinarium and a water park, and even a ski resort to its east. As high rises go up, the capital’s fashionable sip espressos in upmarket bars. Yet the regime’s old habits are unchanged. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the state is squeezing the donju, North Korea’s new successful class of traders. According to DailyNK, a news source with informants in the North, donju are worried that they will be forced to hand over hard-currency savings to make up for the “massive dollar bomb”—ie, the expensive nuclear test—that was detonated last week. In the absence of direction from the top, there are limits to how much can change. A new policy that seems to have been quietly rolled out from 2013 allowed farmers to retain 30% of a new production target, plus any excess over the target, to sell on informal markets. Yet local officials are not distributing the promised shares, perhaps to make up a shortfall at co-operatives, according to a report by Radio Free Asia. Meanwhile, the few foreign investors brave enough to enter North Korea must contend with an unpredictable and predatory state. In November the biggest such, Orascom, an Egyptian telecoms company that set up the North’s first 3G mobile network, said that it thought it had lost control of its joint venture, and has not been able to repatriate its profits. China remains North Korea’s lifeline. Most products for sale in the North’s informal markets are from China. Last year North Korea sold over $1 billion of minerals to China, chiefly coal. As China’s economy slows and the price of coal falls, the North will suffer. But the regime has a solution: putting its scant resources into military power. This serves as a “battering-ram for international extortion”, as Mr Eberstadt puts it. Alas, it seems to work.Whose side are you on? MOST Australians have heard of wombats, but few could place the numbat. Both marsupials are among 315 mammal species that roamed Australia at the time of the first European settlement in the late 18th century. The wombat has thrived. The smaller numbat, once widespread, clings on in only a few colonies in Western Australia. There it is listed as endangered, because of predation by feral cats. At least it survives. Australia has one of the world’s highest rates of mammal extinctions—29 have been recorded over more than two centuries. Feral cats are reckoned to be culprits in 27 of those disappearances: among them the desert bandicoot, the crescent nailtail wallaby and the large-eared hopping mouse. Cats probably arrived in Australia on British ships carrying convicts. Unlike the convicts, their descendants have grown wilder and more menacing. The feral-cat population today is estimated at between 4m and 20m, most of them prowling outback habitats. They are often huge, weighing 15 kilograms. And they eat perhaps 75m Australian animals a day. A parliamentary inquiry and a scientific report on mammals called for governments to step in. Last year Greg Hunt, the federal environment minister, launched a “threatened species strategy” to stop mammals’ decline. Fire, loss of habitat and foxes, another alien predator, have played a part. But, Mr Hunt says, feral cats are “the number-one killers”. Ten cat-free sanctuaries are planned across Australia over the next four years. The Australian Wildlife Conservancy, an NGO, is to start fencing 650 square kilometres (250 square miles) in April to create the biggest one at Newhaven, in the desert in Northern Territory. Atticus Fleming, the outfit’s head, calls this region the “epicentre of the extinction crisis”. His colleagues aim to reintroduce several threatened mammals there, including the mala, a winsome creature resembling a tiny wallaby, which disappeared from mainland Australia 25 years ago. The project will also give jobs to the local Ngalia Warlpiri aboriginal clan. Its senior women, says Mr Fleming, are “extremely good cat hunters”. The government wants 2m feral cats culled across Australia by 2020. It is funding trials on cat-specific baits, as well as an app allowing humans who venture into the outback to report cat sightings. Mr Hunt insists the baits would work “humanely”. If they eventually killed even half the cat population, “it would be the most important action for Australian wildlife in 100 years.” The planned felicide has greatly upset some cat people, notably Brigitte Bardot, a French former sex goddess, and Morrissey, a miserable British singer. But conservationists say killing cats and fencing enclosures have already saved several species from extinction, including the Gilbert’s potoroo in Western Australia and the bridled nailtail wallaby in New South Wales. Mr Fleming admits an Australia free of feral cats is a long way off: “But the fence strategy can buy time until a silver bullet is found.”India Gate: one day your children may be lucky enough to see it IF A fine powder combining arsenic, black carbon, formaldehyde, nickel, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide sounds unpleasant, imagine how it would be if 200 tonnes of it were dumped on your town every day. Imagine, too, that it was proved to be cancerous, with most of it coming in the shape of particles small enough to lodge in the deepest, most tender parts of your lungs. Such is the woe of India’s capital. With a count of “respirable suspended particulate matter” that is roughly double that of China’s notoriously smoggy capital, Beijing, Delhi is ranked by the World Health Organisation (WHO) as the world’s most polluted big city. Several other Indian cities are nearly as atrocious (see table). Perhaps 25,000-50,000 of greater Delhi’s 25m people die prematurely every year because of air pollution. The number is growing: admissions for respiratory ailments at a busy teaching hospital soared fourfold between 2008 and 2015 according to an investigation by the Indian Express, a newspaper. And the trouble is not confined to the capital. In the country as a whole the number of early deaths caused by toxic air could exceed 600,000 a year. The largest cause is not cars or factories: it is smoke from home cooking, while in northern India stubble-burning in the countryside is also a factor. But vehicles play a big part, and it is to this source that the keenest attention is now being paid. Ashes to Ashes On January 15th Delhi wrapped up a drastic two-week experiment to reduce car emissions by restricting road use to odd- or even-numbered licence plates on alternate days (a method occasionally used in Beijing, São Paulo and a dozen other cities). When the local government announced the scheme in December, many predicted failure. Proud car-owners would ignore it. Police would be too few or too corrupt to enforce compliance. And anyway, in a city with 2.9m cars but some 7m motorbikes and motorised rickshaws, and with many exempt from the ban such as taxis and other public vehicles, the effects would be minimal. Yet it seems to have been a striking success. With teams of volunteers manning corners to shame would-be shirkers into parking their cars, and police out in force to slap on fines, few flouted the ban. Nor can anyone now claim to be unaware of a problem to which residents had become so inured that it has hardly featured in elections to date. Public transport was more crowded, but passengers were delighted to find traffic markedly lighter. True, by the measure of the nastiest element in Delhi’s toxic cocktail, ultrafine particles, the drop in emissions was not drastic. The first days of the new year even saw a discouraging spike in concentrations of PM10 and PM2.5, as the diameter of two sizes of particles are commonly defined in thousandths of a millimetre. In parts of the city, PM2.5 (the more harmful of the two sorts, because it penetrates the lungs more deeply) exceeded 500 micrograms per cubic metre. That is 20 times the WHO’s guideline for safe air. Still, notes Anumita Roychowdhury of the Centre for Science and Environment, a think-tank in Delhi, those highs were largely due to winter weather, and were lower and shorter-lasting than previous peaks. The odd-even test not only showed that such emergency measures can limit dangerous pollution; it showed how much more efficient public transport can be when road space is freed up to let it move. The positive response has jolted politicians and India’s courts into action. In December the country’s Supreme Court slapped a citywide ban on the registration of luxury diesel cars. Soon afterwards, the national government declared that it would speed up the introduction of stricter emissions standards for new passenger cars. It is now considering a similar move for two- and three-wheelers. The government is also hurrying to improve the quality of fuel. If both new sets of regulations come into effect by 2020, as is planned, new vehicles will emit only a fraction of the pollution they do today. Other initiatives include the expansion of Delhi’s metro, measures to maintain roads better (the dust kicked up from these accounts for a big proportion of breathable particulates), restrictions on lorries entering the city, and plans to enforce the replacement or retrofitting of older vehicles. If all this is done, Delhi may get acceptable air in a few years’ time. It is not the first time the central government has acted against air pollution. Over a decade ago it introduced a battery of pollution controls, such as requiring most buses, taxis and auto-rickshaws to convert to natural gas. It banned the burning of rubbish and shut down heavily polluting industries as well as power plants. Those measures worked too, getting rid of the coarsest grit. People noticed that their shirt collars were no longer dirty, says Sumit Sharma of Delhi’s The Energy and Resources Institute, another NGO. “They thought the problem was solved.” Wild is the Wind Two things then intervened to undermine progress. One was a tripling of the number of vehicles on India’s roads between 2002 and 2013. The other was misguided government policy. By subsidising diesel in a bid to woo farmers who rely on it to power water pumps and tractors, successive governments encouraged a massive shift in Indian vehicle markets. Between 2000 and 2013 the proportion of new cars with diesel engines rose steeply, from one in 20 to one in two. California’s environmental regulatory agency—the body that recently exposed cheating on diesel emissions tests by the German car firm Volkswagen—says diesel exhaust poses the highest cancer risk of any toxic air contaminant it has evaluated. Luckily, the Indian government’s mistake has already been corrected. In October 2014 it scrapped diesel subsidies; sales of diesel vehicles have already dropped. This month a supreme-court judge had this to say to lawyers from a carmaker who argued against the ban on diesel-guzzlers: “So are your vehicles emitting oxygen?” The horrors of Delhi’s air are sinking in.
