CHINA’S biggest military shake-up in a generation began with a deliberate echo of Mao Zedong. Late in 2014 President Xi Jinping went to Gutian, a small town in the south where, 85 years before, Mao had first laid down the doctrine that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is the armed force not of the government or the country but of the Communist Party. Mr Xi stressed the same law to the assembled brass: the PLA is still the party’s army; it must uphold its “revolutionary traditions” and maintain absolute loyalty to its political masters. His words were a prelude to sweeping reforms in the PLA that have unfolded in the past month, touching almost every military institution. The aim of these changes is twofold—to strengthen Mr Xi’s grip on the 2.3m-strong armed forces, which are embarrassingly corrupt at the highest level, and to make the PLA a more effective fighting force, with a leadership structure capable of breaking down the barriers between rival commands that have long hampered its modernisation efforts. It has taken a long time since the meeting in Gutian for these reforms to unfold; but that reflects both their importance and their difficulty. The PLA itself has long admitted that it is lagging behind. It may have plenty of new weapons—it has just started to build a second aircraft-carrier, for instance—but it is failing to make effective use of them because of outdated systems of command and control. Before any substantial change in this area, however, Mr Xi felt it necessary to strengthen the party’s control over the PLA, lest it resist his reforms and sink back into a morass of money-grubbing. The reforms therefore begin with the main instrument of party control, the Central Military Commission (CMC), which is chaired by Mr Xi. On January 11th the CMC announced that the PLA’s four headquarters—the organisations responsible for recruiting troops, procuring weapons, providing logistics and ensuring political supervision—had been split up, slimmed down and absorbed into the commission. Once these were among the most powerful organisations in the PLA, operating almost as separate fiefs. Now they have become CMC departments. Power to the party The political headquarters was the body through which the party kept an eye on the ranks and ensured they were up to speed on Maoist texts and the party’s latest demands. The loss of its autonomous status may suggest that the party’s role is being downgraded. Far from it. Now the party’s CMC (there is also a state one, which exists only in name) will be better able to keep watch. The body’s 15 new departments will include not only departments for politics but also for logistics, personnel management and fighting corruption. Mr Xi has already turned his guns on graft, imprisoning dozens of generals. The second reform has been to put the various services on a more equal footing. The land forces have hitherto reigned supreme. That may have been fine when the PLA’s main job was to defend the country against an invasion across its land borders (until the 1980s the Soviet Union was considered the biggest threat). But now China has military ambitions in the South China Sea and beyond, and wants the ability to challenge American naval and air power in the western Pacific. A recent editorial in the Liberation Army Daily, a PLA mouthpiece, berated the armed forces for their “army-centric mindset”. In addition to those for the navy and air force, a separate command has now been created for the army, which had previously run everything. On December 31st the CMC also announced the formation of a command responsible for space and cyberwarfare, as well as one for ballistic and cruise missiles (previously known as the Second Artillery Force, part of the army). There is also a new joint command with overall control of the various services, a little like America’s joint chiefs of staff. Big changes are also afoot in regional command structures. China used to be divided into seven military regions. These were powerful and relatively self-contained; sharing or swapping troops and equipment was rare. Now, according to reports in the South China Morning Post, a newspaper in Hong Kong, the number will be reduced to five. Troops will be recruited and trained by the various services before regional deployment. This will ensure greater central control over the regions. China has been talking about military reform for decades, but change has been glacial. Opposition within the armed forces has been intense. “If [reform] is not done properly,” wrote Sun Kejia and Han Xiao of the PLA National Defence University last month, “it could affect the stability of the armed forces or even all of society.” (The article was promptly removed from the Liberation Army Daily website.) Demobbed soldiers could make trouble—Mr Xi wants the number of troops to be cut by 300,000. State firms have been ordered to reserve 5% of jobs for laid-off veterans. The recent reforms are more extensive than most Western observers had expected after the Gutian conference. But even so, they are incomplete. The army still holds sway over some appointments (all five chiefs of the new regional commands are army generals, for instance). The PLA has traditionally given higher status to combat units than to those providing communications, logistics, transport and the like, a misplaced emphasis in an age when information and communications are crucial in warfare. The reforms do little to correct that bias. Moreover, many details about them remain unclear. No one knows, for example, where the troop cuts will come from or what units will go into the new space and cyberwarfare command. The first result of the reforms is likely to be confusion in the ranks, until the new system settles down. Dennis Blasko, an American observer of the PLA, says no one can be sure of the results until they are tested in battle. Amid the murk, only one man clearly seems to have got his way: Mr Xi.Lego produced its first interlocking bricks in 1949, the year the Chinese Communist Party founded the People’s Republic. While the former has generally inspired creativity, the latter is typically more fearful of it. But last year Ai Weiwei (pictured), a Chinese artist, accused Lego of censorship when it refused his large order because it could not approve of using bricks “for political works”. He planned an artwork on dissidents. On January 12th Lego backed down, saying it would no longer query a buyer’s purpose. The reversal comes too late for Mr Ai: members of the public have already donated millions of bricks, many of them dropped into second-hand BMWs set up by the artist as collection points. He must have enough by now to build a Great Wall.Great brain, great prawns A GIANT wooden bust of Confucius greets visitors to the Luweifang restaurant in Beijing, where diners may feast on “literary ginkgo”, braised hog rectum and other delicacies said to be part of a centuries-old culinary tradition developed by the ancient philosopher’s family. The restaurant, set up in 2011, is one of dozens across the country purporting to offer such delights. Now China is preparing to bid for UNESCO to register Confucius’s family cuisine as part of the “intangible cultural heritage of humanity”. China has already logged Mongolian throat singing, mathematical calculations on the abacus and a form of puppetry with UNESCO, as well as more prominent arts such as Peking opera and acupuncture. Confucian cookery would not be the first culinary entrant: washoku, traditional Japanese cuisine, attained this status in 2013, and North and South Korea have each separately listed kimchi, the seasoned, fermented vegetables beloved on both sides of the demilitarised zone. Even the “Mediterranean diet” is catalogued. Confucian gastronomy was included in China’s list of cultural treasures in 2011 (joining Chinese yo-yos, some folk tales and roast duck). Yet even within China Confucian fare is rarely considered distinctive. Foodies variously divide Chinese cookery into four, eight or ten regional schools, but the philosopher’s tradition is not among them. “The Analects”, a book of his sayings, praises the scholar who “does not seek the gratification of his appetite” and abjures indulgent banquets. The culinary tradition reportedly emerged from entertaining visiting emperors and high-ranking officials to the sage’s birthplace—rather than feeding his own gluttony. Registering Confucius’s family tradition coincides with a wider attempt to standardise national cuisine. Last summer the government in Inner Mongolia, a northern province, published the official method for cooking 100 local dishes. Xi’an, home to the famous terracotta warriors (a UNESCO world heritage site), wants to publish recipes for the city’s five most famous foods, to guard against distasteful rip-offs. They follow a 19th-century tradition for codifying French haute cuisine. The appeal of Confucian fare is more political than gastronomic. Mao vilified the sage as a reactionary, but Communist Party leaders have since rehabilitated him. President Xi Jinping has stressed Confucius’s emphasis on order and hierarchy. But the culinary tradition—whatever its provenance—may prove of limited use. Since Mr Xi’s anti-corruption campaign has choked the demand for fancy banquets and pricey delicacies, Confucius’s disciples could yet again fall on the wrong side of history.THE lugubrious Leung Chun-ying, Hong Kong’s chief executive, was never the man to cheer you up. This was a handicap as he made his fourth annual policy address to the Legislative Council (Legco) this week. The mood in the chamber and the territory as a whole was sour. Business frets about the slowdown in China. Political life remains scarred by the failure of the pro-democracy “umbrella” movement of 2014. To protests, Mr Leung plodded through a speech on economic issues, with a special emphasis on China’s regional plans. He did not even try to allay rekindled fears that Hong Kong’s freedoms are in jeopardy. Looked at in a certain light, such fears can seem overblown. Hong Kong still debates politics with no holds barred. Groups banned elsewhere in China freely proselytise. And any perceived encroachment on the territory’s freedoms provokes loud protests. Yet the alleged abduction since October of five Hong Kong residents by the Chinese authorities has cast a dark shadow. Three vanished in mainland China and one in Thailand. The disappearance on December 30th of the fifth man, Lee Bo, has caused particular alarm. He appears to have been snatched from Hong Kong itself and spirited across the border to the mainland, without his travel documents or any record of his leaving. His fate remains unknown. Like the other four, he was associated with a publisher and bookshop specialising in one of Hong Kong’s more esoteric niche businesses: scurrilous tales of intrigue, infighting, corruption and sex among China’s Communist leaders. A forthcoming title purports to uncover the love life of President Xi Jinping. Many have assumed that the Communist Party’s displeasure with the firm’s output explains the mysterious disappearances. China has not denied it.   The implications would be grim. Under the Joint Declaration of 1984 with Britain over Hong Kong’s future, China promised that “one country, two systems” would apply after China resumed sovereignty over the territory: ie, that Hong Kong would enjoy autonomy in all but its defence and foreign relations. Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, the Basic Law, guarantees among other things freedom of speech and judicial independence. The suggestion that Hong Kong’s people, should they displease the sovereign master, might simply be kidnapped makes a nonsense of this. A torrent of outrage has gushed from China’s usual critics in Hong Kong: Martin Lee, a veteran barrister, legislator and pro-democracy campaigner, called the apparent kidnapping “the most worrying thing” to have happened in Hong Kong since British rule ended in 1997. Even the Communist Party’s loyalists in Hong Kong are at a loss. The local government usually sees its role as justifying the central authorities’ ways to Hong Kong, rather than the other way round. Yet this week the justice secretary, Rimsky Yuen Kwok-keung, called the fears the incident had evoked “totally understandable”. Legco’s president, Jasper Tsang Yok-sing, founding chairman of the biggest pro-Communist party, insisted that China should reassure Hong Kong about its autonomy. And many businessmen, even those who usually advocate placating the central government in the interests of political stability, think that extrajudicial rendition would cross a red line. China also faces international scrutiny. Britain, hoping to position itself as China’s best friend in Europe, did little to show support for the pro-democracy protesters in 2014. But the missing Mr Lee holds a British passport, and Philip Hammond, Britain’s foreign secretary, has said that his abduction to the mainland would be an “egregious breach” of the Joint Declaration. Gui Minhai, who vanished in Thailand, is a Swedish citizen; the European Union has called the events “extremely worrying”. They were also widely watched in Taiwan. China hopes that island will also eventually accept Chinese sovereignty under the promise of “one country, two systems”, but Taiwan is likely on January 16th to elect an independence-leaning president. Since the disappearances look disastrous for China’s image, many in Hong Kong believe that they cannot have been a deliberate policy by the central leadership. They speculate that lower-level officials overstepped the mark, or even that Communist Party factions hostile to Mr Xi are trying to embarrass him. China is left with a headache. It will have to cook up some plausible-sounding explanation for the mystery and coax, cajole or coerce the missing men into playing along. That, the theory goes, explains the prolonged silence. For pessimists, however, the snatching of Mr Lee is just the most outrageous instance of the mainland’s increasing interference in Hong Kong. They see other examples, including the purchase of the South China Morning Post, Hong Kong’s main English-language newspaper, by Alibaba, China’s e-commerce goliath; and the decision by Mr Leung to appoint a pro-government ally to chair Hong Kong University’s governing council, rather than the university’s own nominee. Notes from the underground Pessimists also point out that China has wielded enormous influence in Hong Kong since long before 1997. Bizarrely, though, the Communist Party is even now an underground organisation there. The secrecy may encourage subterfuge, rumour-mongering and even lawlessness. Some officials may well sanction illegal snatch-squads, to show that Hong Kong’s autonomy does not extend to anti-party activity. That this also proves the emptiness of the “one country, two systems” promise would be a small price to pay. Presumably having nothing useful to say on the issue, Mr Leung ignored it in his speech. A legislator from the pro-democracy camp, Lee Cheuk-yan, was expelled from the chamber for interrupting him to demand information about the Lee Bo case. Later he accused the chief executive of trying “to turn Hong Kong into the mainland”. Nearly two decades after its reversion to China, few in Hong Kong want that.WHEN Egyptian politicians discussed sabotaging the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam in 2013, they naturally assumed it was a private meeting. But amid all the scheming, and with a big chuckle, Muhammad Morsi, then president, informed his colleagues that their discussion was being broadcast live on a state-owned television channel. Embarrassment apart, it was already no secret that Egypt wanted to stop the largest hydroelectric project in Africa. When Ethiopia completes construction of the dam in 2017, it will stand 170 metres tall (550 feet) and 1.8km (1.1 miles) wide. Its reservoir will be able to hold more than the volume of the entire Blue Nile, the tributary on which it sits (see map). And it will produce 6,000 megawatts of electricity, more than double Ethiopia’s current measly output, which leaves three out of four people in the dark. This boon for Ethiopia is the bane of Egypt, which for millennia has seen the Nile as a lifeline snaking across its vast desert. The river still provides nearly all of Egypt’s water. Egypt claims two-thirds of that flow based on a treaty it signed with Sudan in 1959. But even that is no longer enough to satisfy the growing population and sustain thirsty crops. Annual water supply per person has fallen by well over half since 1970. The UN warns of a looming crisis. Officials in Egypt, while loth to fix leaky pipes, moan that the dam will leave them high and dry. Herodotus, an ancient Greek historian, called the fertile land of Egypt the Nile’s gift. Countless Egyptian leaders have rattled their sabres in defence of the water supply. This has soured relations with the eight other countries that share the Nile basin. Most of them have agreed to co-operate with each other, dismissing another old treaty which, Egypt claims, gives it a veto over upstream projects. Only recently has the Egyptian government adopted a more conciliatory tone. In March of last year Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, who ousted Mr Morsi in a coup, joined Hailemariam Desalegn, Ethiopia’s prime minister, and Omar al-Bashir, Sudan’s president, to sign a declaration that tacitly blesses construction of the dam so long as there is no “significant harm” to downstream countries. The agreement was affirmed in December, when the three countries settled on two French firms to study the dam’s potential impact. That step is long overdue. The impact studies were meant to be completed last year, but bickering over the division of labour, and the withdrawal of one firm, caused delays. Many Egyptians believe that Ethiopia is stalling so that the dam becomes a fait accompli. Already half-finished, experts worry that it may be too late to correct any problems. Representatives of the three countries are now meeting to discuss “technical” issues. The contracts for studying the dam are not yet signed. A sense of mistrust hangs over the dam’s ultimate use. Ethiopia insists that it will produce only power and that the water pushing its turbines (less some evaporation during storage) will ultimately come out the other side. But Egypt fears it will also be used for irrigation, cutting downstream supply. Experts are sceptical. “It makes no technological or economic sense [for Ethiopia] to irrigate land with that water,” as it would involve pumping it back upstream, says Kenneth Strzepek of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A more reasonable concern is over the dam’s large reservoir. If filled too quickly, it would for a time significantly reduce Egypt’s water supply and affect the electricity-generating capacity of its own Aswan Dam. But the Ethiopian government faces pressure to see a quick return on its investment. The project, which is mostly self-funded, costs $4.8 billion. Some experts say filling the reservoir could take seven years. But “having a fixed time to fill it may not be the best way to do it, because there can be extremely dry years and extremely wet years,” says Kevin Wheeler of Oxford University. He recommends releasing a fixed amount of water from the dam each year, leaving the reservoir to fill at a pace set by nature. A potential wild card in the negotiations is Sudan, which long sided with Egypt in opposition to the dam, some 20km from its border. But as the potential benefits to Sudan have become clear, it has backed Ethiopia. Short on energy itself, Sudan will receive some of the power produced by the dam. By stabilising the Nile’s flow, it will also allow Sudan to prevent flooding, consume more water and increase agricultural output (once old farming methods are updated). Currently much of the country’s allocation of water under the 1959 treaty is actually consumed by Egyptians. To their chagrin, the river will no longer gush past their southern neighbours during monsoon season and end up in Lake Nasser, the huge reservoir behind the Aswan Dam. How much water Sudan uses in the future, and other variables such as changes in rainfall and water quality, should determine how the dam is operated. That will require more co-operation and a willingness to compromise. Disagreement between Egypt and Sudan over such things as the definition of “significant harm” bodes ill. But all three countries will benefit if they work together, claims Mr Strzepek, citing the dam’s capacity to store water for use in drought years and its potential to produce cheap energy for export once transmission lines are built. The Renaissance Dam is merely the latest test of countries’ willingness to share water. There may soon be more difficulties. Ethiopia plans to build other dams on the river, which could further affect downstream supply. Sudan has promised foreign investors an abundance of water for irrigation. If Egypt is made to feel at the mercy of its neighbours, it may not have finished rattling its sabre.TWO gleaming new towers rise from the dry savannah of Gaborone, Botswana’s capital. The country’s tallest buildings are billed by their developers as offering the city’s residents “their first true glimpse into the benefits of inner-city dwelling”. No doubt these stylish apartments make comfortable pads—particularly for the mistresses of wealthy businessmen who are installed in quite a few—but building upwards rather than outwards seems rather odd: at four people per square kilometre, Botswana is one of the world’s least densely populated countries. Yet Gaborone’s small city centre—originally designed for 20,000 people, a tenth of the current number—is hemmed in by communally owned tribal land that is almost impossible to buy and develop. It must grow up or not at all. Botswana’s wider economy and polity are similarly constrained by outmoded traditions and laws, even though at first blush the country is doing astoundingly well. Since its independence from Britain in 1966, Botswana has been one of Africa’s most stable and prosperous democracies. Elections are so peaceful, fair—barring a little gerrymandering—and boring that the country is held up as a model for Africa. The Ibrahim Index of governance, for instance, ranks it third among African states. More impressive is that this was achieved in the face of a potential “resource curse” from diamonds, which were discovered in 1967. Instead of perverting politics, the riches Botswana has gathered as the world’s second-largest diamond producer (see chart) have paid for infrastructure and development. Income per person has quadrupled over 35 years and the country has tackled challenges including one of the world’s highest HIV rates. Yet Botswana’s complacency is being sorely tested. In the short term it faces the worst market in “living memory”, in the words of one diamantaire. Diamond mining accounts for a quarter of Botswana’s economy and it is being hurt by a sharp downturn in demand almost everywhere—particularly in China, where a clampdown on corruption has curbed public displays of wealth. Analysts reckon that De Beers, which digs up most of Botswana’s gems through a joint venture with the government, and Alrosa, a Russian firm, have slashed sales of rough diamonds by as much as half. Despite this brake on supply, diamond prices have still fallen by close to 30%. Botswana’s economy, which has expanded by 5% a year over the past decade, probably grew by half that rate in 2015 and is unlikely to do much better than 3% this year. Having balanced its books for the previous four years, the government ran a small deficit in 2015 and will probably do so again this year. This economic shock, mild as it may be, is but a taste of the adjustments that will have to be made as the country runs out of diamonds. That is likely to happen within the next 15-20 years, analysts reckon. Diamond mines are not forever. Botswana has made some progress in diversifying its economy, about half of which was directly tied to mining in the early 2000s. Much of this growth has come from poorly-paid service industries, but Botswana manufactures almost nothing and exports little other than diamonds. It needs not only to create manufacturing jobs to reduce an official unemployment rate of almost 20% but also to find new sources of export earnings. Yet its efforts to promote new industries are hobbled by labour policies that are meant to promote the employment of locals. Bosses complain that it is almost impossible to get work permits for skilled foreigners. Some talk of firms having to close because their expatriate founders could not renew permits. Another test will be for the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP), which has run the country for five decades. In national elections in 2014 it lost its outright majority for the first time, though it was still able to form a government because the opposition was divided. If its rivals were to unite, the BDP could be pushed out of government in 2019, not least because it has failed to deal with water and power shortages in the capital. As its grip on power is weakening, the BDP is beginning to dabble with repression. Journalists complain of arrests and harassment, while the independence of the judiciary is under attack. With its well-educated people, Botswana could live up to its promise as a model that combines democracy and good governance. But if it falters, it will struggle to attract the investment it needs to put the sparkle back in its economy.ACCORDING to America’s secretary of state, John Kerry, “Implementation Day” for the Iran nuclear accord could be just “days away if all goes well”. He was not expecting two US Navy patrol boats and their crews to be seized by Iranian Revolutionary Guards on January 12th after unintentionally entering Iranian waters near an island naval base. But with both sides determined to smooth things over, the boats and the sailors were released the following day. As long as there are no new shocks, the big day looks set to be announced in the next few days—sooner than was expected when the deal was struck last July. Iran will be judged to have complied with all its obligations in dismantling those parts of its nuclear programme which offered a path to building a bomb. In return the UN, America and the EU will drop or suspend all their nuclear-related sanctions. At the same time, Iran will apply the Additional Protocol of its safeguards agreement (subject to ratification by its parliament, the Majlis) with the International Atomic Energy Agency, a measure which gives the agency’s inspectors access to materials and sites beyond declared nuclear facilities. Iran is very near to completing the removal of some 14,000 uranium-enrichment centrifuges. The core of the Arak heavy-water reactor, which had the potential to produce plutonium, was reportedly taken out on January 11th and is being filled with cement. Most of Iran’s stockpile of low-enriched uranium was sent to Russia and Kazakhstan in late December. Nuclear proliferation experts are amazed at the speed with which Iran has acted. Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, and the head of its Atomic Energy Organisation, Ali Akbar Salehi, have appeared determined to navigate all obstacles, even supposed red lines drawn by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, to get the job done. A priority for them was to get the sanctions lifted before Majlis elections on February 26th. After more than two years in office, President Hassan Rohani will cite the achievement as evidence that his policy of engagement with the West has worked, ending a crisis that had left Iran’s economy in ruins. He will urge voters to back moderate candidates who support him and to weaken hardline factions that were opposed to the negotiations. Yet there are still important players in the regime, such as the Revolutionary Guards, who remain hostile to the deal and are prepared to test the West’s commitment to it. The IAEA received minimal co-operation in preparing its report, published in early December, on the possible military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme. It concluded that Iran had a parallel clandestine weapons programme until 2003 and that some aspects of it continued until 2009. But there was no admission of this by Iran and no access to the scientists the agency wanted to talk to. It was also unable to carry out verification procedures at the Parchin military complex, where it believes there was an explosives chamber. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal Western diplomats decided that Iran’s obfuscations were predictable and it was time to move on. That raises questions about how much Iran may get away with in the future. Gary Samore, a former White House arms-control adviser now at Harvard, says that the Iranians’ caginess about their past nuclear weapons-dabbling was a reminder that the deal was not a “strategic solution to the nuclear problem but something purely transactional”. The response to an Iranian test of a nuclear-capable ballistic missile in October that violated a UN Security Council resolution was also less than resolute. Mr Samore says that it was clearly intended by the Guards to provoke a reaction from America that would give Iranian critics of the deal the chance to stall or kill it. Persuaded by Mr Kerry, who had his ear bent by Mr Zarif, not to rise to the bait, Barack Obama flip-flopped over slapping on new sanctions, first indicating he would, but then withdrawing the threat. As for the prospects of the deal holding, Mr Samore thinks the Iranians have an incentive to co-operate for the time being, as they will benefit by up to $100 billion from the unfreezing of assets. But if other benefits, such as increased oil revenues, are slow to come, this might not last. A more immediate threat will come from whoever is the next American president. A Republican could choose to sabotage the deal with new sanctions, while even Hillary Clinton, says Mr Samore, will need to show there is a new sheriff in town if Iran’s behaviour in non-nuclear areas (missile tests, the unjustified imprisonment of American citizens, support for the Syrian regime and abuse of human rights) does not change. Getting to Implementation Day has been surprisingly smooth. What comes after will be a lot harder.All work and nothing else makes Magufuli hard to mock WITH his campaign slogan “work and nothing else”, you might think John Magufuli, Tanzania’s new president, would be a poor subject for satire. Yet austerity can provide a few laughs. In his first few weeks, the new president cancelled independence day celebrations, went litter-picking and turned up at the ministry of finance to make sure staff were actually coming to work. The result, on Twitter, was a hashtag, #WhatWouldMagufuliDo, full of pictures of money-saving ideas: a wooden cart acting as a wedding limousine; a vanity mirror attached with duct tape to a car to replace a broken wing mirror. The joshing was mostly affectionate: Mr Magufuli’s anti-corruption drive is popular. Kenya’s president, Uhuru Kenyatta, comes off rather less well. The joke about Mr Kenyatta—who is known for his many foreign trips—is that when he is in Kenya, he is an important foreign statesman visiting. When the Pope visited Kenya in November, tweeters captioned pictures with jokes about the pontiff welcoming the president. Twitter thus illustrates the fortunes of two of east Africa’s rulers, at least in the view of the middle classes in their countries. And just as in the West, the internet is changing political conversations in Africa. Not all the hashtags are humorous. In Kenya anti-corruption campaigners have begun organising on Twitter. When they are arrested or mistreated by police, the world soon knows. The potential for influencing politics is enormous. In Tanzania’s recent election, over 60% of eligible voters were under the age of 35; almost all sub-Saharan African societies are as young. In countries where age is revered, social media allow young people to make themselves heard. #AfricaTweets: The use of Twitter in Africa Sadly, change is not happening everywhere. In democratic Kenya, 37% of the population had access to the internet in 2014, according to the International Telecommunication Union. In autocratic Ethiopia, however, the figure was just 2%. When Barack Obama visited both countries in July, Kenyan Tweeters produced a flurry of commentary, much of it mocking their own government. Ethiopia’s produced barely a trickle. Tweeple need connections to flourish.FROM inside his headquarters in the southern Saudi city of Najran, Major-General Saad Olyan, the area commander, looks up at the craggy mountains looming over the city and wonders what Yemen’s rebels on the plateau above will do next. They have pushed Saudi forces out of some border posts, and forced the evacuation of more than 7,000 civilians from Saudi villages near the ill-marked frontier. Saudi artillery rhythmically thumps suspected rebel positions. But it has not prevented them from regularly rocketing Najran and other border towns, killing 80 people, 25 of them in Najran. One Katyusha rocket fell a few yards away from General Olyan’s office; the windows were blown out, pitting his walls with shrapnel. Another blew out the glass front of a nearby hotel shortly before it was due to open. A banner with a picture of King Salman and his designated heirs declares forlornly: “We are all soldiers of the homeland.” Residents of the area have fled to safer parts of the city. Kindergartens and homes near the military base lie in ruins. Bar the Pakistani workers obliviously playing cricket, the streets feel like a ghost town. Saudi Arabia’s young defence minister, deputy crown prince and de facto ruler, Mohammed bin Salman, insists he is winning the war. His coalition has retaken Aden, Yemen’s southern port, and 80% of the country, he claims. But many of Yemen’s largest cities—Sana’a, Taiz and Ibb—remain in rebel hands. And with negotiations stalling (the resumption of talks set for January 14th has been indefinitely postponed), officials talk less of an early victory than a protracted war. “We’re looking at conflict management, not resolution,” says a confidant of the prince. “This problem can go on for years.” For all the bluster of Saudi generals who vow to lead their troops into Sana’a if necessary, the campaign now has more limited goals, says the confidant. Saudi Arabia wants to send Iran and its regional clients a message that it will resist their regional push. With Iran holding sway through its proxies in Baghdad, Damascus and Beirut, Saudi Arabia is loth to let a fourth capital, particularly one in its back yard, go Iran’s way. But the campaign is now mostly about blunting the capabilities of the Houthis (a militia of Zaydis, a splinter Shiite sect concentrated in Yemen’s north) and their ally, Ali Abdullah Saleh, who until Saudi Arabia engineered his removal in 2012 was the Arab world’s longest-reigning ruler. Together the Houthis and Mr Saleh make a formidable force. Whereas the former are guerrillas who model themselves on Lebanon’s Hizbullah, the latter commands Yemen’s Republican army, which has been fighting wars (including against the Houthis) for 25 years. Together they wield an arsenal of tanks, ballistic missiles and, at one point, even the odd fighter-jet. Houthi fighters head to battle carrying charms, such as keys and visas to paradise. Their preachers on satellite television call for re-establishing Zaydi rule across the border, not just over the three border provinces the Al Sauds seized in 1934 but even over Mecca farther north. That is implausible given Saudi Arabia’s air power and network of allies. But some Saudis ask how their overfed armed forces would fare should battle-hardened Houthi fighters make even a limited push across the border. It says much about Saudi trepidation that General Olyan limits himself to defending Saudi territory; he says his troops make no attempt to attack the Houthi heartland of Saada governorate, just across the frontier. Allies have offered help. Last month Kuwait sent a battalion to the Saudi side of the border. Pakistan has vouchsafed to come to the kingdom’s rescue, should it come under attack. And at the back of Najran’s airport, the Americans have provided a battery of Patriot air-defence missiles to knock out the score of incoming SCUDs that Mr Saleh has fired at the kingdom’s southern cities. But the costs for Saudi Arabia are mounting. Eroding his plans for cutting the budget deficit, Muhammad bin Salman is reinforcing his forces inside Yemen. Yemeni refugees, too, have been spilling into the kingdom, to the tune of over half a million. Cross-border smuggling and infiltration, perhaps of Houthi fighters, says a Saudi officer, is higher than ever. Yemenis do not constitute a fifth column, but they complain that Saudi Arabia is refusing them health care. Some mutter about turning the kingdom into a republic. The air campaign in Yemen is denting Saudi Arabia’s reputation. The death-toll of Yemenis is nearly 6,000, a “modest” number says a Gulf official, especially when judged against the carnage elsewhere in the region. Some recall that Yemen, like Afghanistan, has been a graveyard for many an invader. But prominent preachers from Saudi Arabia’s religious establishment egg the Al Sauds to confront, not compromise with, the region’s Shias. Salman al-Ouda, a critical cleric with a strong Wahhabi following, wonders what the point was of spending billions and taking thousands of dead “if it just left us where we started?”  
