THE desolate hills east of Jerusalem seem insignificant, a barren stretch of scrubland with few buildings or residents. Yet twice in the past few weeks Israel’s supreme court has heard arguments over this small patch of territory. Diplomats have bluntly warned Israel not to build anything here. And thousands of Palestinians have found themselves at the centre of a long battle over the most controversial patch of the occupied West Bank. The area in question, known as E1, sits between Jerusalem and the sprawling settlement of Maale Adumim, 7km (4 miles) to the east. Every Israeli prime minister since Yitzhak Rabin has dreamed of building a town on these hills. It would create a salient jutting almost halfway across the West Bank’s narrow waist, slashing the route between Ramallah and Bethlehem, and further encircling Palestinian districts in East Jerusalem. One local activist calls it the “doomsday settlement”, a deadly blow to the idea of a territorially contiguous future Palestinian state. Any construction in E1 would oblige Israel to expel 18 Bedouin tribes who live in the area. Last spring several members of these tribes received an unwelcome visitor: an emissary from the Israeli army, calling himself Farid, who urged them to register for plots at a nearby “relocation site”. It sits on the edge of a rubbish dump. Forced moves in the past have already destroyed the itinerant lifestyle of the Bedouin. Starting in 1997, Israel evicted more than 100 families to make room for an expansion of Maale Adumim, which now houses 40,000 people. Their new plots of land had little grazing space; most were forced to sell their flocks, and now work for Israeli companies as labourers. Many are unhappy. “We’re like fish in the water,” said Abu Imad, a leader of the Abu Nawwar tribe. “Our lives are in the desert, and we will die if we’re moved.” Yet the relocation is moving ahead, if slowly. The army destroyed at least 39 homes in the area last summer. It was the biggest wave of demolitions in three years. Several tribes are now appealing against their pending expulsions in the high court. Israel has also started paving a bypass road that would allow Palestinians to skirt a future settlement in E1. The highway would mitigate one of the consequences of building there—though it will inevitably become a bottleneck for the 1m Palestinians who live in Ramallah and the southern West Bank. Nothing has been built yet in E1, which America’s State Department publicly describes as “very sensitive” and privately talks of in much cruder terms. But fears remain rife. On December 28th an anti-settlement Israeli activist group, Peace Now, published a report claiming to have evidence that the housing ministry has quietly commissioned plans for 8,372 housing units in the E1 corridor. The government says nothing is decided, though Uri Ariel, the agriculture minister, visited the site on January 10th with a group of Knesset members and called for the building to start. Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, heads a coalition that depends on support from the settler movement. He also fears the consequences of moving forward. The EU decided in November to slap labels on products made in the West Bank; a recent poll found that 37% of Americans support putting sanctions on Israel over the settlements. International pressure may yet forestall E1. But the issue is sure to keep festering.WIDE-OPEN deserts and sunshine for more than 300 days a year ought to have made countries in the Middle East centres for solar power. Yet with the world’s largest oil- and gasfields nearby there has been little reason to develop renewable energy in the region. Still, much as fossil fuels are plentiful there is another liquid in short supply: fresh water. Might the shortage of water now be alleviated through the abundance of sunlight? EcoPeace, a joint Israeli, Jordanian and Palestinian NGO thinks it just might. In December it presented an ambitious, if far from fully developed, $30 billion plan to build a number of desalination plants on the Mediterranean shore of Israel and the Gaza Strip. At the same time, large areas in Jordan’s eastern desert would host a 200 square km (75 square mile) solar-energy plant, which would provide power for desalination (and for Jordan) in exchange for water from the coast. “A new peaceful economy can be built in our region around water and energy” says Gidon Bromberg, EcoPeace’s Israeli director. Jordan and the Palestinian Authority are already entitled to 120 million cubic meters of water a year from the Jordan river and West Bank aquifers but this is not enough to meet demand, particularly in Jordan, which regularly suffers from shortages. The main drawback to making fresh water from the sea is that it takes lots of energy. Around 25% of Jordan’s electricity and 10% of Israel’s goes on treating and transporting water. Using power from the sun could fill a sizeable gap, and make Palestinians less dependent on Israeli power. Renewables supply just 2% of Israel’s electricity needs, but the government is committed to increasing that share to 17% by 2030. Jordan, which has long relied on oil supplies from Arab benefactors, is striving for 10% by 2020. The plan to make water from sunlight is still at an early stage and similar grand designs in the past have foundered on the rocks of reality. Desertec, a German programme to generate solar energy in northern Africa for use in Europe, has stalled over concerns about the cost of transmitting the electricity over great distances, not to mention the problem of local political instability. Over the past 40 years there has been a series of plans to build a Red Sea-Dead Sea canal that would have irrigated the Jordan Valley and generated power, none of which have been built. Beyond many logistical and financial obstacles, the plan’s boosters also have to navigate a political minefield. Although Israel already supplies most of the Palestinian Authority’s electricity, and pipes water from the Sea of Galilee to Jordan, many Arab countries have signed up to boycotts that prohibit them from connecting Israel to their power-grids. Diplomatic tensions could therefore easily stymie any comprehensive energy treaty. “The political problems are the main obstacle” says Yana Abu Taleb, the deputy director of EcoPeace in Jordan. The relevant Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian steering committees each have government representation; but the three committees have yet to hold a single joint meeting. Although regional instability may indeed deter foreigners and investors from backing the project, its authors hope that working together might lessen tensions. Addressing their shared environmental issues could bring the sides closer on other matters too.FOR a brief moment at the turn of the year, Angela Merkel seemed to have recaptured control of Germany’s careering debate over refugees. The chancellor’s traditional New Year’s Eve address was acclaimed for striking just the right note. For the first time ever it was broadcast with subtitles, in Arabic and English, so that refugees as well as Germans would get her message. Mrs Merkel reminded the 1.1m asylum-seekers who arrived in Germany in 2015 to respect German rules and traditions. She urged her German viewers not to let themselves be divided, and warned of “those who, with coldness or even hatred in their hearts, lay sole claim to be German and seek to exclude others”. Yet even as Mrs Merkel was speaking, about a thousand men, described by police as mainly migrants of north African or Arab origin, began massing between Cologne’s railway station and cathedral, where fireworks were about to begin. Around midnight they broke into clusters and formed huddles around women who had turned out to celebrate. They then set upon the women, harassing and groping them, stripping them of clothing and valuables. One victim was raped. Of the more than 600 women who have since come forward, many described the ordeal as “running the gauntlet”. The news took four days to get out. Inexplicably, Cologne’s police initially reported “relaxed” festivities. (On January 8th Wolfgang Albers, the local police chief, was suspended for this and other failings.) The public news networks were also slow to pick up the story, providing grist for the conspiracy mills of populists who denounce the mainstream media as a politically correct “liars’ press”. But as the extent of the crimes became clear, it raised questions about Mrs Merkel’s liberal response to the crisis in Syria and the wider Middle East. The chancellor has repeatedly told Germans: “We can handle this.” Now her optimism is being hurled back at her with disdain. One of the Cologne offenders purportedly taunted police: “I am a Syrian, you have to treat me nicely—Mrs Merkel invited me!” Seeking safety: A flow diagram of asylum applications and rejections Growing numbers of Germans worry about the large influx of Muslims. In a survey by INSA, a pollster, 61% of respondents have become less happy about accepting refugees since the assaults; 63% think there are already too many asylum-seekers in Germany, and only 29% still agree with Mrs Merkel that the country can handle it. The sceptics are not only on the populist right. Alice Schwarzer, Germany’s leading feminist, says that Germany is “naively importing male violence, sexism and anti-Semitism”. For now Mrs Merkel and her governing coalition have responded by talking tough. At a gathering of her centre-right Christian Democrats, she promised that the offenders will “feel the full force of the law” and suggested that more asylum-seekers who commit crimes would be deported. Even her centre-left coalition partners, the Social Democrats, want to crack down hard. Sigmar Gabriel, their boss, wants offenders to serve their prison time in their home countries to spare German taxpayers. Yet the legal hurdles to increased deportation are daunting. First, it is not clear how many of the Cologne offenders can be identified. Second, German judges typically cannot deport criminals with sentences of less than three years; the sexual offences in Cologne mainly fell short of rape, and would carry lighter penalties than that. On January 12th the interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, and the justice minister, Heiko Maas, said they would expand the definition of rape (currently, an assault does not count as rape unless the victim fights back). They also promised to lower the deportation threshold, making it an option even for those on probation. But even with these changes, the Geneva conventions forbid deporting people to a country where they might be executed, tortured or harmed. Finally, home countries must co-operate; many don’t. Mr Gabriel is musing about cutting aid to such states. Europe's safe lists: Which countries does Europe consider safe for migrants to return to? Playing into xenophobes’ hands Germany’s legal reaction will therefore be slow and nuanced. But the transformation of its public debate has been swift and blunt. The assaults were a boon to Germany’s xenophobic right—from a movement that calls itself Pegida (short for “Patriotic Europeans against the Islamisation of the Occident”) to the new Alternative for Germany (AfD) party. Predictably, AfD has called on Mrs Merkel to resign. In social media and on the streets, the angry are more audible than the nuanced. In Cologne 1,700 anti-migrant demonstrators faced off against 1,300 pro-migrant demonstrators until the police broke it up. Thugs roamed the streets attacking foreigners, injuring two Pakistanis and one Syrian. Among the indirect victims of Cologne are the many migrants who would not dream of assaulting anyone, and who came to Germany seeking safety for themselves and their families. Four refugees have drafted an open letter to Mrs Merkel in which they express their support of women’s rights and their shock at the assaults. They are handing the letter round to collect signatures. Many refugees and German Muslims fear being tarred with the same brush as the offenders. In retrospect it is clear that Mrs Merkel’s hopeful New Year’s address coincided with the appearance of immigration’s dark side on German streets, and that her warnings have not been heeded. Some refugees have not respected German rules and traditions. Germans are divided. Germany’s neighbours, from Hungary and Poland to Switzerland and Denmark, have sneered at Mrs Merkel’s “welcome culture”. It now looks tenuous even at home.SINCE the attacks in Cologne several commentators have argued that Europe has a “man problem”. Writing in Politico Magazine, Valerie Hudson, a political scientist, argued that “the sex ratios among migrants are so one-sided...that they could radically change the gender balance in European countries in certain age cohorts”—especially young ones. Is this the case? More young men than young women have indeed been coming to Europe. Of the 1.2m asylum applicants in the last 12 months of available data, 73% were men, up from 66% in 2012. Those men skew increasingly young: according to Eurostat, the proportion of male asylum claimants who were 18- to 34-year-olds was 40% in October 2015 (the latest available data), up from 35% in 2012. Males between 14 and 17 years old accounted for 11% of all asylum-seekers, up from 5% in 2012. The numbers, however, differ by nationality. Around 60% of all male asylum-seekers from Algeria and Morocco were 18- to 34-year-olds. By contrast just 48% of the Iraqis, 38% of the Syrians and 31% of the Afghans fell into this age group. Proportions of young males also differ by host country (see chart). Sweden took three asylum-seekers for every 1,000 inhabitants in the 12 months to September 2015. That is the highest ratio in Europe. Alongside this, it also has more young male asylum-seekers: in the past 12 months 17% were 14- to 17-year-olds, compared with only 6% in Germany. Seeking safety: A flow diagram of asylum applications and rejections This will alter the sex ratio for some age groups in Sweden. As Ms Hudson points out, the teenage population will become more male: currently there are 106 male 14- to 17-year-olds for every 100 women. If all asylum applications are granted, this will change to 116 men to 100 women, while for those aged between 18 and 34 the male-to-female ratio will go from 105:100 to 107:100. This is worrisome. Skewed sex ratios would mean lots of sexually frustrated young men, which is a recipe for trouble. But the example of Sweden does not reflect what will happen across the whole of Europe. (Ms Hudson also conflates asylum applications with asylum granted. Not all of the 20,000 16- to 17-year-olds she says entered Sweden in 2015 will receive full refugee status; on current trends, around 17,000 will.) The countries that will be most affected are small, with populations under 10m. Sweden, Hungary, Austria and Norway would see the biggest sex-ratio changes (and only if they accepted all the asylum-seekers who applied). Germany has less to worry about. If it accepted all the young males who sought asylum in the year to October 2015, its sex ratios would go from 106:100 to 107:100 for 14- to 17-year-olds and from 105:100 to 106:100 for 18- to 34-year-olds. Europe does not have a man problem. Sweden may have.ARTUR MAS spent five years as president of Catalonia leading its drive for independence but, for the most part, he was a pro-business centrist who embraced the cause of secession because politics demanded it. When Mr Mas stepped down on January 9th after three months attempting to form a government, it was to make way for a more ideologically pure successor, Carles Puigdemont. In a speech in 2013 Mr Puigdemont said, quoting a Catalan journalist executed under the dictatorship of Francisco Franco, that “the invaders will be expelled from Catalonia”—referring to the Spanish government. On January 12th Mr Puigdemont became the first Catalan president to take the oath of office while omitting the traditional vows of loyalty to Spain’s constitution and king. Spain’s interior minister looked on in stony silence. It was Mr Puigdemont’s long commitment to independence, which much of his centre-right Catalan Democratic Convergence (CDC) party has embraced only recently, that enabled him to form a government where Mr Mas had failed. It won him the trust of the far-left Popular Unity Candidacies (CUP) party, whose members thought Mr Mas a sleazy austerity-monger but apparently consider Mr Puigdemont a more trustworthy radical. Three months after the elections, Catalonia’s independence movement now has control of the region’s government. But that control has come at a cost to the secessionists’ image. For years, the separatist movement has successfully sold itself as cool, kind and progressive. Backers of continued union with Spain were scorned as reactionaries, or even the inheritors of Franco’s legacy. Now senior members of the independence movement worry that it will be identified with the CUP, whose raised fists and chaotic assemblies frighten conservative, middle-class Catalans. Mr Puigdemont’s CDC has traditionally stood for order. The small but newly powerful CUP represents radical change. Separatism’s squeaky-clean image has found its greatest expression in pro-independence demonstrations on Catalan national day, September 11th. For each of the past four years, at least 600,000 people, or around 10% of the population, have turned out to demonstrate. The good-natured protests pull in entire families, with small children holding grandparents’ hands, banners in the red, gold and blue colours of the independence movement flying—“and not a single piece of litter on the street”, claims Jordi Sánchez, president of the Catalan National Assembly, the group that organises the festivities. Unionists complain that separatism’s civilised facade hides an unpleasant sense of moral superiority. “I call it the Kumbaya factor,” moans an anti-separatist Catalan economist. The movement’s righteous aura is aided by the participation of several nuns. One radical crowd-pleaser is Teresa Forcades, a Benedictine with a master’s degree from Harvard who is on leave from her convent on Catalonia’s Montserrat holy mountain. Mr Mas liked to be seen with one of his greatest fans, a Dominican nun named Lucía Caram. According to the coalition accord, Mr Puigdemont will now lead the Catalan government on an 18-month “road map” to independence. Yet Spain’s constitution does not allow any move towards secession, nor are there plans for a referendum on it. The acting government in Madrid, led by Mariano Rajoy’s conservative Popular Party (PP), has vowed to apply the full weight of the law as soon as it sees the constitution under threat. The question is whether Catalans will support an avowedly confrontational government. Mr Mas billed the regional elections as the referendum on independence that Madrid had refused to call. His Together for Yes coalition and CUP, which both backed the road map, jointly won more than half the seats—but only 48% of the vote. Even many separatists doubt that is enough. The ugly infighting of recent weeks and the radical antics of CUP are unlikely to have boosted support any further. The separatists’ ranks have swollen dramatically over the past half-dozen years. This has been the result, in part, of Mr Rajoy’s refusal to concede any Catalan demands for greater self-government. Most important, says Mr Sánchez, it is younger voters who are keenest on independence. That bodes well for the future of separatism. Much depends on how the central government in Madrid responds. Unfortunately, Spain’s general election on December 20th left parliament so fractured that forming a government could take months, or require new elections. Catalonia may have a new president, but the question of its independence is not much closer to being resolved.Sticking up for media freedom POLAND is in trouble with Brussels. On January 13th the European Commission launched a formal assessment of whether changes to the constitutional tribunal and public media pushed through by Poland’s new government, led by the Eurosceptic Law and Justice party (PiS), violate the rule of law. The commission is wielding new enforcement powers; in the worst case, Poland’s voting rights in the EU could be suspended. The move has “nothing to do with politics”, claimed Frans Timmermans, the first vice-president of the commission. But a big political fall-out looks likely. Since coming to power in October PiS has strengthened its grip over the security services and the civil service. In December it passed a law that requires the constitutional tribunal to approve verdicts by a two-thirds majority, crippling its ability to strike down legislation; it also appointed five new judges. A new media law sacked the management of Poland’s public television and radio broadcasters; a former PiS MP is the new television boss. Moderates are worried. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, PiS’s divisive leader, is moving like an “elephant in a china shop”, says Ryszard Petru, the leader of Nowoczesna, a new liberal party. Nowoczesna has surged in polls since the election; one recently put it ahead of PiS, with almost 30%. Thousands across Poland took to the streets in protest against the media law. Many see parallels with the illiberal path Hungary has pursued since Viktor Orban became prime minister in 2010. When PiS lost the election in 2011, Mr Kaczynski spoke of one day building “Budapest in Warsaw”. On January 6th Mr Orban and Mr Kaczynski held a secretive six-hour meeting in southern Poland. The EU has so far trod carefully. Donald Tusk, president of the European Council and prime minister of Poland between 2007 and 2014, warned that an exaggerated reaction from Brussels could backfire. Indeed, European criticism of PiS’s power grabs has already provoked a backlash from the government that could create political headaches for the EU. The relationship between Poland and Germany, which was built up under the previous government and which rests heavily on the fact that Germany buys lots of Polish exports, is coming under strain. One magazine cover depicted Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, as Adolf Hitler under the headline “Again they want to supervise Poland”. On January 10th Witold Waszczykowski, the foreign minister, summoned the German ambassador over allegedly “anti-Polish” comments made by German politicians. In an open letter to the German EU commissioner who first mentioned the rule-of-law procedure, Zbigniew Ziobro, the justice minister, alluded to the second world war and argued that Germans talking about overseeing Poland carry the “worst possible connotations” among Poles. Mr Kaczynski told a gathering of followers that no words, “especially not from German lips,” will stop PiS on its path towards justice. The Polish government has downplayed the significance of the formal assessment. Polish matters should be resolved in Poland, Beata Szydlo, the prime minister, said this week. In political terms, the government has little to worry about. It has a solid parliamentary majority, and tough action by the EU will only make it more popular with its own nationalist voters. Sceptics note that Hungary, which is far further down the path of illiberalism than Poland, has never faced serious repercussions in Brussels. This is in part because the EU lacked the rule-of-law monitoring mechanisms it now wields when Mr Orban was cementing his hold. But the Commission is still working out how to use its newfound powers. Its review of Poland’s new government may prove more of a test for the EU than for PiS.ONE dodgy referendum lost Ukraine Crimea. Another threatens to lose it the European Union. On April 6th the Dutch public will vote on the “association agreement” the EU signed with Ukraine in 2014. The deal cements trade and political links with one of the EU’s most important neighbours; the prospect of losing it under Russian pressure triggered Ukraine’s Maidan revolution. But last summer a group of Dutch mischief-makers, hunting for a Eurosceptic cause they could place on the ballot under a new “citizens’ initiative” law, noticed that parliament had just approved the deal. Worse luck for the Ukrainians. Unlike the Crimeans in 2014, the Dutch will not be voting under foreign occupation. But nor are they likely to have familiarised themselves with the Ukraine agreement’s 2,135 pages. Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, says a Dutch “No” could unleash a “continental crisis”. That is a stretch: as the referendum is non-binding, the Dutch government could ratify the agreement anyway, and its most important provisions are already in force. But Mr Juncker put his finger on something, because national referendums on EU matters are turning into a throbbing headache. Margaret Thatcher once dismissed referendums as “a device of dictators and demagogues”. The opposite was true for the central and eastern Europeans who joined the EU in the 2000s; their accession votes, usually passed with whopping majorities, marked the final rejection of tyranny. Elsewhere most EU referendums have turned on one-off issues, like joining the euro or ratifying an internal treaty. Negative votes, such as the French and Dutch dismissals of an EU constitution in 2005, have at least forced Eurocrats to pause for breath before resuming the march of integration. But now the silly season is here. A few months before the Dutch referendum, Danes were asked to vote on whether their government should convert its “opt-out” on EU justice and policing matters to an “opt-in”. They plumped for the status quo, leaving their government with an awkward negotiation in Brussels. A few months earlier Alexis Tsipras, Greece’s prime minister, called a referendum on a euro-zone bail-out agreement that would expire before the vote was held. His mighty oxi (“no”) victory was quickly converted to humiliating assent when his government realised that tough bail-outs were the price of euro membership. EU referendums are held for many reasons. The hapless Mr Tsipras hoped to boost his negotiating hand in the euro zone. David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, is holding an EU membership vote largely as a tool to manage his fractious Conservative Party. Some, more cynically, are called to provide a seal of legitimacy to something a government was going to do anyway. But a growing number of referendums serve as brakes on European integration. If voters cannot throw out the bums in Brussels, they can at least lob rotten fruit at them. Politicians, too, find them useful: of the national referendums that have consequences for the entire EU (such as treaty ratifications), a third have been called for partisan rather than constitutional reasons, according to Fernando Mendez at the Centre for Research on Direct Democracy in Switzerland. The trouble is that the politics of referendums cuts both ways. Two years ago the Swiss voted to restrict immigration from the EU. That directly contradicted free-movement agreements, and Swiss officials are struggling to square the circle. Brussels threatens to suspend a raft of bilateral agreements if the Swiss go through with it—partly to avoid emboldening the British, who want immigration concessions in their EU renegotiation. In turn, should Britain vote to leave, the EU will have every incentive to take a hard line when the British come back to negotiate their post-EU trade deal. Mr Tsipras’s gambit flopped because the euro zone could not allow the precedent of a debtor state unilaterally changing the terms of its loans. No referendum is an island The tools of direct democracy are always controversial—at times, they have threatened to make American states like California ungovernable—but they are doubly difficult in the EU. First, in America federal law trumps state law, meaning no state can vex another by placing a lunatic proposal on the ballot. But in the EU, which is not a federal construction, there is nothing to stop one member holding a referendum that causes trouble for the rest. When things go wrong, the usual remedy is to tweak whatever regulation or accord made voters unhappy (usually a treaty) and to seek a second vote that produces the correct answer. A second problem is that the EU needs more integration just when many voters are turning against it. The euro zone and EU migration policy are both half-built ships. Each may require changes to EU treaties to allow more centralisation. But extending Brussels’s powers into new areas will fuel the appetite for referendums that could scupper the changes. Moreover, notes Stefan Lehne, a former Austrian diplomat, these days EU politicians test the existing treaties to breaking point in order to avoid triggering referendums. The clamour for direct democracy thus fosters the legalistic jiggery-pokery to which it has been a reaction. All this smells horribly undemocratic to some. But joining a club, or striking a deal with it, will always limit governments’ room for manoeuvre. National politicians can shoulder some of the blame for not being clear with voters about what their arrangements with the EU imply. But too often EU officials seem wedded to the views of their founding father, Jean Monnet, who wrote that he “thought it wrong to consult the peoples of Europe about the structure of a community of which they had no practical experience”. That may have worked when Eurocrats restricted themselves to tinkering with agricultural subsidies and fisheries policy. Not any more: the age of referendums is here to stay.
