GLOOM seems to have descended at the start of 2016. Equity markets have had the worst start to the year in at least two decades. The great and the good have queued up to warn of the dangers ahead. George Soros, a fund manager, said the Chinese financial environment reminded him of 2008, when the financial crisis was at its height. Larry Summers, a former American treasury secretary, declared in the Financial Times: “The global risk to domestic economic performance in the US, Europe and many emerging markets is as great as any time I can remember.” George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor, spoke of a “cocktail of threats” facing the global economy. The chart shows a number of indicators of concern, from rising credit spreads (the interest-rate premium paid by risky borrowers) to slumping stockmarkets in the emerging world. Investors have many worries. The first is that the Chinese economy is weaker than the GDP statistics suggest. Falling commodity prices, the collapse in the Baltic Dry index (which tracks the cost of shipping bulk goods) and the sluggish growth of global trade can all be seen as signs of weakness. Given China’s importance to global growth, this means that 2016 may turn out to be yet another year when growth disappoints. Mr Soros sees a parallel with 2008 in the rapid credit growth in China and other emerging markets. If growth slows, borrowers may be unable to repay their debts. Similarly, emerging-market companies that have borrowed in dollars may be in trouble if their currencies depreciate. Asian nations might be forced to devalue if China lets the yuan fall sharply (see Free exchange). The second concern is that the Federal Reserve might have miscalculated when it pushed up interest rates in December—the first increase since 2006. The employment numbers in America may still be strong, as December’s muscular payroll numbers showed, but the labour market is a lagging indicator. The Atlanta Fed’s nowcasting model suggests that GDP growth in the fourth quarter was just 0.8% at an annualised rate. Manufacturing looks weak: the purchasing managers’ index has been below 50 (which signals contraction) for two straight months. A related worry is that the global economy has become over-dependent on the stimulus provided by low interest rates and quantitative easing (QE). Such policies may have saved the world from another depression, but they have not led to a return to pre-crisis growth rates. Moreover, by pushing up asset prices, they have spurred inequality. Nor has the problem of high debt levels been eliminated; the debt has simply been shifted from the private to the public sector. A swift return to what used to be thought of as “normal” interest rates (3-4%) would prove crippling. Martin Taylor, manager of a hedge fund called Nevsky Capital, detailed his concerns in a farewell letter to clients. Despite having earned an average annual return of 18% for 15 years, he is closing the fund. He fears that the global economy has become too dependent on China and India, where he does not trust the economic data. Individual equities have also become riskier, since companies have taken advantage of low rates to borrow more. And the equity market is less transparent, with trading dominated by index funds and computer programs. The risk of sudden, sharp shifts in prices has grown. “We could be caught up in an erroneous market trend, which could then persist for far longer than we could take the pain,” Mr Taylor wrote. All this is in stark contrast with the idea of fund managers as “masters of the universe” or the Thatcherite mantra, “You can’t buck the markets”. Since 2008 central banks have shown they can bend the markets to their will, at least for a while. Investors have to devote a lot of their time to poring over every word of central bankers’ speeches and statements for a change in policy emphasis. But perhaps this year’s sell-off indicates that central banks are losing their grip or that investors are less confident the authorities know what they are doing. Albert Edwards, an ultra-bearish strategist at Société Générale (SG), a French bank, says: “The Fed and its promiscuous fraternity of central banks have created the conditions for another debacle every bit as large as the 2008 global financial crisis.” He thinks a global recession and widespread deflation are on their way. This may still be a minority view, but more people are listening: SG’s annual bearfest in London this week had 850 attendees, a record audience. Economist.com/blogs/buttonwoodDEBT crises, capital flight and corruption are all familiar problems for poor countries trying to finance their development. A bulwark, say some, is remittances: money sent home by migrants, worth $580 billion in 2014. Unlike portfolio flows, which tend to flee at the first sign of trouble, remittances usually increase in tough times. And unlike aid, they go directly into the pockets of ordinary people, bypassing corrupt officials. All this is true, and important. But even remittances, alas, cannot always be relied upon. The experience in 2015 of Central Asia and the Caucasus, regions exceptionally dependent on remittances from Russia, shows why. Some countries there export oil or gas. Others export people. In Tajikistan four in ten working-age adults have sought jobs abroad; in 2014 they sent home remittances equivalent to 42% of GDP, proportionally more than any other country in the world received. Armenia, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan also received remittances worth at least 10% of GDP—more than the Philippines, a country famous for its migrant workers. Most migrants go north, to Russia, finding work on building sites or in other low-income jobs. But Russia’s economy contracted last year, and remittances have plummeted. In dollar terms, money sent home from Russia by Tajik migrants was down by 44% in the first six months of 2015 compared with the same period in 2014, according to the Russian Central Bank; remittances from Russia to Uzbekistan fell by half, and those to Kyrgyzstan fell by a third. These figures partly reflect the weakness of the rouble. Other currencies in the region have also fallen, but not as far: every rouble a Tajik migrant sends home buys 35% fewer somoni than in June 2014, for example. Migrants also have less money to spare. Real wages are falling in Russia: they were 9% lower in November than a year before. And migrant numbers are down too, because of job losses and tighter immigration laws (though not for migrants from Armenia and Kyrgyzstan, which this year joined the Eurasian Economic Union, a Russian-centred economic bloc). Lower remittances are contributing to lower growth. The IMF expected GDP to grow at 2.3% last year for oil and gas importers in the region, down from 4.7% in 2014 and 5.7% in 2013. Those numbers understate the real effects. Since GDP is a measure of domestic production, it only captures declines in remittances to the extent that recipients spend less on local goods or services. Purchasing power has dropped by more than 10%, says the World Bank, once the direct impacts of remittances and declining terms of trade are taken into account. Working longer hours or tapping into savings is helping some scrape by, but even so, 40% of households in Tajikistan say they cannot afford enough food. As people spend less, governments are spending more to support demand: in the main remittance-receiving countries, fiscal deficits are expected to have widened by about two percentage points of GDP last year. The falling price of regional exports such as aluminium, copper and cotton is adding to economic woes and putting further strain on government finances. The Central Asian experience is unusual. Elsewhere, remittances grew in 2015. In South Asia they were up by 6%, according to projections from the World Bank. The region’s remittances come mainly from America and the Middle East; a strong dollar and fiscal expansion in the Gulf have kept the money flowing. But small countries such as Nepal, where remittances were equivalent to 30% of GDP in 2014, look vulnerable to future shocks. Central America and some Pacific islands also depend on remittances: they suffered in 2009, the only year this century that global remittances have fallen. In the long run, the solution is to diversify. Central Asian countries are trying to improve their infrastructure, supported by Chinese investment; trade with China has increased tenfold in a decade. The lesson of a tough year is obvious: though remittances can finance development, they are not a substitute for it.SINCE the new year, the price of oil has surprised even the most bearish punters, plunging by 18%. On January 12th West Texas Intermediate (WTI), America’s benchmark, briefly dipped below $30 a barrel, its lowest level since 2003. The next day an incipient rally was undone by the news that American stocks of crude oil and petroleum products had reached 1.3 billion barrels, a new record. Firms are hunkering down. BP this week announced hefty job cuts; Petrobras, Brazil’s state-controlled oil firm, slashed planned investment. Some blame factors other than supply and demand for turning increasingly bearish. For instance, Standard Chartered, a bank, said oil might need to fall as low as $10 a barrel before speculators concede that “matters had gone too far”. But it’s mostly guesswork. Such is the level of uncertainty that American derivatives contracts tied to deliveries in April imply an oil price of anything from $25 to $56 a barrel, according to official number-crunchers. Neil Atkinson of the International Energy Agency (IEA), a forecasting outfit, finds lots in the physical oil market to be bearish about—particularly regarding consumption, which was one of the few factors supporting prices last year. The sell-off in oil in the past fortnight has occurred concurrently with a slide in the Chinese stockmarket and the yuan, which some investors think reflects weakness in China’s economy and hence in demand for oil. Though Mr Atkinson acknowledges that possibility, he thinks this risk is overplayed: figures on January 13th showed China imported a record 6.7m barrels a day (b/d) of oil in 2015. The trouble, though, is that apart from India and a wobbly China, demand is not looking promising anywhere this year. Europe is unlikely to see a repeat of its relatively strong oil-demand growth in 2015. Although America’s economy continues to grow, tightening fuel-efficiency standards cap the upside. Drivers in the Middle East, where fuel use rose last year, are more likely to keep their cars off the road after their governments raised petrol prices or eliminated fuel subsidies altogether to shore up public finances. “There are now considerable uncertainties about oil-demand growth globally,” Mr Atkinson says. Adding to the gloom, producers are not turning off the taps as fast as people expected. The latest rout stems from an OPEC meeting in early December in which the producers’ cartel abandoned output quotas. Saudi Arabia, which used to curb output to rescue prices, now refuses to play that role, and instead is bent on driving high-cost producers out of business. Saudi officials privately say that they expect the price of oil to rebound late this year or early in 2017 as global output begins to lag behind demand. The natural decline as fields are depleted saps production by at least 5% a year, they argue, even before accounting for the effects of reductions in new drilling by embattled oil firms. But there remains huge uncertainty about how much Iran will export when UN sanctions are lifted, possibly in coming weeks. What is more, Mr Atkinson says, production continued to rise last year from high-cost wells in the Gulf of Mexico and Canada’s tar sands because, however much oil prices fell, operating costs were lower. “The habit of the industry is to keep producing for as long as you can. Anyone who blinks first is handing a lifeline to their competitors,” he says. INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability To be sure, production in America is falling, thanks chiefly to cutbacks by struggling shale-oil producers. With oil prices at $30 a barrel, America’s oilmen will have an even tougher task shoring up output by drilling new wells, and will face further pressure from their bankers to reduce borrowing. AlixPartners, a consultancy that advises troubled firms, says more will go bankrupt this year. It forecasts a funding gap of $102 billion this year between American oil firms’ projected cash flows and their interest payments and capital spending, up from $83 billion in 2015. It said the downturn “could be one of the most severe and prolonged ever”. But however big the cutbacks, they are not yet enough to reduce the glut (see chart). Global inventories are at record highs, the IEA says. The Energy Information Administration, an American government agency, predicts they will rise a further 700,000 b/d before supply and demand begin to balance out in 2017. It adds that storage at Cushing, Oklahoma, which can hold 73m barrels, is at record highs of 64m barrels. Brian Busch of Genscape, an industry data gatherer, says it’s a similar story in China, with ships carrying oil spotted waiting at anchor out at sea because storage tanks appeared to be full. Based on the high level of stocks, Mr Busch thinks it could take up to a year and a half before the bear market ends. The only certainty is, the quicker the oil price falls, the sooner that day will come.THE billboards advertising Powerball, an American lottery, were not big enough to display the size of the jackpot in the draw that took place on the evening of January 13th: $1.6 billion. That prize will be split among the three winners, who bought their tickets in California, Florida and Tennessee. For several days beforehand, Lotto fever gripped the nation: long queues formed outside shops selling tickets and on the day of the draw sales were ringing up at a rate of $787,000 per minute. Powerball’s website had some advice for its frantic customers: “Swinging a live chicken above your head while wishing for the future numbers does NOT work.” A more useful bit of counsel would have been that buying a lottery ticket is fun but financially foolish. A punter buying a Powerball ticket has a 1 in 292m chance of winning the jackpot. Buyers are around four times more likely to be killed by an asteroid impact this year. Lotteries are designed to be a bad deal, hoovering up participants’ money in order to plug state budgets and fund good causes. What’s more, the designers are getting better at their jobs. Victor Matheson, professor of economics at the College of the Holy Cross in Massachusetts, explains that sales are much more sensitive to the size of the jackpots than to the likelihood of winning. After a particularly big prize is won, there is a halo effect, whereby ticket sales remain high even though the jackpot has reverted to the norm. So lottery designers go to great lengths to boost the size of the big prize. One easy trick is to make the jackpot seem bigger than it is. The sums advertised by Powerball represented the pre-tax value over 29 years of an annuity that winners can opt to receive. If the winners choose a lump sum instead, they get just over 60% of that, on which they would have to pay tax of at least 40%. Another approach is to boost the jackpot by expanding a lottery’s geographic scope, and thus its potential pool of participants. Powerball and Mega Millions, the two largest American lotteries, have both taken this tack. By forging alliances among state lotteries, they are both now available to residents of 44 of America’s 50 states. Similarly, EuroMillions, a lottery that covers nine European countries, has twice offered a jackpot of €190m ($206m). Powerball’s record-breaking jackpot stems mainly from a riskier strategy, however. If the chances of winning become so slim that no one guesses the right combination of numbers, the prize rolls over, growing to a vast sum. Both Powerball and the British national lottery changed their rules to this effect in October, by increasing the number of balls in the draw. In Britain the change slashed the chance of a winning guess from 1 in 14m to 1 in 45m. In America it fell from 1 in 175m to 1 in 292m. There is a catch: make it too hard to win a lottery, and punters will lose interest. So even as lottery designers have been lowering the chances of winning the jackpot, they have been boosting the chances of winning lesser prizes, notes David Spiegelhalter of the University of Cambridge. As larger jackpots draw more customers, the chance that someone will win shoots up. But so does the chance of multiple winners, which lowers the expected value of a ticket. In the run-up to this week’s draw, Powerball’s organisers expected that roughly 86% of all possible numerical combinations would have been bought, suggesting sales of some 570m tickets. With that many tickets sold, the chance of a winner having to share the pot with others (as indeed happened) was around 68%, compared with just 4% for more typical sales of 25m tickets. Only very rarely have so many players piled in that the expected value of the jackpot has fallen, and mostly when there are huge jackpots on offer. But the affliction is set to become more common. Britain’s National Lottery enjoyed unprecedented demand in the run-up to the record £66m ($95m) jackpot won on January 9th. Sales for the 28 Powerball draws since its rule change in October (excluding the draw on January 13th) were 134% higher than for the 28 preceding draws. According to Mr Matheson, the customers who are drawn in by higher jackpots tend to be richer than the average. So while lotteries may be snaffling ever more money for an ever smaller chance of striking it rich, at least the burden is tilting away from the very poorest.WHEN a financial firm boasts of offering the biggest loans at the lowest rates with the slimmest collateral, it has either devised the underwriting equivalent of a better mousetrap or is setting itself up for an almighty fall. At first glance SoFi, a startup based in San Francisco, looks like it is up to the sort of tricks that would make even a pre-2008 banker blush: lending youthful customers $975,000 to buy a $1m house, say. Yet few “fintech” firms seem quite as threatening to America’s incumbent banks. Social Finance, as it once was, started life in 2011 as a way to match students who needed money to pay for a degree at Stanford with alumni with lots of dough. Engineering graduates from one of America’s grandest universities, the firm’s founders reasoned, were unlikely to welch on their debts, especially with Silicon Valley booming. That allowed SoFi to price student loans below even the notionally discounted rates available under government schemes, attracting lots of customers. Well-to-do alumni, meanwhile, were happy to lend via SoFi’s platform, understanding what a safe bet the borrowers were. The firm also raised money to invest in its own loans, largely to package them as securities it could then sell on, a variant on “marketplace lending”, a crowded field in fintech. SoFi quickly expanded—to borrowers from other prestigious universities, and to other forms of lending. Having provided many of its customers with their first loans, SoFi then worked to cater to their expanding financial needs after graduation, offering them personal loans and mortgages. Again, the firm’s lending algorithms ignore the rigid credit scores used by banks in favour of common-sense indicators of ability to pay. High Earners Not Rich Yet, or HENRYs, are its main customer base. To distinguish itself from banks, SoFi smothers customers with personalised service. Its 100,000 or so borrowers are “members”, invited to parties thrown by the firm. Entrepreneurs among them can apply to have their loan repayments suspended, and make use of SoFi’s offices for meetings with investors. Lost your job? Whereas a bank might foreclose, SoFi will tap its network to help you find a new one. Mortgages can be obtained by pecking at a smartphone and sending snaps of required documents. Pen-and-ink signatures are for fuddy-duddies. The easygoing branding belies an outfit that can hold its own on Wall Street. Mike Cagney, its founder and boss, is a former trader at Wells Fargo. Like many other fintech lending operations, SoFi obtains the money it lends from hedge funds and investment banks. Its balance-sheet is turned over every two to three weeks; some of the loans it issues get sliced, diced and repackaged in much the same way subprime mortgages once did. Most fintech startups aim to do one thing well and sell that service as widely as possible. SoFi is the opposite: its customer base is focused (though it now lends to graduates of over 2,200 schools) but it is busy diversifying its offering. Beyond student loans and mortgages, it aspires to manage its customers’ wealth and offer them insurance. It even wants to launch something akin to a current account, without officially becoming a deposit-taking institution. But SoFi faces three obstacles if it is to keep growing fast enough to justify a recent investment that valued it at around $4 billion (it is not listed). The first is growing without lowering its lending standards. Of the $6 billion it has lent in total, more than $4 billion went out the door in 2015. Such rapid growth usually comes with more than a few dud loans. Mortgages seem an obvious concern. Banks like to lend to buyers with a 30% deposit. SoFi is happy with 10%—and now has a scheme to help borrowers raise most of the down payment too, in exchange for a slice of the increase in the value of the house. Can that be sensible, given that its loans are concentrated in pricey property markets, which are likeliest to deflate? Mr Cagney says his customers will keep paying even if their houses are worth less than their mortgages. That is placing an awful lot of faith in Americans, who have walked away en masse from underwater mortgages before, and particularly in millennials, a generation often derided for its feckless and unpredictable behaviour. Like other young fintech lenders, SoFi has never had to weather a recession. The second obstacle is rising interest rates. SoFi has made a packet by refinancing student loans which were in effect mispriced by government programmes. If interest rates rise substantially, the scope for existing borrowers to save money by refinancing will disappear. Mortgage refinancing will also dry up. Mr Cagney says he assumes much higher interest rates are unlikely anytime soon and that the firm will have diversified enough to handle them by the time they appear. The third is regulation. Especially if it starts gathering something resembling deposits, SoFi will have many of the attributes of a bank while insisting it should not be regulated like one. In part it simply wants to skirt the red tape that comes from accepting deposits, along with the government guarantee they attract. But there is also a libertarian bent to the shaggy-haired Mr Cagney, who clearly believes that governments meddle too much in markets. The brief he received from his biggest investor, SoftBank, which led a $1 billion funding round in September, is to reach a valuation of $100 billion or go bust, but not to settle for the status quo. That is the kind of talk that might panic regulators, who prefer financial institutions to be boring.THE past six months have been hard on the reputations of China’s economic managers. Their attempts to bring troublesome stockmarkets to heel border on slapstick. The uncertain handling of the country’s exchange rate, on the other hand, is no laughing matter. Unexpected wobbles in the value of China’s currency roil global markets. Yet no exchange-rate policy offers a sure and safe route forward. Some see a resemblance in China’s predicament to the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s. Then, fast-growing countries like Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand faced outflows of capital as investor sentiment flipped from bullish to bearish. Governments were forced to abandon currency pegs as their foreign-exchange reserves dwindled. Massive depreciations led to financial havoc, as asset prices tumbled and these countries’ enormous debts ballooned in dollar terms. Painful recessions ensued. The lessons of the Asian crisis were not lost on China’s leaders, however. During its great boom, in the 2000s, China maintained tight capital controls, permitting foreign direct investment while eschewing “hot money”. The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) intervened heavily in foreign-exchange markets to keep the yuan cheap, building up $4 trillion in reserves in the process. Where the crisis countries of the 1990s ran persistent trade deficits, China kept its current account in surplus; thus adding to, rather than draining from, its foreign-exchange reserves. Despite these prophylactics China now faces its own financial crunch. Its reserves are down by almost $700 billion from their peak, thanks to capital flight and sinking asset values. Determined money has long seeped out of China’s stockade; signs of a bigger leak emerged in the latter half of 2015. In December alone reserves fell by more than $100 billion. Capital slipped abroad at an annualised pace of $1 trillion in the second half of 2015. In the third quarter, China’s outward foreign-direct investment rose from $29 billion to $32 billion while inward investment fell sharply, from $71 billion to $39 billion; at $7 billion, the net flow of inward investment was the lowest since 2000.   An anti-corruption drive, slowing growth and rising American interest rates are all partly to blame. Once begun, however, capital flight can be hard to control. Chinese citizens can move a maximum of $50,000 abroad each year. If just 5% of the population used its quota, China’s reserves would evaporate. The authorities are desperate to prevent such an outcome, and the severe tightening of domestic credit conditions it would entail, but there is no painless way to do so. Many economists reckon China will allow the yuan to fall. After all, the currency has appreciated by 20% against a broad range of currencies since 2012, thanks to rising wages and a peg to the strengthening dollar. Yet a sinking yuan poses threats. Roughly $1 trillion of China’s accumulated debts are denominated in dollars. That is small beer next to $28 trillion in total Chinese debt. But because Chinese firms are so highly leveraged, even a small rise in the cost of servicing dollar-denominated debts could force some into asset sales or bankruptcy. That, in turn, would encourage more capital outflows, depressing the yuan’s value still further. The economy could expect only a modest boost to exports for its trouble. Since much of the material that goes into Chinese exports is itself imported, devaluation does not boost exports that much. It also squeezes the purchasing power of Chinese consumers and thus slows the rebalancing of its economy from investment to consumption, while irking America and encouraging competitive devaluations elsewhere. Alternatively, China could hold the yuan’s value steady. The big depreciations of the late 1990s were done out of necessity rather than by choice, after all. Investors fleeing from Thailand, for instance, converted their baht to dollars on their way out. When the government ran short of greenbacks, it had no option but to repay investors with many fewer dollars per baht. Yet China still has $3.3 trillion of hard currency in reserve. Stability poses its own problems, however. If China resists depreciation and capital outflows continue, the erosion of reserves could puncture the PBOC’s air of invulnerability, leading to faster capital leakage. A commitment to a strong yuan could also constrain China’s monetary policy. Cuts to interest rates tend to diminish a currency’s value. Any attempt to maintain it under such circumstances hastens the depletion of reserves. Why not strengthen capital controls, in that case? In 1998 Malaysia imposed controls on fleeing investors and outperformed some other crisis-hit economies, such as Indonesia. The government is cracking down on the underground financiers in Macau and banks in Hong Kong that help sneak Chinese cash past the controls. If ordinary citizens began moving savings abroad in greater numbers, China could reduce the limit on foreign transfers. Yet backtracking on planned reforms would be a huge embarrassment for China’s leaders, who have laboured long and hard to raise the yuan’s status internationally. It would also deter foreign investors, worsening the short-run foreign-exchange picture and long-run growth prospects. Faith no more Ample reserves, capital controls, a trade surplus and a determinedly interventionist state mean that China is a long way from a full-fledged crisis. Neither is all the apparent capital flight as worrying as it might appear: purchases of foreign securities by Chinese corporates may look like a stampede for the exits, but can serve to hedge firms with foreign-currency debts against depreciation. But there is good reason for nervousness, in China and elsewhere. All the countries afflicted by the Asian crisis combined accounted for a much smaller share of global output in 1998 than China does now. And China seems not to have absorbed the most important lesson of that crisis: that confidence matters.WHEN selecting a base for preparing attacks, jihadists should choose flats that are on the ground floor, hard to peer into, not near government buildings and unsecluded in a newly built neighbourhood. So advises “Declaration of Jihad Against the Country’s Tyrants”, an al-Qaeda manual found in Manchester in 2000. Flats conforming to these specifications make it easier to dig secret storage areas under the floor, to melt away into the city and to avoid attention from neighbours who, were they longtime residents, might take a greater interest in newcomers. Thanks to the clever use of software, tips from this and other manuals obtained by intelligence agencies are proving increasingly valuable to counter-terrorist forces deployed both in the West and abroad. Technologists are modifying existing mapping software to produce “geographic profiling” programs that show which areas should be searched or put under surveillance first in the hunt for hideouts, bomb workshops and weapons caches. “Declaration of Jihad Against the Country’s Tyrants”, for example, was a cornerstone of Building Intent, a geoprofiling program developed by Alper Caglayan of Milcord, in Massachusetts, for America’s defence department. In addition to terrorist guidelines on which buildings to use, software such as Building Intent is fed the co-ordinates of bombings and other actions thought related to the group of interest. These are useful because such groups are often reluctant to conduct operations far from their bases, be it to save time, to remain in familiar or friendly territory, or to reduce the likelihood of encountering a checkpoint. SCARE story At the same time, such people also tend not to operate too close to base, in the hope of sparing it scrutiny. Data from years of home-made-bomb (IED, or “improvised explosive device”) attacks and discoveries in Iraq, analysed by Roy Lindelauf of the Dutch Defence Academy, suggest that those planting bombs in urban areas almost always carry the device at least a couple of hundred metres from where it was stored, though rarely much more than a kilometre. Also—suicide missions aside—few IEDs are built, stored or detonated in the territories of rival groups. Data from as few as five IED blasts can thus more or less pinpoint the location of a workshop or cache. What is true of IEDs is true also of those places from which insurgents launch mortar rounds and rockets. Taliban fighters in Afghanistan, for example, do not like to tote their weaponry far, lest they be caught or killed before getting a good opportunity to use it. The American army has therefore developed, for use in Afghanistan, geoprofiling software called SCARE-S2. This crunches data on the times and co-ordinates of enemy attacks, analysing these in the context of information about the country’s terrain, road network and ethnic make-up, as well as what is known at the time of the shifting pattern of tribal alliances in the area of interest. The software then identifies a handful of villages that are most likely to host the commander behind the attacks or the weapons cache used to make them. Details about SCARE-S2’s performance are, understandably, scarce. But a publicly available analysis by Paulo Shakarian, who led the program’s development, used data on hundreds of earlier Taliban attacks in Kandahar and Helmand provinces to test its effectiveness. The areas this test flagged up as worth searching had an average of 4.8 villages in them, and NATO records of discoveries of Taliban commanders and weapons caches showed that the density of such discoveries in these flagged areas was 35 times that of discoveries in the two provinces as a whole. Guerrillas and terrorists are not fools. They are aware they may be under surveillance, and take what they hope are appropriate counter-measures. They are unlikely, for example, to make calls from inside a safe house in which they are living. Instead, they typically make calls from roughly spaced out nearby locations, taking care not to call too often from the same spot. They hope, thereby, that if their activity is being monitored, it will appear random and therefore meaningless. Spacing things out like this is, in mathematical fact, anything but random: that, in itself, is suspicious. But true randomness would also be odd. As Ian Laverty, the boss of ECRI, a geoprofiling-software firm in Vancouver, observes, innocent phone calls have geographical patterns, because people have routines. Those who take steps to elude the authorities thus often end up unwittingly creating a profile of where their home base is—a profile that a piece of ECRI’s software called Rigel Analyst can spot. This software is used by more than 90 intelligence agencies around the world. Its applications include searching for Taliban rocket caches in Afghanistan. Geoprofiling is thus already an important counter-insurgency tool. It is likely to become more so in the future, because the number of pertinent actions that can be plotted by it is booming, according to a geoprofiler in Denmark’s intelligence apparatus who prefers to remain anonymous. This operative uses geoprofiling software called ArcGIS that analyses Global Positioning System (GPS) data provided unwittingly by insurgents’ growing use of smartphones and other gadgets that are equipped, by default, with GPS kit. For example, simply right-clicking on propaganda images posted online often obtains a GPS “geocode” that reveals where the picture was taken. “I’d like to keep my job, so we won’t say any more,” his colleague chimes in. Here I go again Other experts are more forthcoming. Geoprofiling software is now being fed the locations of extremist groups’ leafleting and graffiti, says Kim Rossmo, who led the development of Rigel Analyst and also trains intelligence and military geoprofilers in America, Australia, Canada and the Netherlands. The locations of muggings and robberies are also analysed, because many terrorists finance themselves from the proceeds of such crime. Even data on income distribution are plugged into geoprofiling software according to Matthew Degn, who was once an adviser to the Iraqi interior ministry’s intelligence directorate. The poorer an area is, he says, the more likely a flat there houses people paid to store weapons or, say, to snip off countless match heads to make bombs. The likelihood increases if there have been lots of violent deaths in that quarter, for bloodletting often spawns extremists, or at least acceptance of them. Geoprofiling works especially well in countries like Iraq, in which sectarian splits limit where people are willing to live or work. It is, nonetheless, still a useful tool in places, such as Western countries, where patterns of belief might be thought of as less tied to geography. As Brent Smith, of the University of Arkansas’ Centre for Advanced Spatial Technologies observes, right-wing extremists rarely hole up near gay bars, abortion clinics and other places they consider “pollutants of urban life”. In the matter of politically motivated violence, the ideas thought worth killing and dying for vary. To the geoprofiler it makes no difference.IT IS getting ever trickier to find incandescent bulbs. Almost all rich countries are phasing them out because they squander so much energy as heat rather than visible light. But they have ardent fans. Unlike many of their would-be successors, such as compact fluorescent lights (CFLs) and light-emitting diodes (LEDs), they cast a full spectrum of colours reminiscent of daylight, need no time to warm up and can be dimmed. Ahead of the European phase-out in 2009, for example, Vaclav Klaus, the Czech president, urged people to hoard a lifetime’s worth. Such stockpiling may have been premature. This week, researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, led by Marin Soljacic, demonstrated a modified incandescent bulb that maintains the technology’s advantages while vastly improving its energy credentials, giving it the potential to trounce CFLs and LEDs. Incandescent bulbs are so named because their light comes from heating their central filaments up until they glow. The colour of such a glow (ie, the wavelength of the radiation) depends on how hot the glowing object is. The sun, whose light an incandescent bulb attempts to approximate, is hotter than a filament, so radiates more strongly at shorter wavelengths (see chart). But in both cases the visible light produced is accompanied by a lot of infrared—or heat, as it is more familiarly known. Dr Soljacic has therefore sought a way to let the former pass while reflecting the latter. This reflected infrared heats the filament, meaning less electricity is needed to keep that filament at a given temperature and thus at a given visible-light output. Prior efforts to accomplish the same thing, stretching back to the 1970s, tried to do so with some kind of coating on the bulb itself. Dr Soljacic and his colleagues realised that the filament would capture more reflected heat if it were flattened out rather than being made from a thin coil of wire, as is now the case, and if the reflection happened nearer to it. To design a reflector suitable to the task, the team relied on an idea similar to that used in the anti-reflection coatings applied to spectacle lenses. These coatings are made of thin layers of materials of slightly different refractive indices (that is, light moves at slightly different speeds within them). The layers’ thicknesses and compositions are chosen so as to force light waves to add together or subtract from one another as they are reflected from the various layers. This process of interference is governed by the wavelength of the light in question, so it can affect light of different wavelengths differently. And visible light and infrared light do have different wavelengths (infrared waves are longer). Engineering a stack of layers that can pass visible light unchanged and reflect infrared—and do so from all of the angles from which the filament radiates—was no easy task. For that, the team used a computer program which was able to learn from its mistakes to work out what material each layer should be made from, and how thick it should be. Their first attempt involved stacks of 90 alternating layers of silica and tantalum oxide, two common coating materials, of varying thicknesses, from 17 to 426 nanometres (billionths of a metre). As they report in Nature Nanotechnology, a pair of such stacks, arranged on either side of the flat filament, led to a bulb that converted about 6.6% of the electrical energy running through it into visible light. That is far better than the 2% or so of a conventional incandescent bulb, and is comparable with low-efficiency LEDs. Their calculations show that adding layers of aluminium oxide to the mix and increasing the number of layers to 300 should increase that efficiency to 40%, far better than even the most efficient fluorescent lights. Whether Dr Soljacic’s process can be industrialised remains to be seen. But if it can, then the likes of Mr Klaus may come to find that their hoards are worthless.
