MENTION the phrases “greenhouse gases” and “global warming” in the same breath and most people will think of the carbon dioxide produced by burning fossil fuels such as coal and oil. But CO2 is not the only greenhouse gas and fossil fuels are not the only source of such gases. A surprising and neglected one is the world’s ruminant livestock—cattle, sheep and so on. Ruminants play host to bacteria that digest the otherwise undigestible grass and other cellulose-rich plants those animals eat, making nutrients such as fatty acids available to the beasts the bacteria inhabit. But the complicated ecosystem of a ruminant’s stomach includes other creatures, too. Many are methanogens—organisms that react carbon dioxide with hydrogen made by the cellulose-digesting bugs, to create water and methane. A lot of methane. A hundred million tonnes of it a year for all the world’s domesticated ruminants, according to the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organisation. And methane is a greenhouse gas 25 times more powerful than CO2. Altogether, according to estimates by Andy Reisinger, of the New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre, methane emitted from livestock is responsible for about 14% of global warming since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. Pardon me for being rude! New Zealand is one of the guilty parties. Its 40m head of sheep and cattle mean that a third of its contribution to global warming is ruminant-belched methane. But Peter Janssen of AgResearch, the country’s main farming-science institute, hopes to change this. He and his colleagues are looking for ways to reduce the amount of methane the country’s animals burp up. Their first approach is to develop methanogen-specific drugs. Though methanogens look like bacteria, they belong to a completely different branch of life, the archaea. That means their enzymes are different from bacterial ones (and also, of course, from mammalian ones), so there is a reasonable hope of finding chemicals which interfere with methanogen enzymes while leaving those of both bacteria and host animal unaffected. Dr Janssen and his team have thus been screening thousands of compounds that might block the action of enzymes methanogens need to survive. A handful seem to, and are now being put through their paces—firstly in bubbling bottles of rumen contents (the rumen is one of the animals’ stomach chambers), and then in real cattle and sheep. So far, the best of them reduce methane emissions by 20-30%, with no apparent detriment to the animal. The problem with this approach is that it requires animals to be treated continuously, to stop the methanogens returning to full strength. This is fine when beasts are being farmed intensively, as is often the case in Europe (indeed, DSM Nutritional Products, a European firm, is working along the same lines). But cattle in New Zealand, and sheep everywhere, are normally put out to pasture, so Dr Janssen has a second string to his bow: vaccination. To do this, his team identified and synthesised proteins found on the surface of ruminant methanogens, and injected these into sheep and cattle, to try to raise antibodies to those proteins. In that they have succeeded. The desired antibodies turn up in both the blood and the saliva of injected animals. At the moment, however, these antibodies work against methanogens only in test tubes. The vaccinations that raise them do not seem to reduce methane output. A third approach is to breed animals with a lower propensity to burp methane. Among sheep, for example, some animals emit as much as 10% less of the gas than others. These low emitters have smaller rumens, meaning the contents pass through faster. This limits production of the hydrogen that is methanogens’ food source without, apparently, limiting that part of the digestive process which feeds animals—for sheep with small rumens do not grow more slowly than those with large ones. Rumen size, moreover, is heritable. This means that a breeding programme for low-emission sheep is a plausible idea. Dr Janssen’s fourth approach is to alter what animals eat. Certain food plants—forage rape and fodder beet, in particular—curb methane emission by as much as 25% compared with the belchings of animals fed on grass and clover. However, though rape and beet are planted by some farmers as supplementary food crops, particularly for winter forage, they do not, unlike grass and clover, keep growing after being grazed. They also have a mixture of nutrients different from grass and clover, and take more effort to establish. Most farmers, therefore, would require quite a lot of persuading to use them more widely. It was not me, it was my food... In New Zealand, such persuasion is being discussed. Its most probable form would be what is known memorably, though inaccurately, as a fart tax (most ruminant methane is belched, not farted). Whether such a tax could actually pass through the political process of a country so dependent on farming is moot. But if an effective way of dealing with methanogens were developed, farmers might find it in their interests to adopt it anyway. Some microbial ecologists think methanogens exclude other microbes which could produce yet more fatty acids for the host animal to turn into milk or meat. If that were true, and someone such as Dr Janssen were to come up with an effective way to suppress them, no persuasion at all would be needed. One of the simplest answers, though, may just be better husbandry. Clever pasture management, and the breeding and victualling of animals so that they produce more milk and meat for less fodder, means New Zealand’s production of milk has trebled since 1990 while methane emissions from dairy cattle have only doubled over that period. Similarly, the number of sheep in the country has almost halved, with a concomitant emissions reduction, yet as much lamb and mutton is produced as ever. Reduced release of methane may only be a by-product of these gains in efficiency, but it is a welcome one.Lieutenant Pigeon HIS was a daunting task. It was October 1918 and, with the 77th Infantry Division cut off from all other American forces, Major Charles Whittlesey sent him to inform allies of the soldiers’ predicament. Shot after shot was fired from the trenches as he made his perilous journey. Then, just as he reached Rampont, the local headquarters, a bullet severed his leg. He died eight months after the war ended, and received the Croix de Guerre posthumously, for the message he delivered had saved the lives of 194 men. He was then stuffed and shipped to the Smithsonian Museum, in Washington, DC, to be remembered as Cher Ami, the bravest homing pigeon of the first world war. Being shot at will hasten anyone’s journey. But might the thick smoke of battle have helped Cher Ami on his way too? That, at least, is the suggestion of a study just published in Scientific Reports by Li Zhongqiu of Nanjing University, in China, and Daniel Blumstein and Franck Courchamp, who both work at the University of California, Los Angeles. Dr Li and his colleagues have sought to study how air pollution shapes the behaviour of migratory animals by collecting information on homing-pigeon competitions organised by the Chinese Racing Pigeon Association. In particular, they have analysed 415 pigeon races run between the same two points, 300km (200 miles) apart on the heavily polluted North China Plain, during the autumns of 2013 and 2014. They noted rainfall, wind and air quality during each race, and expected to see numerous delays and lost birds on days when the smog was exceptionally thick. But that is not what they found. Of the 1,591 pigeons released in the races the team analysed, 715 made it home. This 45% return rate remained the same regardless of whether the air was thick with pollution or not. What did change was the time it took the pigeons to return to their natal lofts. When the sky was a thick soup of noxious smog, with an air-quality index of 500, pigeons returned home at an average speed of 68.2kph. By contrast, when the index value was zero and the air pure, the birds flew at only 55.6kph. Why the birds travel faster under terrible conditions is unclear. Homing pigeons are well known to use the sun, magnetic fields and infrasound to navigate but, in recent years, researchers have started speculating that they use odours too. With this in mind, Dr Li and his colleagues suggest that the birds have come to learn what the pollutants common to the biomass boilers and power plants found in different parts of northern China smell like, and are using this information to navigate. They do, however, have an alternative hypothesis. This is that the birds are flying faster to get out of the vile conditions as quickly as they can. One reason could be the obvious fact that thick pollution is hard to breathe, but the researchers argue that fear may also be a factor. Thick clouds of haze make it nearly impossible to detect predators, and pigeons may not be smart enough to understand that this lack of visibility works the other way around, too. They thus just want to get the hell out of there as fast as they can—quite possibly the true motive of Cher Ami as well.Not all prehistoric monsters were big ONE of the nastier ways an insect can make its living is as a parasitoid. Female parasitoids lay their eggs inside other insects, usually at the larval stage of the host’s life cycle. The grub that hatches then eats its host alive, reserving the vital organs until the moment when it is, itself, ready to pupate. Most parasitoids are wasps, but some are flies, and this fossil, dubbed Zhenia xiai by its discoverer, Bo Wang of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, is an early example of such an insect. The specimen shown, which Dr Bo describes in Naturwissenschaften, was trapped 99m years ago in tree resin that has solidified into amber, in a part of the world now known as northern Myanmar. Its sticky death has preserved features, such as the needle-like egg-laying organ, called an ovipositor, at its rear, and the host-grasping claws on its legs, that are often characteristic of a parasitoid way of life. Zhenia xiai belongs to the Eremochaetidae, a family which palaeoentomologists have long suspected were parasitoids, but whose previously known representatives were not well-enough preserved for them to be sure. Now, thanks to Dr Bo’s discovery, they are.  LIKE this reviewer, many parents will have given their children electric toothbrushes for Christmas, hoping that the sensors that buzz after two minutes will keep them brushing longer than their flimsy elbow grease. Both generations may, however, be ignorant of the fact that in that time the toothbrushes produce more than 62,000 strokes; that the power to generate such motion comes from tiny magnets using three rare metals, neodymium, dysprosium and boron; and that some of these metals are so coveted that in 2010 they were at the centre of a dangerous rift between China and Japan. In all, an electric toothbrush is made of 35 metals. The journey they take to children’s gums may involve China, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Chile, Russia, South Korea, Indonesia, Turkey and other countries too. They are rare, says David Abraham in “The Elements of Power”, a thought-provoking book that follows the trail of these elements, not because they are necessarily scarce or hard to extract. It is because they are used in tiny yet essential quantities—like yeast in a pizza. In terms of amounts consumed, these metals pale compared with base metals such as aluminium and copper. But, as the book argues, they are no less transformative—and possibly just as valuable—as oil and coal. That is a bold claim, but the author backs it up convincingly. Using vivid detail, he injects life and purpose into the story of elements that are so light, strong, heat-resistant and elusive that an American general in the 1950s quipped that they should be called “unobtainium”. Indium, part of an iPhone’s screen, is an “invisible link…between the phone and your finger”. Just a pinch of niobium, a soft, granite-grey metal mined mostly in Brazil, greatly strengthens a tonne of steel used in bridges and pipelines. Lithium is so light that it has become essential for rechargeable car-batteries. Dysprosium, as well as making an electric toothbrush whirr, helps power wind turbines. Military technology depends on numerous rare metals. Tungsten, for instance, is crucial for armour-piercing bullets. America’s forthcoming F-35 fighter planes are “flying periodic tables”, Mr Abraham writes. As with oil, those who can secure the resources have access to immense power. The problem, the book laments, is that China, Japan and South Korea are more keenly aware of the strategic importance of rare metals than Western countries, including the United States. Yet it is not just the rare metals that the book explores. As Mr Abraham follows their extraction, he finds geologists, refiners, traders, smugglers and boffins whose stories add to the intrigue of this shadowy trade. Deals are done in backrooms by likeable mavericks. One, a New Yorker called Noah Lehrman, is described as “likely the only person in history to perform at the Jewish Grateful DeadFest and advise the US Congress on resource security”. “The Elements of Power” turns out to be a critic as well as an advocate of the rare-metals trade. One concern is what the author calls the “long tailpipe” of pollution left in the wake of mining and refining, notwithstanding the role of minor metals in creating greener products. Supplies are also a worry. In 2010 a Chinese trawler rammed Japanese coastguard vessels in waters near islands called the Senkakus in Japanese and the Diaoyu in Chinese (their ownership is disputed by both countries). After the Chinese captain was detained, supplies of rare metals from the mainland to Japan suspiciously dried up. Though China never acknowledged an export ban, the incident caused rare-metal prices to spike, and unsettled manufacturers around the world. Though Japan quickly released the captain, repercussions of the affair pop up through the book. Mr Abraham would have done well to use more such central narratives—the story, perhaps, of dysprosium, which has one of the most fascinating and fragile supply chains. Yet he persuasively explains the danger of underestimating a business that, by one estimate, generates $4 billion of revenues a year and also plays a critical role in systems worth about $4 trillion. China, which develops more rare metals than any other country, understands the calculus. The West, his book suggests, does not. The Elements of Power: Gadgets, Guns and the Struggle for a Sustainable Future in the Rare Metal Age. By David Abraham. Yale University Press, 319 pages; $30 and £20.What more do you want? Couple Mechanics. By Nelly Alard. Translated by Adriana Hunter. Other Press; 307 pages; $16.99. ALL marriages are suspense thrillers, in a way. From the outside, any relationship is a mystery. But even from within there is much that is unknown and unsaid; no one really knows how it will all end. Years in, when responsibilities replace the romance and the days all look alike, staying together can feel less a desire than a duty. This is the moment when many marriages fall apart. There is “an element of will in love”, writes Nelly Alard in “Couple Mechanics”, the new English translation of her award-winning novel “Moment d’un Couple”. Every relationship forces couples to “decide to love, to keep on loving, or to stop loving.” Such negotiations are invariably tricky, as Ms Alard shows in this elegant and gripping tale about a marriage on the rocks. The couple at the centre of this book live in Paris, but they could be any of the countless young-professional duos who are steadily gentrifying outer boroughs in increasingly unaffordable big cities around the world. Olivier is a journalist, Juliette a computer engineer, and they strive for a balance between home and work, juggling their careers and their two children. The novel begins at their moment of rupture: “Okay, so I’m seeing a girl,” Olivier blurts out over the phone. He is hastily explaining to Juliette that he cannot make it to the cinema that night because the “girl”, a socialist politician whom he has known for only a short time, is having a fit. No, he does not want to leave Juliette, he says later, but yes, he may be in love. He promises to extricate himself from his affair, but “it’ll take a bit of time.” This book is really Juliette’s story, told in the third person. With a bit of whiplash, she finds herself thrust into a banal “French farce”, assuming a role she had never imagined for herself. Olivier says he intends to stick around, yet he is often distant and discouraging. Juliette tries to play it cool, but she finds herself turning into the kind of “pathetic creature consumed with jealousy” who searches her husband’s phone for evidence of foul play. Suspense builds throughout this months-long saga, as it is never quite clear whose needs, and which union, will win the day. Ms Alard tells this tale with admirable restraint. Olivier’s mistress may be a bit too mad, but “Couple Mechanics” shies away from melodrama. Instead, it offers a keen look at the work of love at that point—tough for everyone—when passion must be replaced by will.FEW figures were cooler or calmer than Pierre Boulez on the podium. He conducted without a baton, lifting the phrases and flicking them away with long, elegant fingers. The rest of his body did not move, impassive and commanding as a man lightly trimming a hedge; his face was a stone mask, only his darting eyes revealing how he was excavating the music, uncovering the layers and rebuilding them in structures of crystal clarity. Many said he was the finest conductor-composer since Richard Strauss. Every inch of him suggested that he was well aware of that.    Inside the statue, though, was gelignite. Music, to him, was in permanent revolution; but since there had been no proper upheaval since the Renaissance, he was leading one. For 50 years he was at war, or in a state of uneasy truce, with the musical establishment, fighting to make the deaf, incurious or plain uncultured appreciate the works of their own time. The composers of the 20th century—Schoenberg, Webern, Nono, Ligeti, himself—were woefully neglected and unplayed. This he vowed to change, first by challenging the canon known as “popular”. Opera houses, “full of dust and shit”, should be burned down. Original scores should be destroyed and accepted “masterpieces” vandalised, in order to recreate them. He cursed the grim custodians of the standard repertoire, and mocked his teachers at the Paris Conservatoire: Olivier Messaien, who wrote “brothel music”, and René Leibowitz, who dared to “correct”, in red pen, his first piano sonata. This was not a war he fought single-handed. He dragged into it, often kicking and screaming, great orchestras, audiences and even governments. Instrumental players were bullied out of their traditional routines, made to interleave their comfortable Haydn and Brahms with works based purely on the pitch of notes and their duration. In New York, where he conducted the Philharmonic from 1971 to 1977, horrified audiences found the Avery Fisher Hall stripped of seats for his “rug concerts”, and programmes spiky with unfamiliar stuff. He could chalk up victories, as at Bayreuth, where his performance of Wagner’s “Ring” in 1976 was booed on the first night and cheered for 85 minutes on the last. More often he left to sighs of relief. Music as maze In his pocket, primed like bombs, were his own compositions: in germination from his teenage years, when he had fallen under the spell of Stravinsky’s percussive, discordant “Chant du Rossignol”, and tested from 1946, when he was in charge of music for a decade for Jean-Louis Barrault and Madeleine Renard at their avant-garde theatre company. His works ranged from piano sonatas in which the whole keyboard was ravaged, plucked and battered to the delicate teaspoonfuls of notes dispensed in “Le Marteau sans Maître” (The Hammer without a Master, 1955), or the dreamy soprano wanderings of “Pli selon Pli” (Fold following Fold, 1958), his setting of poems by Mallarmé. Ever seeking new sounds, he introduced Asian and African timbres, gourd and gamelan, and tried every newly invented electronic device in the hope that computers might play, in real time, with orchestras. When he had made peace with the French government (after telling André Malraux, the culture minister, in 1966 that he was going “on personal strike” against him), he was given his own music department in the Centre Pompidou, where he set up an orchestra, the Ensemble Intercontemporain, to play new works, and collaborated with scientists to try to expand the sounds of music into realms so far unthought of and unheard. Paradoxes dogged him. He fought to set music free; but he also longed for order in it. He imagined the answer lay in Schoenberg’s serialism, where melody, harmony and counterpoint vanished, notes were related only to one another, and music “left the world of Newton for the world of Einstein”. But he soon found the dry 12-tone system a burden. The inspiration for “Le Marteau sans Maître” was his urge to weave colour, imagination and spontaneity into it—combining opposites to make music that was more like Debussy’s, and which opened up another world. Both composition and conducting—to him an essential pairing, each informing and enriching the other—were explorations. Music was a maze through which listeners should wander freely, stumbling on the unexpected and not knowing the end. His own works were revised constantly; some were deliberately left unfinished, for in writing and making music he was also, he believed, discovering himself. Of the private Boulez, almost nothing was revealed; he was a solitary, isolated by choice and cloaking his charm, much of the time, in arrogance. His favourite mental associates were bad-boy poets, Rimbaud and Baudelaire, or abstract painters like Kandinsky, all smashers of boundaries and shockers of the status quo. When he composed, he once explained, he dug down through layers of himself towards the “core of darkness” from which, in extraordinary flashes, his music came. Though the music might be wildly radical, this core—another paradox—would never change. Towards that unknown, like Orpheus, he made the most tumultuous and controversial journey of any modern classical musician.In our review of Molly Crabapple’s book (“When anger turns to ink”, January 9th) we refer to her drawing Libyan snipers. They were Lebanese. Sorry.
