ON DECEMBER 25th, some three years after taking over as China’s leader, Xi Jinping posted his first tweet. For a man clearly rattled by the rapid spread of social media, and grimly determined to tame them, the venue was fitting. Uniformed military officials stood around as he typed his message into a computer in the office of an army-run newspaper (see picture). His new-year greeting was not to China’s more than 660m internet users, but to the armed forces—most of whose members are banned from tweeting. It was clearly in part to intimidate feistier members of the country’s online community that the authorities arrested one of the country’s most prominent civil-rights activists, Pu Zhiqiang, in 2014 and eventually put him on trial on December 14th. On the basis of seven messages posted on Weibo, China’s heavily censored version of Twitter, Mr Pu was charged with “picking quarrels and stirring up trouble” as well as “inciting ethnic hatred”. The court handed down a three-year suspended prison sentence, which means that Mr Pu will not be allowed to continue his widely acclaimed work as a lawyer (less than three years ago, he was the subject of a laudatory cover story in a state-controlled magazine). “It was not the worst outcome, but it set the most odious of precedents,” said a Weibo user in Beijing in a message to his nearly 57,000 online followers. Mr Xi is the first Chinese leader to come to power amid the rapid growth of a middle class whose members are equipped with a powerful means of airing dissent and linking up with like-minded malcontents. He inherited an army of internet censors, but despite his efforts to give them more legal muscle (the country’s first counter-terrorism law, passed on December 27th, includes restrictions on the reporting of terrorist incidents), Mr Xi is still struggling. Support for Mr Pu both online and off has shown the scale of the challenge he faces. Some had feared that Mr Pu would be jailed for years. It is possible, in the face of huge support for the activist and a lack of strong evidence, that officials blinked. Napping net nannies Social-media messages relating to Mr Pu were quickly purged from the internet. Yet it is likely that some were seen by many people before disappearing. Some sensitive postings were retweeted by users with large followings before they were eventually deleted, suggesting that censors occasionally failed to keep up. “If you can be found guilty on the basis of a few Weibo postings, then every Weibo user is guilty, everyone should be rounded up,” wrote a Beijing-based journalist to his more than 220,000 followers. “I don’t understand the law, but I do know that [handling Mr Pu this way] was absolutely against the spirit of rule by law,” said Zhang Ming, a politics professor in Beijing, to his following of nearly 790,000 people. Mr Pu’s prosecutors also provided evidence of the censors’ weaknesses. They said one of his allegedly criminal messages, which suggested that a terrorist attack in 2014 may have reflected failings in the government’s policies in the western region of Xinjiang, had garnered 1,930 retweets—remarkable given Mr Pu’s well-known propensity to criticise officialdom. Outside the court, dozens of Mr Pu’s supporters defied a heavy police presence, which included the deployment of thuggish men in plain clothes (oddly wearing smiley badges during the trial). Several protesters were dragged away, some after chanting “Pu Zhiqiang is innocent”. Internet users showed similar disdain for the censors on the anniversary on December 26th of the birth of Mao Zedong (“He wreaked greater destruction on human civilisation than any other villain,” one businessman told his more than 106,000 followers). They piped up, too, after an avalanche of construction waste on December 20th in the southern city of Shenzhen that killed at least seven people and left more than 70 others missing. One Weibo user with nearly 75,000 followers lamented how effective a modern city like Shenzhen was at downplaying such news. “What’s frightening is that this is the way China as a whole will be,” he said. Mr Xi need not worry about his own social-media pulling power. By the time The Economist went to press, his first post on Weibo—sent through the account of an unnamed journalist at the newspaper he visited—had been retweeted more than 380,000 times and had garnered more than 50,000 comments. Most of these are fawning—of those still visible, at least.RONALD REAGAN, a sworn enemy of communism, and Xi Jinping, a doughty defender of Communist rule in China, ought to have little in common. Lately, though, Mr Xi has seemed to channel the late American president. He has been speaking openly for the first time of a need for “supply-side reforms”—a term echoing one made popular during Reagan’s presidency in the 1980s. It is now China’s hottest economic catchphrase (even featuring in a state-approved rap song, released on December 26th: “Reform the supply side and upgrade the economy,” goes one catchy line). Reagan’s supply-side strategy was notable, at least at the outset, for its controversial focus on cutting taxes as a way of encouraging companies to produce and invest more. In Xiconomics, the thrust of supply-side policy is less clear, despite the term’s prominence at recent economic-planning meetings and its dissection in numerous articles published by state media. Investors, hoping the phrase might herald a renewed effort by the leadership to boost the economy, are eager for detail. Mr Xi’s first mentions of the supply side, or gongjice, in two separate speeches in November, were not entirely a surprise. For a couple of years think-tanks affiliated with government ministries had been promoting the concept (helped by a new institute called the China Academy of New Supply-Side Economics). Their hope is that such reforms will involve deep structural changes aimed at putting the economy on a sounder footing, rather than yet more stimulus. Since Mr Xi gave the term his public blessing, officials have been scrambling to fall in line with supply-side doctrine, designing policies that seem to fit it or, just as energetically, working to squeeze existing ones into its rubric. Mr Xi’s aim may be to reinvigorate reforms that were endorsed by the Communist Party’s 370-member Central Committee in 2013, a year after he took over as China’s leader. They called for a “decisive” role to be given to market forces, with the state and private sectors placed on an equal footing. But Mr Xi lacked a catchy phrase to sum up his economic vision. The one he most commonly used was simply that the economy had entered a “new normal” of slower, more mature, growth. That phrase had its detractors, for it seemed to imply passive acceptance of a more sluggish future. “Supply-side reform” is being made to sound like a call to action. Xinhua, a state news agency, neatly tied the two phrases together: “supply-side structural reform is the new growth driver under the new normal.”  But what does it mean? Those who first pushed supply-side reform onto China’s political agenda want a clean break with the credit-driven past. Jia Kang, an outspoken researcher in the finance ministry who co-founded the new supply-side academy, defines the term in opposition to the short-term demand management that has often characterised China’s economic policy—the boosting of consumption and investment with the help of cheap money and dollops of government spending. The result of the old approach has been a steep rise in debt (about 250% of GDP and counting) and declining returns on investment. Supply-siders worry that it is creating a growing risk of stagnation, or even a full-blown economic crisis. Mr Jia says the government should focus instead on simplifying regulations to make labour, land and capital more productive. Making it easier for private companies to invest in sectors currently reserved for bloated state-run corporations would be a good place to start, some of his colleagues argue. There are plenty of differences between China’s supply-siders and those who shaped Mr Reagan’s programme, not least in their diagnosis of their respective economies’ ills. The Americans thought that production bottlenecks were fuelling inflation and stifling growth. Their Chinese counterparts worry about the opposite: excessive production causing deflation and unsustainably rapid growth. Still, the language used in China can sound just as radical. “We can no longer delay the clean-up of zombie corporations,” Chen Changsheng of the Development Research Centre, a government think-tank, wrote recently. “Taking painkillers and performing blood transfusions is not enough. We need the determination to carry out surgery.” There may be another similarity as well: a revolution that falls short of its hype. Reagan had to work with a Congress controlled by his political opponents, and the policies he enacted were more moderate and muddled than supply-side purists had hoped. Mr Xi faces no such democratic checks, but China’s ruling party is split between rival interest groups, and economic policy is often implemented in fits and starts as party leaders try to reconcile their competing demands. Supply us with a slogan Mr Xi’s adoption of the supply-side mantra marks the start of protracted tiptoeing. Over the past two months, party propagandists have asked economists at top universities and research institutions to expound on their views of what supply-side reforms should entail, according to insiders. It is a slogan in search of content. In the recent proliferation of articles and speeches about supply-side reforms, there are clearly differences over what the emphasis should be. The National Development and Reform Commission, a powerful planning agency, argues that China needs to become more innovative and efficient in making the kinds of things its consumers want to buy. But its version of “supply-side reform” would look more like stimulus than surgery. Tax cuts since 2014 on purchases of electric cars offer a taste of what may lie ahead; sales of these vehicles have surged nearly fourfold this year. Some fret that the supply-side talk is a dangerous distraction. As Yao Yang of Peking University puts it, the economy’s main ailment now is a lack of demand, not a problem with supply. The cure for that, he believes, is a short-term burst of monetary easing, the very thing that ardent supply-siders have been hoping to banish. For all the recent debate, early signs are that the supply-side shift may not amount to a serious change of course. Measures proposed by the government in late December include lower corporate borrowing costs, an easing of entry barriers in underdeveloped sectors such as health care and a reduction of excess capacity in sectors such as property. It just so happens that all these policies have already been in place for months or even years. If nothing else, Mr Xi’s supply-side reforms will prove that China is among the world’s most accomplished suppliers of slogans.IT HAS been a long time in coming. But on December 27th Iraq’s security forces announced they had recaptured the city of Ramadi from Islamic State (IS), with only pockets of resistance remaining. This followed a week of heavy fighting by the Iraqi army, local police and Sunni tribal fighters, all backed by American air strikes. The expulsion of jihadists from the capital of Anbar, a mainly Sunni province, is a morale-boosting victory for the beleaguered government of Haider al-Abadi in Baghdad. It will go some way towards expunging the memory of the humiliating flight of the army from the city seven months ago, when a numerically inferior IS force launched a stunning assault, spearheaded by at least 30 vehicular suicide-bombs, some of them armoured bulldozers packing enough explosive to demolish entire streets. Outflanked and outgunned, even the army’s Golden Division, a highly regarded American-trained special-forces unit, succumbed to panic. The carefully orchestrated campaign to recover Ramadi, which saw much closer co-ordination between troops on the ground and coalition air power than in the past, is an indication of how other battles to expel IS from Iraqi cities may be conducted. Air strikes are claimed to have killed at least 350 IS fighters in the days before the ground offensive began in earnest. While it is true that Iraqi forces some 10,000 strong were needed to defeat no more than 1,000 IS fighters, the difficulties should not be underestimated. IS had time to construct a multilayered defence based on booby traps and a network of tunnels that allowed shooters and suicide-bombers to move around the town unseen by surveillance drones. The Iraqi army had to spend months encircling the city and slowly cutting IS off from outside help. This allowed Iraqi units to move cautiously into the ruined city, street by street. Significantly, Iranian-backed Shia militias, who have often been in the vanguard of the fight against IS during the past 18 months, were largely excluded from the battle. This was at the insistence of the Americans, who want to encourage a Sunni uprising against IS, like the one they fomented against its predecessor, al-Qaeda in Iraq, in 2006. But the results have been patchy, because the promised supply of American weapons to Anbari Sunni tribes has been blocked by the predominantly Shia government in Baghdad. Next stop, Fallujah Given the deep sectarian divisions, limiting the role of the Shia “Popular Mobilisation Forces” in Anbar remains a priority for the Americans. Most are backed and financed by Iran—and Mr Abadi has little influence over such groups. If the government is to build on its success in Ramadi, it must show displaced Sunni inhabitants that it can both hold the city and start rebuilding it. That means providing material support for the Sunni tribes and local police to garrison Ramadi, while freeing up the overstretched Iraqi army to take on IS elsewhere in Anbar. The jihadists still control not only Fallujah, but also Ana, Rawa, Hit and al-Qaim, towns which between them have (or had) a population of over 700,000. The Iraqi army will have little choice but to work with the Shia militias in the continuing attempt to recapture Fallujah, which has seen only intermittent progress in the past year. The tactics used in Ramadi—encirclement and air strikes—are being applied to the city, which is now more or less completely cut off. But Fallujah, which was al-Qaeda in Iraq’s first stronghold and the scene of bitter fighting with American troops in 2004, will be much harder to crack. Mr Abadi promised on December 28th that IS will be driven from his country by the end of 2016. “We are coming to liberate Mosul, which will be the fatal blow to [IS],” he said. A concerted attempt to retake Iraq’s second city (seized by IS 18 months ago) does now appear more likely, although it will have to wait until Fallujah is restored to government control and the Iraqi army can field more effective units to join with Kurdish Peshmerga fighters. Estimates differ as to how many IS combatants there are in Mosul. IS says it has 30,000. Iraqi government sources put the number at a more modest 1,500. But IS has had a long time to dig itself in to the northern city, and at least some of the people there are said to prefer the so-called caliphate, for all its brutality, to rule from Baghdad. Mosul is a huge source of funding for IS, because it has so many people for the jihadists to tax. If it should fall, IS’s pretensions to being a state will fall with it. But there is still quite a way to go.Cryin’ Christmas tears FAR from spreading cheer this holiday season, Pope Francis has been in a Grinch-like mood. “There will be lights, parties, Christmas trees and Nativity scenes,” he said in late November. “It’s all a charade.” As the Vatican unveiled its own giant spruce, he sounded downright depressed: “We should ask for the grace to weep for this world, which does not recognise the path to peace.” It is easy to see why the pope is so downhearted. Look no further than Bethlehem, where young Palestinians throw stones at Israeli soldiers manning the wall separating the West Bank from Israel. From afar, the Israeli tear gas looks like the smoke from frankincense, of the sort that pilgrims burn when visiting the Church of the Nativity. But there were few pilgrims this Christmas—they were too scared. Most victims of war and terrorism in the Middle East are Muslims, since they are by far the majority of the population. But the tiny Christian minority often feels singled out. Their numbers are declining where the fighting is worst (see chart). Overall, the proportion of Middle Easterners who are Christian has dropped from 14% in 1910 to 4% today. Church leaders and pundits have begun to ask whether Christianity will vanish from the Middle East, its cradle, after 2,000 years. An exodus is under way. Many Christians feel more at home in the West and have the means to get there. Some are leaving because of the general atmosphere of violence and economic malaise. Others worry about persecution. A recent video of three Assyrian Christians in orange jumpsuits being made to kneel before being shot in the head by Islamic State (IS) jihadists fuelled this fear—though IS treats many other groups equally badly. Fewer births, virgin or otherwise The Christians who remain tend to have fewer babies than their Muslim neighbours, according to the Pew Research Centre. Regional data are unreliable, but in Egypt the fertility rate for Muslims is 2.7; for Christians it is 1.9. Mosul, in northern Iraq, was once home to tens of thousands of Christians. Perceived as supporting the Americans, they were targeted by insurgents after the invasion. A wave of killings in 2008, including that of the local Chaldean archbishop, seemed to mark the low point for the community. Then came IS. When the jihadists entered the city in 2014, they reportedly tagged Christian houses with an “N” for “Nazarene”, and gave their occupants a choice: convert, pay the jizya, a tax on non-Muslims, or face possible death. Most fled. In July 2014 IS announced that the city was free of Christians. Many who left Mosul went to Erbil, the Kurdish capital of northern Iraq, where they have trouble finding work or obtaining public services. Even there, some refugees chafe at the enforcement of Muslim customs. “You wouldn’t want to live there,” says Samir, a Christian refugee now in Lebanon. In general, Christians complain that their Muslim neighbours are growing increasingly intolerant. Some retort that Westerners exaggerate tales of Christian persecution to justify interventionist policies. “There is talk as if the West is genuinely interested in Christians, but most of the time they only use them for their own political ends,” says Mitri Raheb, pastor of a church in Bethlehem. He says that the Israeli occupation hurts Palestinian Christians far more than persecution by Muslims, but provokes less outrage in the West. Christian leaders are in a tough spot. “I cannot preach to people: ‘Do not leave,’” says Father Raheb. But other priests have. In an open letter published in September one of Syria’s most senior Catholic leaders, Melkite Patriarch Gregory III, wrote: “Despite all your suffering, stay! Be patient! Don’t emigrate! Stay for the church, your homeland, for Syria and its future!” Rankling many, he then urged Europe not to “encourage Syrian Christians to emigrate”. A refugee from Mosul says the pleas go “in one ear, out the other”. In the decades before the Arab spring, many Christian leaders lent their support to authoritarian rulers in return for the protection of Christians—and their own lofty status. But the deals broke down when the dictators fell or wobbled, leaving Christians in a predicament. “In Iraq, when Saddam Hussein was removed, we lost a million Christians,” said Bechara Boutros al-Rahi, Lebanon’s Maronite Christian Patriarch, to AFP in 2012. “Why? Not because the regime fell, but because there was no more authority, there was a vacuum. In Syria, it’s the same thing, Christians do not back the regime [of Bashar al-Assad], but they are afraid of what may come next.” Christian leaders have often supported whichever strongman is in power. The late Pope Shenouda III, head of the Coptic church, the largest in the Middle East, backed Hosni Mubarak, Egypt’s former dictator, and discouraged Copts from joining the protests that would eventually topple him. In 2012 Shenouda was succeeded by Tawadros II, who supports the current strongman, Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi. He has described the Arab spring as being more like a “winter, plotted by malicious hands” in order to break up the region into smaller states. Yet the Copts have gained little from their leaders’ loyalty. Mr Mubarak stood by as relations between Christians and Muslims deteriorated and sectarian violence increased. Mr Sisi is seen as better than the Islamist government that he toppled. A draft law would make it easier to build churches. But Copts are still expelled from villages for such crimes as falling in love with a Muslim. Even in Lebanon, where Christians were once a majority and still hold considerable power, their political leaders have disappointed. Under the country’s unique system, government posts are shared out based on sect. The presidency goes to a Maronite, the largest group of Christians. But in recent decades many Christians have left. Muslims are now a majority, and want power to match their numbers. Christian political leaders complain of persecution, but many seem more concerned with enhancing their own power. Bickering between politicians has left the presidency vacant for 18 months. Oddly enough it is the Gulf, home to the most conservative brand of Islam, which has welcomed the largest number of Christians recently, though not from Iraq or Syria. A wave of migrant labourers from the Asia-Pacific has dramatically increased the share of Christians in countries such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), which had few before. Tolerance varies between countries. Saudi Arabia, for example, bans the practice of Christianity (though many Christians worship in private). The UAE restricts proselytisation, but has otherwise supported its Christians. The number of churches in the country has grown from 24 in 2005 to 40 today. The emirate’s rulers often provide churches with free land, water and electricity. But these new Christian enclaves may not last. Migrant workers in the Gulf cannot easily become citizens or put down roots. In any case it is the loss of ancient communities that most concerns church leaders. “Christians are not guests in the Middle East,” says Father Paul Karam, the president of Caritas, a Catholic charity, in Lebanon. “We are the original owners of the land.” But none of the Christian refugees who spoke with your correspondent plans to return home. “We don’t belong there,” says Samir, who expects Iraq soon to be empty of Christians altogether.Endangered pleasures IT WAS a disquieting announcement. On November 25th Egypt’s President Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi approved a committee tasked with “improving the morals and values” in his country. Efforts to reduce littering or sexual harassment, both plagues in Egypt, might be welcome. But experience in the Middle East suggests that the boot will be put into more harmless activities. In September, for example, Egypt locked up two belly-dancers for “inciting debauchery” after they showed a little skin in online videos; one of the dancers, known as “Egypt’s Shakira”, is most famous for a video which features much suggestive use of a pestle and mortar, but no more flesh than is revealed by a low-cut blouse and an above-the-knee skirt. A young Egyptian couple tells of police accusing them of being together without being married, something that is not banned in the country. Across the region gay people, atheists and dissidents are punished for their supposed moral transgressions. Saudi Arabia and Iran, regional and religious rivals, are the bossiest. Both regimes claim to be Islamic. Both have vice squads. In Iran they berate women for showing too much fringe; in Saudi Arabia, for wearing too flirty an abaya, the big, usually black, cloak that is mandatory for females there, or being in the company of unrelated males. They enforce bans on alcohol, parties and other things that normal people, even the most morally upright, enjoy. Saudi media recently reported that female bureaucrats wearing too much make-up would be fined 1000 riyals ($266). Police in Algeria, Morocco and Sudan, too, have powers to stamp out immorality. Sudan’s criminal code, which outlaws adultery and women wearing trousers, is particularly harsh. Vague laws across the region such as causing offence and encouraging indecency are broad and open to abuse. Violators can be flogged. In November Saudi Arabia sentenced Ashraf Fayadh, a poet, to death. He was accused of apostasy and of having illicit relations with women, whose images he stored in his phone. He denies the charges. He had previously posted a video showing the religious police whipping a man; his supporters think the police are taking revenge. Saudi Arabia beheads people for moral transgressions. Iran hangs them. Since the 1970s Arab populations have grown more devout. This makes it easier for rulers to use “morality” to keep them in line. Women, especially, are told how to dress and under what circumstances they may have sex. In Morocco and Algeria, women who are raped are sometimes made to marry their rapist. Social censure is pervasive, and can be deadly. Even in moderate countries such as Jordan, men sometimes kill women to uphold family “honour”. The murderers—usually a father or brother—often escape with light sentences. “If I go out with a boyfriend in Beirut it’s fine,” says a Lebanese Christian woman. “But in the villages, people will say, ‘Look, she’s seeing him and they’re not married’.” Some among the region’s ever more globalised young are pushing back. Grindr and Tinder, two hook-up apps for gays and straights respectively, have a fair number of users in the Middle East. Men and women mix and, more and more, choose their own partners. When parts of films are cut, such as an explicit scene in “The Wolf of Wall Street”, people go online to watch the full version. In Jeddah, if not Riyadh, colourful abayas swing open as unrelated men and women mingle in cafés. A few leaders say they want to give people a break. Hassan Rohani, Iran’s relatively moderate president, has talked about stopping the religious police from fining women for failing to conceal their hair, wrists and bottoms. Such small freedoms, so far only very partially implemented, would be popular. Some of the region’s moral arbiters do not practise what they preach, as bartenders and madams in posh parts of Europe can attest. Imagine if the vice police cracked down on hypocrisy.THE Ben Abeba restaurant is a spiral-shaped concrete confection perched on a mountain ridge near Lalibela, an Ethiopian town known for its labyrinth of 12th-century churches hewn out of solid rock. The view is breathtaking: as the sun goes down, a spur of the Great Rift Valley stretches out seemingly miles below in subtly changing hues of green and brown, rolling away, fold after fold, as far as the eye can see. An immense lammergeyer, or bearded vulture, floats past, showing off its russet trousers. The staff, chivvied jovially along by an intrepid retired Scottish schoolmarm who created the restaurant a few years ago with an Ethiopian business partner, wrap yellow and white shawls around the guests against the sudden evening chill. The most popular dish is a spicy Ethiopian version of that old British staple, shepherd’s pie, with minced goat’s meat sometimes replacing lamb. Ben Abeba, whose name is a fusion of Scots and Amharic, Ethiopia’s main language, is widely considered the best eatery in the highlands surrounding Lalibela, nearly 700km (435 miles) north of Addis Ababa, the capital, by bumpy road.  Yet the obstacles faced by its owners illustrate what go-ahead locals and foreign investors must overcome if Ethiopia is to take off. Electricity is sporadic. Refrigeration is ropey, so fish is off the menu. So are butter and cheese; Susan Aitchison, the restaurant’s resilient co-owner, won’t use the local milk, as it is unpasteurised. Honey, mangoes, guava, papaya and avocados, grown on farmland leased to the enterprising pair, who have planted 30,000 trees, are delicious. All land belongs to the state, so it cannot be used as collateral for borrowing, which is one reason why commercial farming has yet to reach Lalibela. Consequently supplies of culinary basics are spotty. Local chickens are too scrawny. The government will not yet allow retailers such as South Africa’s Shoprite or Kenya’s Nakumatt to set up in Ethiopia, let alone in Lalibela, a UNESCO World Heritage site. Bookings at Ben Abeba are tricky to take, since the internet and mobile-phone service are patchy. Credit cards work “about half the time”, says Ms Aitchison. Imports for such essentials as kitchen spares are often held up at the airport, where tariffs are sky-high: a recent batch of T-shirts with logos for the staff ended up costing three times its original price. Wine, even the excellent local stuff, is sometimes unavailable, because transport from Addis, two days’ drive away, is irregular and private haulage minimal. The postal service barely works. Fuel at Lalibela’s sole (state-owned) petrol station runs out. Visitors can fly up from Addis on Ethiopian Airways every morning, but private airlines are pretty well kept out. Many of these annoyances could be removed—if only the government were brave enough to set the economy free. “The service sector here is one of the most restrictive in the world,” says a frustrated foreign banker. The government’s refusal to liberalise mobile-telephone services and banks is patently self-harming. Ethiopians have one of the lowest rates of mobile-phone ownership in Africa (see chart); the World Bank reckons that fewer than 4% of households have a fixed-line telephone and barely 3% have access to broadband. The official reason for keeping Ethio Telecom a monopoly is that the government can pour its claimed annual $820m profit straight into the country’s grand road-building programme. In fact, if the government opened the airwaves to competition, as Kenya’s has, it could probably sell franchises for at least $10 billion, and reap taxes and royalties as well; Safaricom in Kenya is the country’s biggest taxpayer. Moreover, Kenya’s mobile-banking service has vastly improved the livelihood of its rural poor, whereas at least 80% of Ethiopians are reckoned to be unbanked. For entrepreneurs like Ms Aitchison and her partner, Habtamu Baye, local banks may suffice. But bigger outfits desperately need the chunkier loans that only foreign banks, still generally prevented from operating in the country, can provide. A recent survey of African banks listed 15 Kenyan ones in the top 200, measured by size of assets, whereas Ethiopia had only three. Land reform is another big blockage, though farmers can now have their plots “certified” as a step towards greater security of tenure. Given Ethiopia’s not-so-distant feudal past and the dreadful abuses that immiserated millions of peasants in days of yore, especially in time of drought, the land issue is sensitive; the late Meles Zenawi, who for 21 years until his death in 2012 ran the country with an iron fist and a fervent desire to reduce poverty, was determined to prevent a rush of landless or destitute peasants into slums edging the big towns, as has happened in Kenya. But the increasing fragmentation of land amid the rocketing increase in population is plainly unsustainable, even though productivity has risen fast through government-provided inputs such as fertiliser and better seed. (Ethiopia is Africa’s second-most-populous country after Nigeria; by some estimates it has nearly 100m people.) Most women still have four or five children. The standard family plot has shrunk to less than a hectare. Yet, despite these self-imposed brakes, Ethiopia’s economic progress has been spectacular. Its growth rate, if the latest official figure of 11% is true, is the fastest in Africa; and even the lower figure of around 8%, which the IMF and many Western analysts prefer, is still very perky. Social and economic indices are reckoned to have improved faster than anywhere else in Africa, albeit from a low base. Extreme poverty, defined as a daily income of under $1.25, afflicted 56% of the population in 2000, according to the World Bank, but had fallen to 31% by 2011 and is thought to be dipping still. The average Ethiopian lifespan has risen in the same period by a year each year, and now stands at 64. Child and infant mortality have dived. Protection for the rural poor in time of drought, which presently afflicts swathes of the north and east, is more effective than before. The government has “the most impressive record in the world” in reducing poverty, says a British aid official. (Britain gives its fattest dollop of largesse to Ethiopia.) Nonetheless, at least 25m Ethiopians are still deemed to be “extremely poor”. A waitress at Ben Abeba, a university graduate in biology, seems happy to get a monthly wage of $26. A labourer earns a lot less. How they made a miracle The core of the government’s economic policy is to improve agriculture, nurture industry and build lots of infrastructure. This includes a series of huge dams on the Blue Nile (which provides most of the water that flows into Egypt via Sudan) and on the Omo river, which flows south into Kenya’s Lake Turkana. The mass electrification that is expected to ensue should eventually help Ms Aitchison’s kitchen and communications in Lalibela. Roads and railways are also being built apace. Driving east from the town on a dirt track to join a paved road 80km or so away, your correspondent saw not a single other vehicle in two hours. The government puts its hope in industrialisation and light manufacturing, spurred on by investment and also by mass education (more than 32 universities have been created since 2000). It promotes industrial parks, which are supposed to boost their share of GDP from 5% today to 20% within a decade—and create millions of jobs for a population whose median age is only 19. Though the government invokes no precise model, it has various Asian ones in mind, most obviously China’s system of state capitalism under the strict control of a dominant political party. Meles rose to power at the head of the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front, a revolutionary regional party that originally drew its inspiration from Enver Hoxha’s Albanian brand of communism and which, after years of guerrilla warfare in the mountains, overthrew a vicious Soviet-backed Marxist regime, known as the Derg, in 1991. Meles gradually began to open the country’s economy, but he also felt obliged to close down an experiment in multiparty democracy after an assorted opposition made big advances in a general election (which it claimed to have won) in 2005. The two main opposition parties, which both want to liberalise the economy and privatise the land, were eventually allowed to keep 161 seats in the 547-strong parliament. In the post-election fracas, about 200 people were killed and at least 20,000 are reckoned subsequently to have done stints in prison. In the next two rounds of elections, in 2010 and again in May 2015, the tally of opposition MPs, after a government campaign of outright repression, slumped to one and now none. The opposition is crushed, fragmented and feeble. Prominent dissenters have fled or are behind bars. Human Rights Watch, a monitoring group based in New York, reckons there are “thousands” of political prisoners. Torture is routine. “Ethiopians are cowed,” says a longtime analyst. It was notable, at a recent Economist conference in Addis, that virtually no businessman, Ethiopian or foreign, had the nerve to disparage any of the government’s policies. In public Ethiopians tend dutifully to echo the government line; in private, though, they can be franker. After Meles’s death, Hailemariam Desalegn emerged as prime minister. In September of 2015 he was confirmed as head of the ruling Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front, itself a coalition whose key component is still Meles’s Tigrayan front. But Mr Hailemariam, a southern Pentecostalist from a small ethnic group outside Meles’s circle of revolutionaries from the north, has yet to achieve his predecessor’s authority. Just take the plunge He says he favours a loosening of economics and politics. But so far he has been tentative. “He’s a compromise guy encircled by old-guard Leninist ideologues, the Tigray boys,” says Beyene Petros, a veteran leader of the opposition. One of Mr Hailemariam’s close advisers, Arkebe Oqubay, a reformist who promotes industrial policy (especially the creation of industrial parks) and craves foreign investment, cagily suggests that banking will open up “in five years”. Yet the ruling front still reflects a deep wariness of foreigners who, in the words of a long-standing expatriate, remain widely suspected of plotting to “get rich at the expense of Ethiopians”. Most independent observers feel that, overall, Ethiopia is on the rise, and may even emerge as an African powerhouse alongside South Africa and Nigeria—and ahead of Kenya, its regional rival. It is proud of having the African Union’s headquarters and of providing more UN peacekeepers than any other African country. It is a leading mediator in the region, especially in war-torn South Sudan, and has won plaudits from the West for its fierce stand against jihadism. It also caters for more refugees than any other African country—some 820,000 at last count. On the home front, Ethiopia’s infrastructure plans have attracted the interest of potential investors from across the globe. Yet unless the government gets a move on frustration will grow, at home and abroad. If the ruling party had the courage to open up the economic and political system, the pace of Ethiopia’s progress towards prosperity and stability would quicken. Even lovely, remote Lalibela would gain.DOWN a bumpy two-lane road through the hills north-west of Vladivostok, the Pogranichny border crossing is where Russia meets China. Bilateral relations are blossoming, and trade should be booming. Yet lorries loaded with timber idle on the roadside, as obstructive bureaucrats keep them waiting for days. On a recent visit, the electricity was out; candles flickered in the truck stop’s lavatories. “Nothing new here,” said a shopkeeper. Over the past two years, as its relations with the West have soured, Russia has proclaimed a “pivot to the East”. Officials envisioned China replacing Western capital markets and hoovering up Russian exports of oil, minerals and food. Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping, the countries’ presidents, visited each other’s capitals for ceremonies commemorating the end of the second world war; Western leaders stayed away. Big deals in energy, transport and arms seemed to augur a new friendship. In September Mr Putin declared that Sino-Russian relations had “probably reached a peak in their entire history”. That was the official story, at least. “The turn to the east is happening, but in a characteristically Russian way: slowly, foolishly and with unrealistically high expectations,” says Alexander Gabuev, the chairman of the Russia in the Asia-Pacific programme at the Moscow Carnegie Centre, a think-tank. The Russian recession and China’s slowdown have put a damper on grand plans. With oil prices low and the rouble weak, bilateral trade shrank by around 30% in the first half of 2015. Corruption, bureaucracy and the rickety infrastructure of Russia’s Far East cloud the business climate. Mr Putin is not the first Russian leader to turn towards Asia. Chinese and Soviet communists feuded during the cold war, but by the time of perestroika Mikhail Gorbachev was calling Vladivostok a “window to the East” and declaring the Soviet Union “an Asian and Pacific country”. Nor is Mr Putin’s interest in the Pacific Rim new: when Vladivostok hosted the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) conference in 2012, he poured resources into the city, building two bridges and a sprawling campus for the talks. “In the 21st century, the vector of Russia’s development will be the development of the East,” Mr Putin said, in a rare echo of Mr Gorbachev. But after the conference, Moscow’s attention shifted and funds dried up. Development projects fell by the wayside. Two five-star Hyatt hotels went unfinished. The government says funds allocated to rebuild the Pogranichny border area were stolen (by contrast, a shopping mall and a Holiday Inn await on the Chinese side). The clash with the West over Ukraine turned Russia’s focus eastward again. In May 2014, two months after the annexation of Crimea, Mr Putin met Mr Xi and announced a 30-year, $400 billion gas deal, ending a decade of talks. Russia’s rail monopoly awarded a tender to the state-controlled China Railway Group to design a high-speed train between Moscow and Kazan. Moscow agreed to sell Beijing sophisticated S-400 anti-aircraft missiles and Su-35 fighter jets. China extended a yuan currency-swap agreement. In the autumn of 2015 Russia declared several Far Eastern regions priority development zones. Investors will enjoy a five-year break on most taxes and streamlined bureaucracy. Foreigners arriving through Vladivostok will be allowed in without visas. Some firms have moved in: En+ Group, an energy holding company controlled by Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch, has signed a deal with China’s Huawei to build data centres in Siberia. But it has not exactly been a gold rush. Western sanctions have made Chinese lenders cautious about Russian firms. Chinese foreign direct investment in Russia more than doubled in 2014, but collapsed during the first half of 2015. Gas export volumes are up, making Russia China’s largest supplier, but falling oil prices have slashed revenues. And although China is now Russia’s largest trading partner, Russia does not crack China’s top five—a fact not lost on Chinese businessmen. “They believe, and not without good reason, that they can dictate the conditions,” says the boss of a Vladivostok-based shipping firm. Russia, meanwhile, frets about being exploited. The desire to get closer to China is offset by a fear of becoming dependent, says Victor Larin of the Russian Academy of Sciences in Vladivostok. Russia imposes tough restrictions on businesses because of unfounded fears that the Chinese will take over its sparsely-populated Far East. Chinese businessmen complain about restrictions on hiring foreign labourers. Deals to lease farmland draw the ire of Russian nationalists. Even innocuous projects can incur the wrath of Russian apparatchiks. In November Cai Shangjun, an internationally acclaimed Chinese film director, brought more than 50 cast and crew to Khabarovsk to shoot a new movie, but customs officials held his camera equipment at the border. The frustrated cinéaste was left cooling his heels in his hotel for over a week. “It’s a tragedy,” said Mr Cai, as his crew lingered aimlessly in the lobby. His film “Under the Ice”, about two Chinese lovers who meet in Russia, has since resumed production. But like most things under ice, and Russia’s eastern pivot itself, it is moving slower than hoped.A billion on Siberia, please THE shiny new Tigre de Cristal casino looks like a black glass and steel spacecraft that has landed in the Siberian forest. A neon sign advertises “Seafood delicacies from the Sea of Japan”. Inside, Russian ladies deal out baccarat cards to Chinese gamblers. The casino itself represents a bit of a bet: that Russia can tap some of the cash from rising Asian economies to help develop its own Far East, a territory larger than the European Union that is home to just 6m people. Though the Far East is staunchly Russian, it has grown dependent on its Asian neighbours. Some regions do 85% of their foreign trade with China. Europe feels a world away. When Russia’s economy was booming, locals took their holidays at Chinese resorts and popped over the border for cheap massages and shopping. Since the collapse of the rouble the flow has reversed. Chinese shoppers come to buy Russian food, which they think safer than their own chemical-ridden produce. Others come for a bit of Europe. Li Tsang, a hairdresser from Fuyuan, raves about Khabarovsk, just across the Amur river: “It’s so clean!” At Tigre de Cristal, the brainchild of Lawrence Ho, son of the Macao mogul Stanley Ho, investors are banking on an influx of gamblers from north-east China, South Korea and Japan. “Within a two- or three-hour radius, you have 200m-300m people under-served from a gambling perspective,” says Craig Ballantyne, the casino’s upbeat Scottish manager. The fate of such foreign-backed projects depends on Russia providing the conditions for success. For Tigre de Cristal, little went smoothly. A bizarre legislative oversight means that it is illegal to advertise the casino: with the exception of a handful of special gaming zones, gambling is banned in Russia. The launch was postponed because of bureaucratic hassles. Even with the delay, the local government failed to revamp the main road from the airport in time for the grand opening, much to the chagrin of casino staff. “When Disneyland opened,” Mr Ballantyne notes pointedly, “the Santa Ana highway was finished.” Correction: In “The gauge of history” in our Christmas issue, a portrait was wrongly described as showing Fyodor Shekhtel, a Russian architect. The subject was in fact Savva Mamontov, a Russian industrialist and patron of the arts.
