THERE should be something comforting, during uncertain times, in the sight of the boss solidly seated behind his desk, working away at the business of the day. And that was the image China’s official state media presented when broadcasting Xi Jinping’s annual new-year message to the Chinese people on December 31st—though it has to be said, if that impressive expanse of wood really is the presidential desk, Mr Xi must find it hard to reach his impressively red but implausibly far-off telephones. From this confidence-inspiring position Mr Xi told his audience that 2016 was going to mark “the beginning of the decisive phase” of the country’s efforts to build a “moderately prosperous society”, a goal that the Communist Party says it hopes to reach by the end of the decade. Not mentioning that the economy’s rate of growth was at a quarter-century low, he maintained that the country’s future prospects were “encouraging”. Recent events, however, suggest that Mr Xi’s managerial confidence is not widely shared. Jitters emanating from China’s equity and currency markets have exposed widespread fears that the way ahead will be rocky indeed—and that Mr Xi and his colleagues are ill-equipped to navigate it. Evidence from their handling of a broad range of political and economic policy suggests that the worriers may prove right. Four days after Mr Xi’s broadcast, the Shanghai stockmarket reopened after a new-year break. With 90 minutes to go before the close of business, transactions were halted for the rest of the day: the index had fallen by 7% and a newly introduced “circuit-breaker” kicked in. The sell-off has deepened since then: the index is now down by about 15% so far in 2016, its worst-ever start to a new year. At the same time, China’s once-placid currency has turned stormy. The central bank believed it could nudge the yuan down, offering a little help to weary exporters without grave repercussions. Instead, it has triggered an exodus of capital and alarmed investors around the world, who braced themselves for bigger falls. As fears of a meltdown in China rippled across global markets, the government scrapped the ill-conceived circuit-breaker, and scrambled to shore up the yuan and the markets by telling its banks and brokers to buy.    Panic about China’s ability to maintain steady growth is unwarranted. True, its debt is worrisome: government and private debt was about 160% of GDP eight years ago and now stands at more than 240% (about $25 trillion). But the government still expects the economy to grow by an average of 6.5% a year for the rest of the decade. That may be difficult, and it could entail a lot more wasteful investment. But it should be achievable. The problem is thus not an economic one, per se. It is that a government once widely thought of as all-powerful—even over markets—may be losing its grip. The recent ructions, after all, are not the first mess of this sort; the markets went haywire last August (see chart 1). China’s leaders are now grappling with hugely complex reforms of their financial system, their currency policy and of their state-owned enterprises and, apparently uncertain how to proceed, they are thrashing around and making mistakes. At home and abroad, people risk losing faith in them; such a loss would be felt well beyond the markets. Mr Xi and his colleagues appear frightened of losing their grip on the economic levers that they have used to help keep the party in power. Party bosses like state-owned banks: they can be relied on to direct lending to favoured companies and loyal officials’ projects. They worry about loosening the party’s grip on the state-owned industries that control vital areas of the economy such as energy, transport and telecommunications—can anyone but party loyalists be trusted to run them? If the party drags its feet on reform, though, China will fall back on unsustainable stimulus measures, and may eventually slide into economic stagnation, as Japan did in the 1990s. That would bring with it the risk of social and political turbulence. A full-blown economic crisis cannot be ruled out. Once admired by authoritarian governments elsewhere, not to mention some commentators in the West, for its canny balancing of free markets and party control, China’s style of leadership may be about to lose its shine. Though he may lack a sophisticated understanding of how to handle stockmarkets, Mr Xi was quick to grasp the dangers facing China when he took over in 2012. Some foreign commentators were still, even then, mesmerised by what they regarded as a winning combination of a technocratic government with a good sense of the country’s needs and how to fulfil them, and a disdain for the endless debates that can bog down good policy in democracies. But Mr Xi and his colleagues realised that the foundations of the model that the late Deng Xiaoping began to develop in the late 1970s, and that in the 1990s came into its own, was in need of an overhaul. Trouble at the top The model’s surge of success had been sustained by two forces: the rapid spread of prosperity and, since the bloody suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989, an unusually protracted truce among the often fractious party elite. Consistent growth underlay both, providing fabulous dividends for the elite as well as prosperity for hundreds of millions of people. But in 2012 China’s GDP was growing at its slowest pace in 13 years (see chart 2). To make matters worse, Mr Xi’s assumption of power occurred amid the most vicious struggle within the leadership that China had seen since Tiananmen. Not content with enriching his family to a phenomenal degree, Bo Xilai, the party boss of Chongqing, a south-western region, also made a bid for a job at the very top. Mr Xi resented this; other powerful politicians backed it. Mr Bo is now serving a life sentence for corruption and abuse of power. Although economic growth and peace at the pinnacle of the party kept the country stable, they did not keep it static. Under Mr Xi’s predecessor, Hu Jintao, the middle class grew phenomenally (see chart 3). And its desire for a stable environment in which to get ever better off was a vital bulwark of party rule. But some of its members were increasingly fed up with the party’s caprices and its manifest corruption. What was more, this middle class had a powerful new weapon: information. The rapid spread of the internet opened up a nationwide forum for dissent. Sina Weibo—China’s equivalent of Twitter—was founded just three years before Mr Xi took office; but by that time it had 46m daily users. Social media allowed the party to monitor public opinion and identify problems before they became threats to the party’s grip on power. But they also spurred the development of a civil society: NGOs, house churches and independent legal firms ready to take up the cases of the downtrodden and dispossessed in their battles with officialdom all made extensive use of social media. Groups independent of party control—albeit small and scattered—sprang up everywhere. Events abroad seemed to underscore the instability of authoritarian states. The Arab spring began unfolding in 2011, a year before Mr Xi took over, and though it hardly amounted to a democratic breakthrough—far from it—it showed that authoritarian governments could prove unexpectedly brittle. The police in China worked hard to prevent any copycat unrest. At the same time, the Tibetan plateau and Xinjiang, which cover about 40% of China’s land area, were seething with anti-party sentiment following the government’s ruthless response to unrest in 2008 and 2009. A demographic crisis was also beginning to loom. Plunging birth rates were stripping China of the surplus of working-age people that had constituted its “demographic dividend”: it was fast growing old. Young people were beginning to worry about a future weighed down by the burden of caring for the elderly—not to mention sky-high property prices and, among graduates, rising unemployment. To cap it all an environmental catastrophe was unfolding: the industrialisation that had brought growth was choking cities with smog; one-fifth of rivers were too toxic for human contact, let alone to drink from. Even party leaders had taken to describing China’s economic model as “unstable, unbalanced, unco-ordinated and ultimately unsustainable”. Faced with a need to reshape, or even fundamentally restructure, China’s economic and political model, Mr Xi has tried to present himself as a reformer in the mould of Deng Xiaoping. He has acquired more power than any leader since Deng, putting himself in charge of all the most important portfolios and abandoning the system of “collective leadership” Deng brought in. Indeed in many ways Mr Xi’s grip on the country’s mechanisms of control appears stronger than Deng’s was, and second only to that of Mao Zedong. Thus empowered Mr Xi talks of reform that goes yet further than Deng’s did—as when, in 2013, he asked a meeting of the party’s 370-member Central Committee to endorse his call for market forces to be given a “decisive” role in the economy. (It did.) Recently Mr Xi has taken to calling for “supply-side reform”, implying that structural changes in the economy, rather than massive state-led investment, are to be the new order of the day. The party’s main mouthpiece, the People’s Daily, calls these reforms the “China Model 2.0 Edition”. A crucial aim of this approach is to ensure that the middle class remains on side, even as what Mr Xi likes to call a “new normal” of slower growth sets in. Hence his signature exhortations to build the “Chinese dream”. It is an ambiguous term, partly designed to evoke thoughts of American-style middle-class prosperity, and of a life unfettered by interfering government. But the slogan was also designed to foster patriotic pride, including a “dream of a strong army”. Mr Xi’s revamped China model leans even more heavily on nationalism than earlier models did. Constitutionally inept Mr Xi’s style of rule, though, has proved an impediment to his ambitions. His anti-corruption campaign—the longest and most far-reaching of its kind since the party seized control in 1949—has been welcomed not just by the middle class but also among those less well off, who feel that China’s economic miracle has unfairly rewarded the powerful. But along with specific injunctions not to question party policy the anti-graft drive has made officials even more afraid than usual to take the risks needed to carry out reform. In the political realm Mr Xi talks of making the legal system fairer and more effective. Just a month after he took over, he took up a cause that had long been dear to liberal intellectuals: that of giving the constitution more clout. “No organisation or individual has the privilege to overstep the constitution and the law,” he said. He was trying to instil some discipline into the authoritarian model, reining in abuses of power and privilege within the party that had enraged the middle class and people aspiring to join it. Those who saw this as licence to push for deep reform, though, were quickly disabused. When a party-controlled newspaper in Guangdong province, Southern Weekend, tried to argue the case for constitutional government in an editorial titled “The Chinese Dream: A Dream of Constitutionalism”, the censors shut it down. Journalists at the paper went on strike; dissidents gathered outside its offices in Guangzhou. Tolerated for a couple of days, the sight of crowds on big-city streets listening to speeches calling for freedom of the press and even a multiparty system proved too much. The police rounded up the dissident orators. Late last year three of them were sentenced to terms of between two-and-a-half and six years in jail. The episode ushered in a crackdown on civil society of greater duration and intensity than any since the dark days that followed the Tiananmen protests. Mr Xi still talks up the constitution. At a meeting in 2014 the party’s Central Committee decided to make officials swear loyalty to it, ordered schools to teach students about it and decreed that December 4th would be celebrated henceforth as Constitution Day. But Mr Xi’s talk of constitutionalism rings hollow to liberals, just as his talk of reform fails to calm markets. And its impact within the party remains unclear. One way Mr Xi hopes to prolong the party’s life is by proving that it can govern effectively. His anti-corruption chief, Wang Qishan, raised eyebrows in September when he said that “the legitimacy of the ruling party” rested partly on “the mandate of the people”. It was the first public use of the word legitimacy by a Chinese leader in connection with the party’s rule, and seemed to imply a recognition that the party could not take it for granted. Mr Xi has built on a system, developed by his post-Deng predecessors, of grading officials according to their fulfilment of “responsibility targets”. In the past the targets that mattered most were those seen as maintaining social stability and promoting economic growth. Now the environment is getting a much higher billing. In 2012 the government made the reduction of PM2.5 air particles, the worst kind, a “hard target” in Beijing and other heavily polluted cities. State media have reported that the mayor of Beijing, Wang Anshun, has been ordered—metaphorically—to “submit his head” if he fails to meet this target. Sensing that China’s development has entered uncharted territory, China’s leaders are turning to foreign gurus. In November Mr Xi met Francis Fukuyama, an American political scientist whose claim to fame is a thesis that would seem to run against everything Mr Xi wants to protect: that the march to liberal democracy is an unstoppable one. Mr Fukuyama has tweaked this “end of history” line somewhat since first espousing it, emphasising that, even in the absence of democracy, a state’s ability to enforce laws and provide basic services such as education, health and infrastructure can matter a lot. Harder tasks Can Mr Xi’s model—with all the flaws in its implementation—continue to keep the end of the party’s history at bay? David Shambaugh of George Washington University, a career-long observer of China, was an early champion of the idea that the party had learned useful lessons from the collapse of the Soviet Union and changed its methods of ruling accordingly. It had, for example, allowed the development of NGOs that could help fill in the cracks of an overstretched welfare system. It had recruited more businesspeople into its ranks and experimented on a small scale with elections for party posts. But in a forthcoming book, Mr Shambaugh says he has changed his mind; he thinks the reforms of which he spoke have run their course and a new era of “hard authoritarianism” has begun. And he points out that there has been no example of an authoritarian country making the transition to high-income status that Mr Xi seeks without at least a partial democratisation. The 100th anniversary of the party’s founding will come in 2021, just before Mr Xi’s years in power are due, if he follows the example of his predecessors, to come to an end. If China’s reforms continue to disappoint over the next few years, it is unlikely to be the joyous celebration Mr Xi must be hoping for. Nationalist chest-thumping may help to rally some support for the party. But it comes with risks—China’s history since the 19th century is studded with examples of nationalist fervour turning against the government because of leaders’ perceived failings. Mr Xi may feel inclined to step up economic pressure on Taiwan, which is likely to elect an independence-leaning president on January 16th after eight years of rule by one who favoured closer ties with China. But there is little sign of public appetite for a return to the military tensions of the mid-1990s, when China lobbed unarmed missiles close to the island. There is every reason, therefore, for Mr Xi to worry. Job losses in manufacturing will stoke tensions among blue-collar workers, which is why the party has started rounding up labour activists (see article). The loyalty of the middle class, long accustomed to unremitting growth, will become increasingly difficult to secure as growth slackens further. Both the middle class and the equally large cohort of rural migrants that dreams of joining it are vital to the country’s economic success, and both are capable of mobilising regime-threatening opposition. Mr Xi talks a good reform, but has yet to follow through, and has shown that his preferred way of dealing with any threat is to resort to time-honoured tactics of cracking down ever harder. Chinese authoritarianism has been at times surprisingly deft. Just now, it does not look so.  TO HEAR most of the contenders for this year’s presidential election tell it, America is in a horrible state. Republicans both mainstream and whacko, from Jeb Bush to Donald Trump, describe a country enfeebled militarily, ailing economically and culturally corrupted by seven years of Democratic rule; on the left, Bernie Sanders describes an economy rigged against ordinary Americans. In his last state-of-the-union message to Congress on January 12th, Barack Obama delivered a rebuke to that miserabilism—and to the ugly nativism it is fuelling among voters. During his first presidential campaign, Mr Obama promised Americans a lot of change they would like. In what is likely to be his last major speech before the process of electing his successor begins in Iowa on February 1st, he talked more of the historic change globalisation is making, to the workplace, pay packets and complexion of American society, in turn creating much of the anxiety and resentment his would-be successors are pandering to. “It’s change that promises amazing medical breakthroughs, but also economic disruptions that strain working families,” he said. “It promises education for girls in the most remote villages, but also connects terrorists plotting an ocean away.” It is not certain that America will master the turbulence. “Progress is not inevitable,” he warned, disabusing those conservative critics who accuse him of holding a Pollyanna-ish view of history. “It’s the result of choices we make together. And we face such choices right now. Will we respond to the changes of our time with fear, turning inward as a nation…? Or will we face the future with confidence in who we are, in what we stand for?” This was genre-busting stuff. The annual presidential address to Congress is traditionally a wishlist of legislative business for the coming year, with, in the final year of a presidency, an additional trumpeting of the incumbent’s record. Mr Obama’s speech contained some of that. He exhorted Congress to approve the recently concluded Pacific trade agreement, pass legislation to authorise the ongoing American operations in Syria and Iraq and work on criminal-justice reform, one of the few remaining causes that has bipartisan support. He also noted many of his achievements; in presiding over impressive job creation, health-care reform and America’s first national effort at mitigating carbon emissions, for example. Yet the main thrust of his speech was in a way more audacious: an effort to stake out, ahead of Iowa, the ground for legitimate debate in a civilised society. America has not, Mr Obama ventured to suggest, gone to the dogs. Its economy is the envy of the world. Its armed forces are unrivalled. So is its global leadership. “When it comes to every important international issue, people of the world do not look to Beijing or Moscow to lead—they call us.” On that basis alone, anyone promising extreme solutions to America’s problems should be mistrusted. And where they threaten the principles of fairness and rule of law, the basis of America’s strength, they must be disdained. “We need to reject any politics that targets people because of race or religion,” said Mr Obama, in a nod to Mr Trump’s promise of mass deportations and a blockade of Muslims. “This isn’t a matter of political correctness. It’s a matter of understanding just what it is that makes us strong.” The job of politics is to settle finer debates, about the role of the state in apportioning wealth (“The American people have a choice to make”) and the exercise of America’s undimmed power. It was in this didactic spirit that Mr Obama defended his record. On the state, he argued that it was reasonable to worry about overburdening business with regulation, but illogical to reduce welfare payments, as most Republicans want, at a time of wage stagnation and rising insecurity for millions of workers. On national security, he protested, in a tacit response to his many critics, that escalating the wars in which America is already embroiled will not make it safer; “That’s not leadership; that’s a recipe for quagmire…It’s the lesson of Vietnam; it’s the lesson of Iraq.” Stats of the Union: An interactive guide to the United States This was vintage Obama, disdainful of the tribal emotions that have subsumed American politics, cerebral, unrelentingly reasonable. No doubt, it reminded many of his critics, who represent around half of Americans, why they abhor him. Mr Obama said the one big regret of his presidency was that partisan divisions had got worse during the course of it; but America is in no mood for healing. Sitting behind Mr Obama, Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives, wore the impassive expression of a man who dared show no flicker of approval for a president his party despises—even when Mr Obama denounced the business-throttling red tape it should hate even more. When Mr Obama claimed that America was not enfeebled militarily, many Republican congressmen emitted a scandalised gasp. Yet mainstream Republicans candidates such as Chris Christie and Mr Bush, none of whom has denounced Mr Trump’s vile politics half as effectively as Mr Obama, must quietly hope Republican voters imbibe his moral lesson, and reject the rabble-rousers. While he himself must pray that Democratic voters, 30-40% of whom are currently tempted to vote for Mr Sanders, will instead rally to Hillary Clinton who, because more electable, is much likelier to protect his legacy. That, in turn, points to Mr Obama’s weakness, the other political context in which he spoke. The president’s decision not to recite the customary legislative to-do list—as notable by its absence as the victims of gun violence symbolised by a seat left empty next to Michelle Obama—was partly enforced. After a burst of bipartisan co-operation last year, including the overdue passage of a federal budget, he can expect little additional help from Congress. Whatever extra measures he hopes to burnish his record with, for example, to equalise pay between the sexes or increase the modicum of gun control he attempted this month, will probably have to be enacted by executive decree. Wite-Out and the White House So were many of his existing achievements, including changes to how laws on immigration are enforced. Although Mr Obama has not used his presidential powers half as profligately as his critics claim—his immediate predecessors, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton, both issued many more orders—his inability to get much legislation passed since the Democrats lost control of the House in 2010 has made his record unusually dependent on them. And given that most Republicans candidates vow to erase many of those orders, his legacy is one bad election result away from looking rather thin. In his peroration, Mr Obama alluded to that frailty. In the absence of much enthusiasm for electoral reform in Congress, he promised to “travel the country” making his case for it. That desirable change, which he himself once promised to bring about, “will only happen when the American people demand it”, he concluded. As so often, he is right and admirable in his diagnosis. Still, it is hard not to be dismayed by the image he left hanging in the divided House, of the president, once the change politician, reduced to wandering America like a mendicant preacher, appealing forlornly to its better nature. THE most instructive part of Nikki Haley’s memoir, “Can’t is Not an Option”—beyond the fact of its publication, a tell-tale sign of national ambitions—is not the oft-cited anecdote about a beauty pageant in Bamberg, South Carolina: Mrs Haley and her sister, the daughters of Indian immigrants, confounded the judges’ plan to pick black and white winners, and were disqualified. It is rather the passage about how she kept the books of her mother’s shop from the age of 12. Like Margaret Thatcher, another shopkeeper’s daughter and an acknowledged influence, Mrs Haley’s upbringing bequeathed an extreme watchfulness about overheads and a sharp aversion to government intrusion. Those instincts—developed, in Mrs Haley’s case, on the shop floor rather than in a think-tank or boardroom—have guided her stint as governor of South Carolina, in which recruiting jobs and businesses has been her main preoccupation. Debt and spending, taxes and big government, duly featured as villains in her response to Barack Obama on behalf of the Republicans on January 12th. But she alluded, too, to the racist massacre at a church in Charleston last June, in which nine people were killed. Though she modestly omitted her own role, Mrs Haley’s subsequent leadership led to the lowering of the Confederate flag in the statehouse grounds, a gesture that was emulated across the South. In a different sort of compromise, she acknowledged in her speech that Republicans shared the blame for America’s political dysfunction. That combination—fiscal ferocity and a capacity for conciliation—has led to chatter, now intensifying, about Mrs Haley as a contender for vice-president. Then there is the potential of her biography. She is South Carolina’s first female governor, and first from an ethnic minority; five years into her tenure, she is still the country’s youngest (she will be 44 on January 20th). If the Democrats plump for Hillary Clinton, Mrs Haley could attack her in ways that might seem ungallant for a male nominee. She might help salve the rebarbative xenophobia of the Republican primary. To her opponents at home, all this is somewhat ironic. Her burgeoning reputation for sensitivity would be better deserved, they say, if she had aided struggling South Carolinians by expanding her state’s Medicaid coverage under Obamacare (a programme she dutifully whacked this week). Hers is plainly the sort of up-by-the-bootstraps immigrant story that leaves little patience for special pleading: her family’s mantra was “Deal with it”. But another way of putting that is that Mrs Haley is, at heart, an orthodox, even hardline, Republican. For example, like many Republican governors, she has resisted the resettlement of Syrian refugees in her state. She once posted a snap of the Beretta she got for Christmas on Facebook. Indeed for someone who, by her own account, was unsure which party to represent when she first stood for political office, she picked up the art of positioning quickly. In 2010, when she first ran for governor, she saw off three better-known rivals with the backing of the then-surging Tea Party, which liked her excoriations of some pork-happy Republicans as insufficiently conservative. Mitt Romney supported her, as, in her most prized endorsement, did Sarah Palin. So did the outgoing governor, Mark Sanford, then mired in the scandal that introduced “hiking the Appalachians” to the lexicon of political euphemism; Mrs Haley herself faced down unsubstantiated allegations of adultery, plus innuendos about her religion (she grew up Sikh but converted to Christianity). The Tea Party connection points to a potential weakness: an outlook that, beneath the patina of tolerance, can seem both doctrinaire and parochial. Her views on international issues are less assured than those on business taxes. She is a formidable campaigner, but her toughest fights have been against members of her own party: hers is a state in which, for would-be governors, the main challenge is the Republican primary, rather than, as in a presidential contest, persuading waverers. The Hippocratic oaf If Donald Trump is the nominee—which the primary in South Carolina on February 20th will help to determine—he is unlikely to choose Mrs Haley. She previously called his plan to keep out Muslims “absolutely un-American”; her speech this week, with its plea for resistance to “the angriest voices”, was a response to him as well as to Mr Obama. It is hard to see Ted Cruz enlisting her, either. But another nominee would probably not be deterred by her limitations, since most voters, when they tune in, would register the basics of Mrs Haley’s background, her graceful handling of the flag issue, and little else. For the requirements of a presidential running-mate are rudimentary. Ideally he or she might capture a constituency, demographic or geographical, which the candidate struggles to reach. But that is only an aspiration—Paul Ryan failed to deliver Wisconsin for Mr Romney in 2012—and the main task is a simpler, Hippocratic one: not to damage the campaign, as, four years earlier, Mrs Palin’s gaffes hurt John McCain’s. Mrs Haley did no harm this week, certainly not to her own prospects—unlike, say, Bobby Jindal, the former governor of Louisiana and once the country’s most starry Indian-American politician, who botched the same job in 2009. Except among those Republicans for whom any hint of moderation is anathema, her turn was widely applauded. On this evidence, voters would not recoil at the idea of her sitting a missed heartbeat from the Oval Office. Even Mrs Haley’s critics concede that she has grown into her governorship, performing robustly during South Carolina’s recent floods. But they complain that she is more opportunistic than decisive. She tolerated the Confederate flag for years, they say, while others agitated for its removal; her vaunted record of job-creation owes as much to the wider economic recovery as to her leadership. Likewise her name might not be touted for the ticket were it not for the complexion of the race. On the other hand, in politics, seizing your moment is more a talent than a form of cynicism. Timing, after all, is everything.IT WAS demolished more than 50 years ago, but New Yorkers still miss the old Penn Station. The beaux-arts style building boasted vaulted glass windows 46 metres high and a waiting room inspired by the Roman Baths of Caracalla. It was replaced by a soulless high-rise and Madison Square Garden, a sports arena and theatre neither square nor verdant. Since then commuters from Long Island and New Jersey and passengers using Amtrak’s regional rail lines have had to navigate an outdated, cramped, subterranean labyrinth. Now Andrew Cuomo, New York’s governor, has a plan to give America’s busiest transit hub a belated makeover. The $3 billion scheme builds on one first proposed by Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a senator who died in 2003. It involves moving Amtrak across the road to a near empty, but very grand, post office. The two buildings would be connected underground. Penn station’s 650,000 daily passengers would enjoy decreased congestion, increased train capacity and natural light. Mr Cuomo says most of the work for the new “Empire Station” would be paid for by private developers. The expanded station is one of more than a dozen proposals Mr Cuomo announced in the run-up to his combined State of the State and budget address on January 13th. They ranged from the badly needed (a new line for the Long Island Railroad) to the fanciful (a tunnel under the Long Island Sound connecting New York to Connecticut). They also include redesigning 30 subway stations, a $1 billion expansion of Manhattan’s Javits convention centre and upgrades on buses and trains. The governor intends to revitalise several airports as well as investing $22 billion in bridges and roads upstate. He has pledged $5 billion toward a new train tunnel under the Hudson River, the first new rail tunnel connecting New York and New Jersey in a century. Altogether the plans will cost around $100 billion. “It was Christmas in January,” says Doug Muzzio, a political scientist at Baruch College. Mr Cuomo is yet to specify where all the money will come from, but if that small detail is settled the plans would amount to the biggest statewide investment in infrastructure in decades. Tom Wright of the Regional Plan Association, a think-tank, reckons that, while not all the ideas are good, it is both novel and welcome to have a governor planning on this scale. Since Nelson Rockefeller, who began the original World Trade Centre in the 1960s, New York’s governors have largely been timid developers. Before then, New York had a long history of thinking big and building for the future (see table). Manhattan’s street grid was designed for 1m people at a time when the population barely topped 100,000. The subway began operating a century ago when much of the city was still farmland. More recently, Michael Bloomberg, a former mayor, introduced PlaNYC, a 25-year blueprint for enlarging the city, in 2007. Under his watch, more than a third of the city was rezoned (ie, reallocated for alternative uses). Constructive one-upmanship: The tallest skyscrapers in each year since 1885 The infrastructure plan comes at a time when only half of voters view Mr Cuomo favourably. He has been in a public fight with Bill de Blasio, New York’s mayor, for months. He was under federal investigation for over a year. Mr Cuomo had set up an anti-corruption panel staffed by prosecutors that was supposed to look into the abuse of expense accounts by local politicians. Before this body had done its work, Mr Cuomo shut it down, a move that attracted the interest of the feds. On January 11th Preet Bharara, New York’s federal attorney, announced that he would not be prosecuting the governor. Mr Cuomo wants to leave a lasting impression, says Nicole Gelinas of the Manhattan Institute, a think-tank, “but there’s a danger in announcing too many things at once.” The splurge could raise construction costs and mean skimping on maintenance. Existing projects, such as the Second Avenue subway line need funding; the replacement for the Tappan Zee Bridge is not yet complete. Mr Cuomo has lately taken to invoking the spirit of Robert Moses, a planner who both shaped and scarred 20th-century New York. One of Moses’s talents was an ability to find money for his schemes. Mr Cuomo needs some of that.School-free drug zone SOME schools have black mould creeping up the walls; at others, mushrooms sprout from them. At Palmer Park Preparatory Academy, pieces of the ceiling are falling on pupils’ heads while rats run around. Jerry L. White Centre High School has no heating. Western International High School does not have enough books for its pupils, who are crammed into classes of up to 45 children. One reason for this is that of the $7,450-per-pupil grant the school district will receive this year, $4,400 will be spent on debt servicing and benefits for retired teachers, according to the Citizens Research Council, a Michigan think-tank. Listening to the complaints of Detroit’s public-school teachers, it is hard not have some sympathy for those who staged a “sickout” (calling in sick) on January 11th, closing 64 schools. Galvanised by the teachers’ strike, Mike Duggan, the mayor of Detroit, visited some public schools and admitted that he was disturbed by what he saw in some of them, which included four-year olds sitting in their coats in a classroom because it was so cold. Mr Duggan implored lawmakers in Lansing, Michigan’s state capital, to do something. Michigan is different from other states, such as neighbouring Illinois, where the largest single source of funding is local property taxes. Since 1994 it has funded its state schools mainly through state sales and income taxes. This gives the state a big say on how schools are run. Detroit’s public schools have been on life-support since 2009, when the state appointed the first of four emergency managers. The latest one, Darnell Earley, is now battling with a Detroit Public Schools (DPS) debt of over $3.5 billion, which includes nearly $1.9 billion in employee legacy costs (such as unfunded pension liabilities) and cash-flow borrowing, as well as $1.7 billion in multi-year bonds and state loans. For the fourth time since 2009, the DPS last year ranked last among big cities for fourth- and eighth-graders (children aged 8-9 and 13-14) in the National Assessment of Educational Progress, a school-evaluation programme mandated by Congress. The school system has been haemorrhaging pupils at an alarming rate. Pupil numbers fell from 141,000 in 2005 to 46,000 this year. Many of them have moved to charter schools: the majority of Detroit’s schoolchildren now attend state-funded but privately managed charter schools. With its students leaving in droves, the DPS cut staff from 15,700 in 2005 to 6,000 last year and closed scores of schools. But the system’s fixed costs remain high because of its former size. With its monthly debt-service payments about to jump by millions, Michelle Zdrodowski of the DPS recently warned that the system will run out of cash in April. Lawmakers in Lansing have failed to agree on a rescue plan. Governor Rick Snyder, a Republican, has a draft bill that would create a debt-free DPS, run by a board appointed mainly by him, and a shell that assumes the debt. He also wants to shut down poorly performing charter and traditional schools. His plan has not been popular with bail-out-weary lawmakers, as it would come at a cost of at least $715m. And the governor’s fellow Republicans in Lansing are not keen on his plans to mess with charter schools. Michigan’s constitution proclaims primary and high-school education to be a right: 50,000 children are about to find out what that actually means.LOS ANGELES is by far the biggest market missing a team from one of America’s three major sports: football, baseball and basketball (see chart). Having gone 21 years without a National Football League (NFL) team, it has suddenly been graced with three suitors: the St Louis Rams, the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders, though it will have to settle for just two. The Rams and Raiders used to call it home, but left in 1995 when the cities of St Louis and Oakland offered them taxpayer money to help cover their stadium costs, an act of generosity they must now be regretting. On January 12th the NFL announced that the first team headed for Los Angeles would be the St Louis Rams. According to The Tax Payers Protection Alliance, an NGO, 29 out of 31 NFL stadiums have received public subsidies to help cover construction and renovation costs since 1995. NFL teams argue that this is justified because their presence drives consumer spending, but the academic literature says otherwise: economists argue that in the absence of sports teams, consumers would simply spend their money on other forms of entertainment. Any public subsidies for football stadiums are effectively transfers of wealth from taxpayers to NFL owners and athletes. Professional football teams don’t need the help: according to Forbes, a magazine, the average NFL team makes $76m a year in profit, with a very healthy 22% operating margin. One tactic commonly used by NFL owners to extort local governments is threatening to move to another city. That a city as desirable Los Angeles was without a football team made the threats all the more credible. One team, the Minnesota Vikings, managed to extract $500m of taxpayer money to build a new stadium based in part on such methods. Because the NFL has a fixed number of teams, cities wishing to serve as hosts have had to bend over backwards to accommodate them. That was certainly the case with the city of St Louis, which tried to entice the Rams to stay by offering $477m of public money towards building a new stadium. What was different this time around was that the Rams never had any intention of staying. Stan Kroenke, the Rams’ owner, has made far more ambitious plans, purchasing 300 acres of land in Los Angeles. In addition to a new football stadium, Mr Kroenke also plans to build a hotel, housing, retail and office spaces, all without taking public money. The Rams’ privately funded move to Los Angeles is a positive sign for those worried about wasteful public spending, and certainly reduces the amount of leverage that NFL owners will have over city governments in future. It does not, however, signal an end to the ruse. Neil deMause, co-author of “Field of Schemes”, notes that large, rich markets like Los Angeles are few in number. Smaller cities have less leverage. Assuming the Chargers decide to join the Rams in Los Angeles, the Raiders will be left in the lurch. Will they move to another city like San Antonio, or will they shake down Oakland city government?Unfree at last ON THE evidence of Sean Penn’s interview with him, published in Rolling Stone magazine, Joaquín Guzmán, Mexico’s most successful exporter of narcotics to the United States, is not a thoughtful man. If he were, he would reflect on the many ironies that attend his recapture on January 8th, after two escapes in 15 years from high-security prisons. Mr Guzmán knew he had a good story to tell, which is why in October he met Mr Penn, a Hollywood actor, in his jungle hideout in Mexico’s drug-producing “Golden Triangle”. His first escape, in 2001, was reportedly in a prison laundry cart; his second, in July 2015, was through a mile-long tunnel, built by engineers whom he had sent to Germany to learn the craft, he told Mr Penn. Between relatively brief spells in prison Mr Guzmán, better known as El Chapo (Shorty), bloodily built his Sinaloa drug gang into Mexico’s most powerful. He was apparently hoping that his showbiz contacts would lead not just to an article but to a film. In an unintended plot twist, El Chapo’s contacts with Mr Penn and Kate del Castillo, a Mexican actress, helped the Mexican authorities get a fix on his position. Eventually, they closed in on him in a safe house in Los Mochis, a coastal town. Five of his henchmen were killed in a shootout with marines. Mr Guzmán fled the fight through another tunnel, but was apprehended on the town’s outskirts. That will make for an even better movie. Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, and American law-enforcement authorities, which are keenly interested in El Chapo, must now decide how to make the most of his downfall. The signs are that they will do so together.   Mr Guzmán’s second escape, not much more than a year after his recapture, was a low point for Mr Peña. It came after the president’s tone-deaf response to the killing of 43 students from Ayotzinapa, in the southern state of Guerrero, and allegations of a conflict of interest, denied by the president, connected to a house purchase by his wife. His approval ratings fell to levels lower than those of any recent president. The officials in charge of the prison from which Mr Guzmán escaped were arrested; Mr Peña’s security chief lost his job. The recapture in Los Mochis will help accelerate a revival of the president’s fortunes that was already under way. The government has avoided disasters recently. Mr Peña’s economic reforms are beginning to help ordinary people. Mobile-phone charges have fallen thanks to measures to increase telecoms competition, for example. His poll ratings are climbing. El Chapo’s arrest should also encourage closer co-operation between Mexican and American law-enforcement authorities. That relationship suffered after Mr Peña became president in 2012. He drastically scaled back his predecessor’s policy of extraditing drug bosses to the United States, and imposed centralised control on contacts between Mexican law-enforcement agents and American ones. After El Chapo’s second escape, Mr Peña changed tack. Extraditions were stepped back up. Among the deportees was Edgar “La Barbie” Valdez Villarreal, who is nearly as notorious as Mr Guzmán. He pleaded guilty to narcotics charges in a court in Atlanta this month. The two countries’ attorneys-general, both appointed last year, are co-operating. Mexican authorities say El Chapo will be extradited to the United States, beyond reach of his collaborators and Mexico’s corruptible prison guards, although it could take years. For most Mexican crime victims the drug lord’s capture will not provide much relief. The influence of the Sinaloa gang, a traditional drug-distributing operation, may well wane. But that is likely to open opportunities for more dangerous groups, such as the Zetas and the Jalisco New Generation gang, which make their money largely from extortion and kidnapping, says Alejandro Schtulmann of EMPRA, a political-risk consulting firm. El Chapo was an American obsession, but the priority for Mexican authorities should be groups that terrorise the locals, he says. Mr Peña, who tweeted “mission accomplished” after Mr Guzmán was nabbed, deserves his moment of celebration. Now he must press ahead with the fight against lawlessness and corruption.
