THE sign above the door at Cong Caphe, a hip coffee shop in downtown Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, bears a bright-red communist star. Inside, the brick walls are covered in memorabilia from the era of the Vietnam war: rusty canteens, an old transistor radio and snapshots of Viet Cong soldiers trudging off to fight the Americans. Yet the aesthetic is not so much patriotic as a cheeky send-up of communist ideology. The 20- and 30-something Vietnamese who drink here, spending the fruits of an increasingly capitalist economy, feel far removed from the hardships suffered by their parents and grandparents, while they applaud ever-closer ties with America. With its scooter-driving young and an economy growing at nearly 7% a year, Vietnam seems like a country in a hurry. In many ways, the ruling Communist Party is trying to keep up. Not far from the coffee shop, windows the size of a cathedral’s illuminate the new building housing the National Assembly, Vietnam’s parliament. Sunbeams pour from skylights into the marble foyer. In a one-party state where symbols matter, the building’s airiness suggests that the rulers are trying to project an image of modernity and transparency. Yet as Nguyen Vu Nam, a manager at Cong Caphe, points out, young Vietnamese do not pay much heed to who runs the party. Personnel changes among a generally grey and faceless collective leadership have never seemed to matter much. This month party bigwigs will make a fresh bid for relevance. On January 20th they convene for a five-yearly congress, the highlight of Vietnam’s political calendar. More than half of the 16-member Politburo, the party’s ruling council, are meant to retire, to be replaced by younger officials. The country’s three most senior jobs—of state president, prime minister and party general secretary—are all up for grabs. That so much remains mysterious so close to the event suggests that this year’s negotiations are unusually tense. The man to watch is Nguyen Tan Dung, Vietnam’s prime minister for ten years and probably its shrewdest and least uncharismatic politician. At 66, Mr Dung is past the party’s usual retirement age. But he is said to want to remain in high office by taking the role of party secretary, while perhaps relinquishing his current office to an ally. Mr Dung would doubtless reinvigorate a job which has lately begun to look dusty. He may wish to carve out an authority that begins to approach the dominance enjoyed by Xi Jinping in China. But such a move would be unusual. It would rattle a political system which, until now, has discouraged domineering personalities and has valued consensus. Mr Dung’s backers say that Vietnam’s present challenges call for strong and consistent leadership. The economy is much mended after bad debts from cosseted state enterprises threatened the banking system. The country stands to gain from a sheaf of trade agreements negotiated in 2015, including the American-led Trans-Pacific Partnership. Yet progress towards many essential reforms, including the privatisation of state firms, has been slow. The economy is overdependent on commodities, especially coffee and rice, as well as on foreign investors. It will be essential to broaden and deepen Vietnam’s economy before its biggest present advantage, a young and cheap workforce, is spent. As for politics, managing the country’s tricky relations with China is the biggest challenge. Vietnam is economically dependent on its northern neighbour, with which it has a big and growing trade deficit. At the same time, China’s assertive claims to islands and underwater resources in contested parts of the South China Sea have outraged even moderate Vietnamese. Those born since the country ditched its planned economy in the 1980s are growing more outspoken, for example on social media. Vietnam cannot afford to have bad relations with China, but at the same time its leaders must be seen to be defending Vietnamese territory. Fighting ferrets Most intellectuals paying attention to the party congress would like to see Mr Dung retain some authority, since he has been the strongest voice against Chinese bullying. He is also the clear choice among local and foreign business folk, though for different reasons. They see Mr Dung as behind the flurry of trade deals and recent efforts to lift caps on foreign ownership. They say he is unusually knowledgeable about industry, well-advised by Western-educated staff and knows what investors want to hear. Yet whiffs of cronyism taint the prime minister as much as they do other comrades. His son’s political career has seen suspiciously swift advancement, while a flashy Vietnamese-American son-in-law owns the country’s McDonald’s franchise. Scandals have sprouted at state enterprises that Mr Dung had championed. Nor do civil libertarians think that he is more inclined than other leaders to unshackle the censored press or end the thuggish treatment of dissidents. As the party congress approaches, its outcome appears ever less certain. Mr Dung was once thought a shoo-in for party leader. Yet a loose-knit faction opposed to him may even manage to oust him entirely from the leadership. The fighting springs partly from competing networks of patronage, and partly from modest ideological differences between conservatives and the prime minister’s relatively reformist pals. Some officials worry that Vietnam’s growing chumminess with America will only make China more confrontational. A handful of them even seem to fret that Mr Dung’s liberalising instincts could end up threatening the party’s hold on power. But that would be conjecture. For all the light streaming into the new parliament building, Vietnam’s Communist Party remains a dark sack full of ferrets.Another day in the People’s Paradise A POWERFUL army usually depends on a strong economy. Not in North Korea. Per head, the country has more soldiers than any other: 1.2m out of a population of 25m. As well as a huge conventional arsenal, it also has a dozen nuclear warheads and spends perhaps $3 billion a year on a nuclear programme that involves rocket launches and nuclear tests—the latest took place last week, the fourth since 2006. Yet the performance of the economy over the past four decades has been little sprightlier than that of the Great Leader, Kim Il Sung, since he was embalmed in 1994. North Korea suppresses most economic data. But as far as we know, from the 1950s to the 1970s its economy outgrew capitalist South Korea, as a Stalinist state marshalled all resources towards production. Today the North’s per capita GDP is only one-40th of the South’s—a wretched $600 a year or so, by UN estimates. The blame rests squarely with the Kim dynasty’s ruinous policies. Yet the regime of Kim Jong Un, the third Kim on the throne, pays no penalty for the people’s suffering. Rather, it funnels money to itself, the elites and the nuclear programme. In a recent paper for South Korea’s Asan Institute, Nicholas Eberstadt of the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, DC tries to estimate the scale of North Korea’s economic catastrophe. Given the paucity of data, Mr Eberstadt used “mirror statistics”: estimates of the country’s trade divined from other countries’ records. He then made adjustments for population growth and inflation. It is no straight proxy for output, but useful nonetheless. Mr Eberstadt found that North Korea’s per-capita exports last year were no higher than at their peak in the late 1970s, while per-capita imports were two-fifths lower. North Korea’s economic underperformance is remarkable for a country that is neither a failed state nor at war, he says. What went wrong? The collapse of the Soviet Union, upon which the North had long relied for cheap machinery and oil, certainly hit it hard in the 1990s. Weakened by bad weather, centrally run agricultural production collapsed in the 1990s, leading to a famine in which hundreds of thousands of people died. International sanctions in response to North Korea’s nuclear bomb-testing have also hurt. But the biggest problem, Mr Eberstadt argues, is that North Korea has the worst business environment of any functioning state: worse even than Cuba, Venezuela or Zimbabwe. It has no property rights or rule of law, no legal private trade and a currency prone to confiscation: in 2009 the government wiped out small traders’ savings by declaring old banknotes invalid and swapping only a few for new ones. A striking feature of the North’s economic decline is the quantities of foreign aid that accompanied it. North Korea has a long history of shaking down donors—first the Soviet Union, then, after 1991, America and South Korea, and most recently China. The total amount of transfers is impossible to quantify. But Mr Eberstadt estimates the sum from the North’s two biggest historical backers, Russia and China, by taking its balance of trade deficits with each of them as an approximation of net resource flows into the North—assuming that the surplus is a debt that will not be repaid. That surplus amounts to $45 billion, in today’s money, between 1960 and 2013. The money seems to have helped the Kims live like god-kings and still have enough left over to pay the army, the secret police and various suppliers of nuclear materials. Yet Rüdiger Frank, an economist at the University of Vienna, thinks that increased supplies of hard currency may also have helped the informal markets for food and basic supplies that burgeoned as a response to the famine. These black markets are the single most benign transformation in North Korea in the past few years. Most North Koreans now depend on them for their livelihoods. The state usually turns a blind eye, since its central planning system, which is supposed to apportion goods, has broken down. Besides, the elites demand their cut. Fantasy reunification: What the two Koreas would gain from each other if Kim Jong Un's regime fell Some see in such markets the seeds of deeper economic reform. And Mr Kim seems keener than his father to promise prosperity to his people, and even a modicum of leisure. North Korea’s capital, Pyongyang, now boasts a dolphinarium and a water park, and even a ski resort to its east. As high rises go up, the capital’s fashionable sip espressos in upmarket bars. Yet the regime’s old habits are unchanged. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the state is squeezing the donju, North Korea’s new successful class of traders. According to DailyNK, a news source with informants in the North, donju are worried that they will be forced to hand over hard-currency savings to make up for the “massive dollar bomb”—ie, the expensive nuclear test—that was detonated last week. In the absence of direction from the top, there are limits to how much can change. A new policy that seems to have been quietly rolled out from 2013 allowed farmers to retain 30% of a new production target, plus any excess over the target, to sell on informal markets. Yet local officials are not distributing the promised shares, perhaps to make up a shortfall at co-operatives, according to a report by Radio Free Asia. Meanwhile, the few foreign investors brave enough to enter North Korea must contend with an unpredictable and predatory state. In November the biggest such, Orascom, an Egyptian telecoms company that set up the North’s first 3G mobile network, said that it thought it had lost control of its joint venture, and has not been able to repatriate its profits. China remains North Korea’s lifeline. Most products for sale in the North’s informal markets are from China. Last year North Korea sold over $1 billion of minerals to China, chiefly coal. As China’s economy slows and the price of coal falls, the North will suffer. But the regime has a solution: putting its scant resources into military power. This serves as a “battering-ram for international extortion”, as Mr Eberstadt puts it. Alas, it seems to work.Whose side are you on? MOST Australians have heard of wombats, but few could place the numbat. Both marsupials are among 315 mammal species that roamed Australia at the time of the first European settlement in the late 18th century. The wombat has thrived. The smaller numbat, once widespread, clings on in only a few colonies in Western Australia. There it is listed as endangered, because of predation by feral cats. At least it survives. Australia has one of the world’s highest rates of mammal extinctions—29 have been recorded over more than two centuries. Feral cats are reckoned to be culprits in 27 of those disappearances: among them the desert bandicoot, the crescent nailtail wallaby and the large-eared hopping mouse. Cats probably arrived in Australia on British ships carrying convicts. Unlike the convicts, their descendants have grown wilder and more menacing. The feral-cat population today is estimated at between 4m and 20m, most of them prowling outback habitats. They are often huge, weighing 15 kilograms. And they eat perhaps 75m Australian animals a day. A parliamentary inquiry and a scientific report on mammals called for governments to step in. Last year Greg Hunt, the federal environment minister, launched a “threatened species strategy” to stop mammals’ decline. Fire, loss of habitat and foxes, another alien predator, have played a part. But, Mr Hunt says, feral cats are “the number-one killers”. Ten cat-free sanctuaries are planned across Australia over the next four years. The Australian Wildlife Conservancy, an NGO, is to start fencing 650 square kilometres (250 square miles) in April to create the biggest one at Newhaven, in the desert in Northern Territory. Atticus Fleming, the outfit’s head, calls this region the “epicentre of the extinction crisis”. His colleagues aim to reintroduce several threatened mammals there, including the mala, a winsome creature resembling a tiny wallaby, which disappeared from mainland Australia 25 years ago. The project will also give jobs to the local Ngalia Warlpiri aboriginal clan. Its senior women, says Mr Fleming, are “extremely good cat hunters”. The government wants 2m feral cats culled across Australia by 2020. It is funding trials on cat-specific baits, as well as an app allowing humans who venture into the outback to report cat sightings. Mr Hunt insists the baits would work “humanely”. If they eventually killed even half the cat population, “it would be the most important action for Australian wildlife in 100 years.” The planned felicide has greatly upset some cat people, notably Brigitte Bardot, a French former sex goddess, and Morrissey, a miserable British singer. But conservationists say killing cats and fencing enclosures have already saved several species from extinction, including the Gilbert’s potoroo in Western Australia and the bridled nailtail wallaby in New South Wales. Mr Fleming admits an Australia free of feral cats is a long way off: “But the fence strategy can buy time until a silver bullet is found.”CHINA’S biggest military shake-up in a generation began with a deliberate echo of Mao Zedong. Late in 2014 President Xi Jinping went to Gutian, a small town in the south where, 85 years before, Mao had first laid down the doctrine that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is the armed force not of the government or the country but of the Communist Party. Mr Xi stressed the same law to the assembled brass: the PLA is still the party’s army; it must uphold its “revolutionary traditions” and maintain absolute loyalty to its political masters. His words were a prelude to sweeping reforms in the PLA that have unfolded in the past month, touching almost every military institution. The aim of these changes is twofold—to strengthen Mr Xi’s grip on the 2.3m-strong armed forces, which are embarrassingly corrupt at the highest level, and to make the PLA a more effective fighting force, with a leadership structure capable of breaking down the barriers between rival commands that have long hampered its modernisation efforts. It has taken a long time since the meeting in Gutian for these reforms to unfold; but that reflects both their importance and their difficulty. The PLA itself has long admitted that it is lagging behind. It may have plenty of new weapons—it has just started to build a second aircraft-carrier, for instance—but it is failing to make effective use of them because of outdated systems of command and control. Before any substantial change in this area, however, Mr Xi felt it necessary to strengthen the party’s control over the PLA, lest it resist his reforms and sink back into a morass of money-grubbing. The reforms therefore begin with the main instrument of party control, the Central Military Commission (CMC), which is chaired by Mr Xi. On January 11th the CMC announced that the PLA’s four headquarters—the organisations responsible for recruiting troops, procuring weapons, providing logistics and ensuring political supervision—had been split up, slimmed down and absorbed into the commission. Once these were among the most powerful organisations in the PLA, operating almost as separate fiefs. Now they have become CMC departments. Power to the party The political headquarters was the body through which the party kept an eye on the ranks and ensured they were up to speed on Maoist texts and the party’s latest demands. The loss of its autonomous status may suggest that the party’s role is being downgraded. Far from it. Now the party’s CMC (there is also a state one, which exists only in name) will be better able to keep watch. The body’s 15 new departments will include not only departments for politics but also for logistics, personnel management and fighting corruption. Mr Xi has already turned his guns on graft, imprisoning dozens of generals. The second reform has been to put the various services on a more equal footing. The land forces have hitherto reigned supreme. That may have been fine when the PLA’s main job was to defend the country against an invasion across its land borders (until the 1980s the Soviet Union was considered the biggest threat). But now China has military ambitions in the South China Sea and beyond, and wants the ability to challenge American naval and air power in the western Pacific. A recent editorial in the Liberation Army Daily, a PLA mouthpiece, berated the armed forces for their “army-centric mindset”. In addition to those for the navy and air force, a separate command has now been created for the army, which had previously run everything. On December 31st the CMC also announced the formation of a command responsible for space and cyberwarfare, as well as one for ballistic and cruise missiles (previously known as the Second Artillery Force, part of the army). There is also a new joint command with overall control of the various services, a little like America’s joint chiefs of staff. Big changes are also afoot in regional command structures. China used to be divided into seven military regions. These were powerful and relatively self-contained; sharing or swapping troops and equipment was rare. Now, according to reports in the South China Morning Post, a newspaper in Hong Kong, the number will be reduced to five. Troops will be recruited and trained by the various services before regional deployment. This will ensure greater central control over the regions. China has been talking about military reform for decades, but change has been glacial. Opposition within the armed forces has been intense. “If [reform] is not done properly,” wrote Sun Kejia and Han Xiao of the PLA National Defence University last month, “it could affect the stability of the armed forces or even all of society.” (The article was promptly removed from the Liberation Army Daily website.) Demobbed soldiers could make trouble—Mr Xi wants the number of troops to be cut by 300,000. State firms have been ordered to reserve 5% of jobs for laid-off veterans. The recent reforms are more extensive than most Western observers had expected after the Gutian conference. But even so, they are incomplete. The army still holds sway over some appointments (all five chiefs of the new regional commands are army generals, for instance). The PLA has traditionally given higher status to combat units than to those providing communications, logistics, transport and the like, a misplaced emphasis in an age when information and communications are crucial in warfare. The reforms do little to correct that bias. Moreover, many details about them remain unclear. No one knows, for example, where the troop cuts will come from or what units will go into the new space and cyberwarfare command. The first result of the reforms is likely to be confusion in the ranks, until the new system settles down. Dennis Blasko, an American observer of the PLA, says no one can be sure of the results until they are tested in battle. Amid the murk, only one man clearly seems to have got his way: Mr Xi.Lego produced its first interlocking bricks in 1949, the year the Chinese Communist Party founded the People’s Republic. While the former has generally inspired creativity, the latter is typically more fearful of it. But last year Ai Weiwei (pictured), a Chinese artist, accused Lego of censorship when it refused his large order because it could not approve of using bricks “for political works”. He planned an artwork on dissidents. On January 12th Lego backed down, saying it would no longer query a buyer’s purpose. The reversal comes too late for Mr Ai: members of the public have already donated millions of bricks, many of them dropped into second-hand BMWs set up by the artist as collection points. He must have enough by now to build a Great Wall.Great brain, great prawns A GIANT wooden bust of Confucius greets visitors to the Luweifang restaurant in Beijing, where diners may feast on “literary ginkgo”, braised hog rectum and other delicacies said to be part of a centuries-old culinary tradition developed by the ancient philosopher’s family. The restaurant, set up in 2011, is one of dozens across the country purporting to offer such delights. Now China is preparing to bid for UNESCO to register Confucius’s family cuisine as part of the “intangible cultural heritage of humanity”. China has already logged Mongolian throat singing, mathematical calculations on the abacus and a form of puppetry with UNESCO, as well as more prominent arts such as Peking opera and acupuncture. Confucian cookery would not be the first culinary entrant: washoku, traditional Japanese cuisine, attained this status in 2013, and North and South Korea have each separately listed kimchi, the seasoned, fermented vegetables beloved on both sides of the demilitarised zone. Even the “Mediterranean diet” is catalogued. Confucian gastronomy was included in China’s list of cultural treasures in 2011 (joining Chinese yo-yos, some folk tales and roast duck). Yet even within China Confucian fare is rarely considered distinctive. Foodies variously divide Chinese cookery into four, eight or ten regional schools, but the philosopher’s tradition is not among them. “The Analects”, a book of his sayings, praises the scholar who “does not seek the gratification of his appetite” and abjures indulgent banquets. The culinary tradition reportedly emerged from entertaining visiting emperors and high-ranking officials to the sage’s birthplace—rather than feeding his own gluttony. Registering Confucius’s family tradition coincides with a wider attempt to standardise national cuisine. Last summer the government in Inner Mongolia, a northern province, published the official method for cooking 100 local dishes. Xi’an, home to the famous terracotta warriors (a UNESCO world heritage site), wants to publish recipes for the city’s five most famous foods, to guard against distasteful rip-offs. They follow a 19th-century tradition for codifying French haute cuisine. The appeal of Confucian fare is more political than gastronomic. Mao vilified the sage as a reactionary, but Communist Party leaders have since rehabilitated him. President Xi Jinping has stressed Confucius’s emphasis on order and hierarchy. But the culinary tradition—whatever its provenance—may prove of limited use. Since Mr Xi’s anti-corruption campaign has choked the demand for fancy banquets and pricey delicacies, Confucius’s disciples could yet again fall on the wrong side of history.WHEN Egyptian politicians discussed sabotaging the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam in 2013, they naturally assumed it was a private meeting. But amid all the scheming, and with a big chuckle, Muhammad Morsi, then president, informed his colleagues that their discussion was being broadcast live on a state-owned television channel. Embarrassment apart, it was already no secret that Egypt wanted to stop the largest hydroelectric project in Africa. When Ethiopia completes construction of the dam in 2017, it will stand 170 metres tall (550 feet) and 1.8km (1.1 miles) wide. Its reservoir will be able to hold more than the volume of the entire Blue Nile, the tributary on which it sits (see map). And it will produce 6,000 megawatts of electricity, more than double Ethiopia’s current measly output, which leaves three out of four people in the dark. This boon for Ethiopia is the bane of Egypt, which for millennia has seen the Nile as a lifeline snaking across its vast desert. The river still provides nearly all of Egypt’s water. Egypt claims two-thirds of that flow based on a treaty it signed with Sudan in 1959. But even that is no longer enough to satisfy the growing population and sustain thirsty crops. Annual water supply per person has fallen by well over half since 1970. The UN warns of a looming crisis. Officials in Egypt, while loth to fix leaky pipes, moan that the dam will leave them high and dry. Herodotus, an ancient Greek historian, called the fertile land of Egypt the Nile’s gift. Countless Egyptian leaders have rattled their sabres in defence of the water supply. This has soured relations with the eight other countries that share the Nile basin. Most of them have agreed to co-operate with each other, dismissing another old treaty which, Egypt claims, gives it a veto over upstream projects. Only recently has the Egyptian government adopted a more conciliatory tone. In March of last year Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, who ousted Mr Morsi in a coup, joined Hailemariam Desalegn, Ethiopia’s prime minister, and Omar al-Bashir, Sudan’s president, to sign a declaration that tacitly blesses construction of the dam so long as there is no “significant harm” to downstream countries. The agreement was affirmed in December, when the three countries settled on two French firms to study the dam’s potential impact. That step is long overdue. The impact studies were meant to be completed last year, but bickering over the division of labour, and the withdrawal of one firm, caused delays. Many Egyptians believe that Ethiopia is stalling so that the dam becomes a fait accompli. Already half-finished, experts worry that it may be too late to correct any problems. Representatives of the three countries are now meeting to discuss “technical” issues. The contracts for studying the dam are not yet signed. A sense of mistrust hangs over the dam’s ultimate use. Ethiopia insists that it will produce only power and that the water pushing its turbines (less some evaporation during storage) will ultimately come out the other side. But Egypt fears it will also be used for irrigation, cutting downstream supply. Experts are sceptical. “It makes no technological or economic sense [for Ethiopia] to irrigate land with that water,” as it would involve pumping it back upstream, says Kenneth Strzepek of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A more reasonable concern is over the dam’s large reservoir. If filled too quickly, it would for a time significantly reduce Egypt’s water supply and affect the electricity-generating capacity of its own Aswan Dam. But the Ethiopian government faces pressure to see a quick return on its investment. The project, which is mostly self-funded, costs $4.8 billion. Some experts say filling the reservoir could take seven years. But “having a fixed time to fill it may not be the best way to do it, because there can be extremely dry years and extremely wet years,” says Kevin Wheeler of Oxford University. He recommends releasing a fixed amount of water from the dam each year, leaving the reservoir to fill at a pace set by nature. A potential wild card in the negotiations is Sudan, which long sided with Egypt in opposition to the dam, some 20km from its border. But as the potential benefits to Sudan have become clear, it has backed Ethiopia. Short on energy itself, Sudan will receive some of the power produced by the dam. By stabilising the Nile’s flow, it will also allow Sudan to prevent flooding, consume more water and increase agricultural output (once old farming methods are updated). Currently much of the country’s allocation of water under the 1959 treaty is actually consumed by Egyptians. To their chagrin, the river will no longer gush past their southern neighbours during monsoon season and end up in Lake Nasser, the huge reservoir behind the Aswan Dam. How much water Sudan uses in the future, and other variables such as changes in rainfall and water quality, should determine how the dam is operated. That will require more co-operation and a willingness to compromise. Disagreement between Egypt and Sudan over such things as the definition of “significant harm” bodes ill. But all three countries will benefit if they work together, claims Mr Strzepek, citing the dam’s capacity to store water for use in drought years and its potential to produce cheap energy for export once transmission lines are built. The Renaissance Dam is merely the latest test of countries’ willingness to share water. There may soon be more difficulties. Ethiopia plans to build other dams on the river, which could further affect downstream supply. Sudan has promised foreign investors an abundance of water for irrigation. If Egypt is made to feel at the mercy of its neighbours, it may not have finished rattling its sabre.TWO gleaming new towers rise from the dry savannah of Gaborone, Botswana’s capital. The country’s tallest buildings are billed by their developers as offering the city’s residents “their first true glimpse into the benefits of inner-city dwelling”. No doubt these stylish apartments make comfortable pads—particularly for the mistresses of wealthy businessmen who are installed in quite a few—but building upwards rather than outwards seems rather odd: at four people per square kilometre, Botswana is one of the world’s least densely populated countries. Yet Gaborone’s small city centre—originally designed for 20,000 people, a tenth of the current number—is hemmed in by communally owned tribal land that is almost impossible to buy and develop. It must grow up or not at all. Botswana’s wider economy and polity are similarly constrained by outmoded traditions and laws, even though at first blush the country is doing astoundingly well. Since its independence from Britain in 1966, Botswana has been one of Africa’s most stable and prosperous democracies. Elections are so peaceful, fair—barring a little gerrymandering—and boring that the country is held up as a model for Africa. The Ibrahim Index of governance, for instance, ranks it third among African states. More impressive is that this was achieved in the face of a potential “resource curse” from diamonds, which were discovered in 1967. Instead of perverting politics, the riches Botswana has gathered as the world’s second-largest diamond producer (see chart) have paid for infrastructure and development. Income per person has quadrupled over 35 years and the country has tackled challenges including one of the world’s highest HIV rates. Yet Botswana’s complacency is being sorely tested. In the short term it faces the worst market in “living memory”, in the words of one diamantaire. Diamond mining accounts for a quarter of Botswana’s economy and it is being hurt by a sharp downturn in demand almost everywhere—particularly in China, where a clampdown on corruption has curbed public displays of wealth. Analysts reckon that De Beers, which digs up most of Botswana’s gems through a joint venture with the government, and Alrosa, a Russian firm, have slashed sales of rough diamonds by as much as half. Despite this brake on supply, diamond prices have still fallen by close to 30%. Botswana’s economy, which has expanded by 5% a year over the past decade, probably grew by half that rate in 2015 and is unlikely to do much better than 3% this year. Having balanced its books for the previous four years, the government ran a small deficit in 2015 and will probably do so again this year. This economic shock, mild as it may be, is but a taste of the adjustments that will have to be made as the country runs out of diamonds. That is likely to happen within the next 15-20 years, analysts reckon. Diamond mines are not forever. Botswana has made some progress in diversifying its economy, about half of which was directly tied to mining in the early 2000s. Much of this growth has come from poorly-paid service industries, but Botswana manufactures almost nothing and exports little other than diamonds. It needs not only to create manufacturing jobs to reduce an official unemployment rate of almost 20% but also to find new sources of export earnings. Yet its efforts to promote new industries are hobbled by labour policies that are meant to promote the employment of locals. Bosses complain that it is almost impossible to get work permits for skilled foreigners. Some talk of firms having to close because their expatriate founders could not renew permits. Another test will be for the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP), which has run the country for five decades. In national elections in 2014 it lost its outright majority for the first time, though it was still able to form a government because the opposition was divided. If its rivals were to unite, the BDP could be pushed out of government in 2019, not least because it has failed to deal with water and power shortages in the capital. As its grip on power is weakening, the BDP is beginning to dabble with repression. Journalists complain of arrests and harassment, while the independence of the judiciary is under attack. With its well-educated people, Botswana could live up to its promise as a model that combines democracy and good governance. But if it falters, it will struggle to attract the investment it needs to put the sparkle back in its economy.
