ACCORDING to America’s secretary of state, John Kerry, “Implementation Day” for the Iran nuclear accord could be just “days away if all goes well”. He was not expecting two US Navy patrol boats and their crews to be seized by Iranian Revolutionary Guards on January 12th after unintentionally entering Iranian waters near an island naval base. But with both sides determined to smooth things over, the boats and the sailors were released the following day. As long as there are no new shocks, the big day looks set to be announced in the next few days—sooner than was expected when the deal was struck last July. Iran will be judged to have complied with all its obligations in dismantling those parts of its nuclear programme which offered a path to building a bomb. In return the UN, America and the EU will drop or suspend all their nuclear-related sanctions. At the same time, Iran will apply the Additional Protocol of its safeguards agreement (subject to ratification by its parliament, the Majlis) with the International Atomic Energy Agency, a measure which gives the agency’s inspectors access to materials and sites beyond declared nuclear facilities. Iran is very near to completing the removal of some 14,000 uranium-enrichment centrifuges. The core of the Arak heavy-water reactor, which had the potential to produce plutonium, was reportedly taken out on January 11th and is being filled with cement. Most of Iran’s stockpile of low-enriched uranium was sent to Russia and Kazakhstan in late December. Nuclear proliferation experts are amazed at the speed with which Iran has acted. Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, and the head of its Atomic Energy Organisation, Ali Akbar Salehi, have appeared determined to navigate all obstacles, even supposed red lines drawn by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, to get the job done. A priority for them was to get the sanctions lifted before Majlis elections on February 26th. After more than two years in office, President Hassan Rohani will cite the achievement as evidence that his policy of engagement with the West has worked, ending a crisis that had left Iran’s economy in ruins. He will urge voters to back moderate candidates who support him and to weaken hardline factions that were opposed to the negotiations. Yet there are still important players in the regime, such as the Revolutionary Guards, who remain hostile to the deal and are prepared to test the West’s commitment to it. The IAEA received minimal co-operation in preparing its report, published in early December, on the possible military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme. It concluded that Iran had a parallel clandestine weapons programme until 2003 and that some aspects of it continued until 2009. But there was no admission of this by Iran and no access to the scientists the agency wanted to talk to. It was also unable to carry out verification procedures at the Parchin military complex, where it believes there was an explosives chamber. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal Western diplomats decided that Iran’s obfuscations were predictable and it was time to move on. That raises questions about how much Iran may get away with in the future. Gary Samore, a former White House arms-control adviser now at Harvard, says that the Iranians’ caginess about their past nuclear weapons-dabbling was a reminder that the deal was not a “strategic solution to the nuclear problem but something purely transactional”. The response to an Iranian test of a nuclear-capable ballistic missile in October that violated a UN Security Council resolution was also less than resolute. Mr Samore says that it was clearly intended by the Guards to provoke a reaction from America that would give Iranian critics of the deal the chance to stall or kill it. Persuaded by Mr Kerry, who had his ear bent by Mr Zarif, not to rise to the bait, Barack Obama flip-flopped over slapping on new sanctions, first indicating he would, but then withdrawing the threat. As for the prospects of the deal holding, Mr Samore thinks the Iranians have an incentive to co-operate for the time being, as they will benefit by up to $100 billion from the unfreezing of assets. But if other benefits, such as increased oil revenues, are slow to come, this might not last. A more immediate threat will come from whoever is the next American president. A Republican could choose to sabotage the deal with new sanctions, while even Hillary Clinton, says Mr Samore, will need to show there is a new sheriff in town if Iran’s behaviour in non-nuclear areas (missile tests, the unjustified imprisonment of American citizens, support for the Syrian regime and abuse of human rights) does not change. Getting to Implementation Day has been surprisingly smooth. What comes after will be a lot harder.All work and nothing else makes Magufuli hard to mock WITH his campaign slogan “work and nothing else”, you might think John Magufuli, Tanzania’s new president, would be a poor subject for satire. Yet austerity can provide a few laughs. In his first few weeks, the new president cancelled independence day celebrations, went litter-picking and turned up at the ministry of finance to make sure staff were actually coming to work. The result, on Twitter, was a hashtag, #WhatWouldMagufuliDo, full of pictures of money-saving ideas: a wooden cart acting as a wedding limousine; a vanity mirror attached with duct tape to a car to replace a broken wing mirror. The joshing was mostly affectionate: Mr Magufuli’s anti-corruption drive is popular. Kenya’s president, Uhuru Kenyatta, comes off rather less well. The joke about Mr Kenyatta—who is known for his many foreign trips—is that when he is in Kenya, he is an important foreign statesman visiting. When the Pope visited Kenya in November, tweeters captioned pictures with jokes about the pontiff welcoming the president. Twitter thus illustrates the fortunes of two of east Africa’s rulers, at least in the view of the middle classes in their countries. And just as in the West, the internet is changing political conversations in Africa. Not all the hashtags are humorous. In Kenya anti-corruption campaigners have begun organising on Twitter. When they are arrested or mistreated by police, the world soon knows. The potential for influencing politics is enormous. In Tanzania’s recent election, over 60% of eligible voters were under the age of 35; almost all sub-Saharan African societies are as young. In countries where age is revered, social media allow young people to make themselves heard. #AfricaTweets: The use of Twitter in Africa Sadly, change is not happening everywhere. In democratic Kenya, 37% of the population had access to the internet in 2014, according to the International Telecommunication Union. In autocratic Ethiopia, however, the figure was just 2%. When Barack Obama visited both countries in July, Kenyan Tweeters produced a flurry of commentary, much of it mocking their own government. Ethiopia’s produced barely a trickle. Tweeple need connections to flourish.FROM inside his headquarters in the southern Saudi city of Najran, Major-General Saad Olyan, the area commander, looks up at the craggy mountains looming over the city and wonders what Yemen’s rebels on the plateau above will do next. They have pushed Saudi forces out of some border posts, and forced the evacuation of more than 7,000 civilians from Saudi villages near the ill-marked frontier. Saudi artillery rhythmically thumps suspected rebel positions. But it has not prevented them from regularly rocketing Najran and other border towns, killing 80 people, 25 of them in Najran. One Katyusha rocket fell a few yards away from General Olyan’s office; the windows were blown out, pitting his walls with shrapnel. Another blew out the glass front of a nearby hotel shortly before it was due to open. A banner with a picture of King Salman and his designated heirs declares forlornly: “We are all soldiers of the homeland.” Residents of the area have fled to safer parts of the city. Kindergartens and homes near the military base lie in ruins. Bar the Pakistani workers obliviously playing cricket, the streets feel like a ghost town. Saudi Arabia’s young defence minister, deputy crown prince and de facto ruler, Mohammed bin Salman, insists he is winning the war. His coalition has retaken Aden, Yemen’s southern port, and 80% of the country, he claims. But many of Yemen’s largest cities—Sana’a, Taiz and Ibb—remain in rebel hands. And with negotiations stalling (the resumption of talks set for January 14th has been indefinitely postponed), officials talk less of an early victory than a protracted war. “We’re looking at conflict management, not resolution,” says a confidant of the prince. “This problem can go on for years.” For all the bluster of Saudi generals who vow to lead their troops into Sana’a if necessary, the campaign now has more limited goals, says the confidant. Saudi Arabia wants to send Iran and its regional clients a message that it will resist their regional push. With Iran holding sway through its proxies in Baghdad, Damascus and Beirut, Saudi Arabia is loth to let a fourth capital, particularly one in its back yard, go Iran’s way. But the campaign is now mostly about blunting the capabilities of the Houthis (a militia of Zaydis, a splinter Shiite sect concentrated in Yemen’s north) and their ally, Ali Abdullah Saleh, who until Saudi Arabia engineered his removal in 2012 was the Arab world’s longest-reigning ruler. Together the Houthis and Mr Saleh make a formidable force. Whereas the former are guerrillas who model themselves on Lebanon’s Hizbullah, the latter commands Yemen’s Republican army, which has been fighting wars (including against the Houthis) for 25 years. Together they wield an arsenal of tanks, ballistic missiles and, at one point, even the odd fighter-jet. Houthi fighters head to battle carrying charms, such as keys and visas to paradise. Their preachers on satellite television call for re-establishing Zaydi rule across the border, not just over the three border provinces the Al Sauds seized in 1934 but even over Mecca farther north. That is implausible given Saudi Arabia’s air power and network of allies. But some Saudis ask how their overfed armed forces would fare should battle-hardened Houthi fighters make even a limited push across the border. It says much about Saudi trepidation that General Olyan limits himself to defending Saudi territory; he says his troops make no attempt to attack the Houthi heartland of Saada governorate, just across the frontier. Allies have offered help. Last month Kuwait sent a battalion to the Saudi side of the border. Pakistan has vouchsafed to come to the kingdom’s rescue, should it come under attack. And at the back of Najran’s airport, the Americans have provided a battery of Patriot air-defence missiles to knock out the score of incoming SCUDs that Mr Saleh has fired at the kingdom’s southern cities. But the costs for Saudi Arabia are mounting. Eroding his plans for cutting the budget deficit, Muhammad bin Salman is reinforcing his forces inside Yemen. Yemeni refugees, too, have been spilling into the kingdom, to the tune of over half a million. Cross-border smuggling and infiltration, perhaps of Houthi fighters, says a Saudi officer, is higher than ever. Yemenis do not constitute a fifth column, but they complain that Saudi Arabia is refusing them health care. Some mutter about turning the kingdom into a republic. The air campaign in Yemen is denting Saudi Arabia’s reputation. The death-toll of Yemenis is nearly 6,000, a “modest” number says a Gulf official, especially when judged against the carnage elsewhere in the region. Some recall that Yemen, like Afghanistan, has been a graveyard for many an invader. But prominent preachers from Saudi Arabia’s religious establishment egg the Al Sauds to confront, not compromise with, the region’s Shias. Salman al-Ouda, a critical cleric with a strong Wahhabi following, wonders what the point was of spending billions and taking thousands of dead “if it just left us where we started?”  THE desolate hills east of Jerusalem seem insignificant, a barren stretch of scrubland with few buildings or residents. Yet twice in the past few weeks Israel’s supreme court has heard arguments over this small patch of territory. Diplomats have bluntly warned Israel not to build anything here. And thousands of Palestinians have found themselves at the centre of a long battle over the most controversial patch of the occupied West Bank. The area in question, known as E1, sits between Jerusalem and the sprawling settlement of Maale Adumim, 7km (4 miles) to the east. Every Israeli prime minister since Yitzhak Rabin has dreamed of building a town on these hills. It would create a salient jutting almost halfway across the West Bank’s narrow waist, slashing the route between Ramallah and Bethlehem, and further encircling Palestinian districts in East Jerusalem. One local activist calls it the “doomsday settlement”, a deadly blow to the idea of a territorially contiguous future Palestinian state. Any construction in E1 would oblige Israel to expel 18 Bedouin tribes who live in the area. Last spring several members of these tribes received an unwelcome visitor: an emissary from the Israeli army, calling himself Farid, who urged them to register for plots at a nearby “relocation site”. It sits on the edge of a rubbish dump. Forced moves in the past have already destroyed the itinerant lifestyle of the Bedouin. Starting in 1997, Israel evicted more than 100 families to make room for an expansion of Maale Adumim, which now houses 40,000 people. Their new plots of land had little grazing space; most were forced to sell their flocks, and now work for Israeli companies as labourers. Many are unhappy. “We’re like fish in the water,” said Abu Imad, a leader of the Abu Nawwar tribe. “Our lives are in the desert, and we will die if we’re moved.” Yet the relocation is moving ahead, if slowly. The army destroyed at least 39 homes in the area last summer. It was the biggest wave of demolitions in three years. Several tribes are now appealing against their pending expulsions in the high court. Israel has also started paving a bypass road that would allow Palestinians to skirt a future settlement in E1. The highway would mitigate one of the consequences of building there—though it will inevitably become a bottleneck for the 1m Palestinians who live in Ramallah and the southern West Bank. Nothing has been built yet in E1, which America’s State Department publicly describes as “very sensitive” and privately talks of in much cruder terms. But fears remain rife. On December 28th an anti-settlement Israeli activist group, Peace Now, published a report claiming to have evidence that the housing ministry has quietly commissioned plans for 8,372 housing units in the E1 corridor. The government says nothing is decided, though Uri Ariel, the agriculture minister, visited the site on January 10th with a group of Knesset members and called for the building to start. Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, heads a coalition that depends on support from the settler movement. He also fears the consequences of moving forward. The EU decided in November to slap labels on products made in the West Bank; a recent poll found that 37% of Americans support putting sanctions on Israel over the settlements. International pressure may yet forestall E1. But the issue is sure to keep festering.WIDE-OPEN deserts and sunshine for more than 300 days a year ought to have made countries in the Middle East centres for solar power. Yet with the world’s largest oil- and gasfields nearby there has been little reason to develop renewable energy in the region. Still, much as fossil fuels are plentiful there is another liquid in short supply: fresh water. Might the shortage of water now be alleviated through the abundance of sunlight? EcoPeace, a joint Israeli, Jordanian and Palestinian NGO thinks it just might. In December it presented an ambitious, if far from fully developed, $30 billion plan to build a number of desalination plants on the Mediterranean shore of Israel and the Gaza Strip. At the same time, large areas in Jordan’s eastern desert would host a 200 square km (75 square mile) solar-energy plant, which would provide power for desalination (and for Jordan) in exchange for water from the coast. “A new peaceful economy can be built in our region around water and energy” says Gidon Bromberg, EcoPeace’s Israeli director. Jordan and the Palestinian Authority are already entitled to 120 million cubic meters of water a year from the Jordan river and West Bank aquifers but this is not enough to meet demand, particularly in Jordan, which regularly suffers from shortages. The main drawback to making fresh water from the sea is that it takes lots of energy. Around 25% of Jordan’s electricity and 10% of Israel’s goes on treating and transporting water. Using power from the sun could fill a sizeable gap, and make Palestinians less dependent on Israeli power. Renewables supply just 2% of Israel’s electricity needs, but the government is committed to increasing that share to 17% by 2030. Jordan, which has long relied on oil supplies from Arab benefactors, is striving for 10% by 2020. The plan to make water from sunlight is still at an early stage and similar grand designs in the past have foundered on the rocks of reality. Desertec, a German programme to generate solar energy in northern Africa for use in Europe, has stalled over concerns about the cost of transmitting the electricity over great distances, not to mention the problem of local political instability. Over the past 40 years there has been a series of plans to build a Red Sea-Dead Sea canal that would have irrigated the Jordan Valley and generated power, none of which have been built. Beyond many logistical and financial obstacles, the plan’s boosters also have to navigate a political minefield. Although Israel already supplies most of the Palestinian Authority’s electricity, and pipes water from the Sea of Galilee to Jordan, many Arab countries have signed up to boycotts that prohibit them from connecting Israel to their power-grids. Diplomatic tensions could therefore easily stymie any comprehensive energy treaty. “The political problems are the main obstacle” says Yana Abu Taleb, the deputy director of EcoPeace in Jordan. The relevant Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian steering committees each have government representation; but the three committees have yet to hold a single joint meeting. Although regional instability may indeed deter foreigners and investors from backing the project, its authors hope that working together might lessen tensions. Addressing their shared environmental issues could bring the sides closer on other matters too.FOR a brief moment at the turn of the year, Angela Merkel seemed to have recaptured control of Germany’s careering debate over refugees. The chancellor’s traditional New Year’s Eve address was acclaimed for striking just the right note. For the first time ever it was broadcast with subtitles, in Arabic and English, so that refugees as well as Germans would get her message. Mrs Merkel reminded the 1.1m asylum-seekers who arrived in Germany in 2015 to respect German rules and traditions. She urged her German viewers not to let themselves be divided, and warned of “those who, with coldness or even hatred in their hearts, lay sole claim to be German and seek to exclude others”. Yet even as Mrs Merkel was speaking, about a thousand men, described by police as mainly migrants of north African or Arab origin, began massing between Cologne’s railway station and cathedral, where fireworks were about to begin. Around midnight they broke into clusters and formed huddles around women who had turned out to celebrate. They then set upon the women, harassing and groping them, stripping them of clothing and valuables. One victim was raped. Of the more than 600 women who have since come forward, many described the ordeal as “running the gauntlet”. The news took four days to get out. Inexplicably, Cologne’s police initially reported “relaxed” festivities. (On January 8th Wolfgang Albers, the local police chief, was suspended for this and other failings.) The public news networks were also slow to pick up the story, providing grist for the conspiracy mills of populists who denounce the mainstream media as a politically correct “liars’ press”. But as the extent of the crimes became clear, it raised questions about Mrs Merkel’s liberal response to the crisis in Syria and the wider Middle East. The chancellor has repeatedly told Germans: “We can handle this.” Now her optimism is being hurled back at her with disdain. One of the Cologne offenders purportedly taunted police: “I am a Syrian, you have to treat me nicely—Mrs Merkel invited me!” Seeking safety: A flow diagram of asylum applications and rejections Growing numbers of Germans worry about the large influx of Muslims. In a survey by INSA, a pollster, 61% of respondents have become less happy about accepting refugees since the assaults; 63% think there are already too many asylum-seekers in Germany, and only 29% still agree with Mrs Merkel that the country can handle it. The sceptics are not only on the populist right. Alice Schwarzer, Germany’s leading feminist, says that Germany is “naively importing male violence, sexism and anti-Semitism”. For now Mrs Merkel and her governing coalition have responded by talking tough. At a gathering of her centre-right Christian Democrats, she promised that the offenders will “feel the full force of the law” and suggested that more asylum-seekers who commit crimes would be deported. Even her centre-left coalition partners, the Social Democrats, want to crack down hard. Sigmar Gabriel, their boss, wants offenders to serve their prison time in their home countries to spare German taxpayers. Yet the legal hurdles to increased deportation are daunting. First, it is not clear how many of the Cologne offenders can be identified. Second, German judges typically cannot deport criminals with sentences of less than three years; the sexual offences in Cologne mainly fell short of rape, and would carry lighter penalties than that. On January 12th the interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, and the justice minister, Heiko Maas, said they would expand the definition of rape (currently, an assault does not count as rape unless the victim fights back). They also promised to lower the deportation threshold, making it an option even for those on probation. But even with these changes, the Geneva conventions forbid deporting people to a country where they might be executed, tortured or harmed. Finally, home countries must co-operate; many don’t. Mr Gabriel is musing about cutting aid to such states. Europe's safe lists: Which countries does Europe consider safe for migrants to return to? Playing into xenophobes’ hands Germany’s legal reaction will therefore be slow and nuanced. But the transformation of its public debate has been swift and blunt. The assaults were a boon to Germany’s xenophobic right—from a movement that calls itself Pegida (short for “Patriotic Europeans against the Islamisation of the Occident”) to the new Alternative for Germany (AfD) party. Predictably, AfD has called on Mrs Merkel to resign. In social media and on the streets, the angry are more audible than the nuanced. In Cologne 1,700 anti-migrant demonstrators faced off against 1,300 pro-migrant demonstrators until the police broke it up. Thugs roamed the streets attacking foreigners, injuring two Pakistanis and one Syrian. Among the indirect victims of Cologne are the many migrants who would not dream of assaulting anyone, and who came to Germany seeking safety for themselves and their families. Four refugees have drafted an open letter to Mrs Merkel in which they express their support of women’s rights and their shock at the assaults. They are handing the letter round to collect signatures. Many refugees and German Muslims fear being tarred with the same brush as the offenders. In retrospect it is clear that Mrs Merkel’s hopeful New Year’s address coincided with the appearance of immigration’s dark side on German streets, and that her warnings have not been heeded. Some refugees have not respected German rules and traditions. Germans are divided. Germany’s neighbours, from Hungary and Poland to Switzerland and Denmark, have sneered at Mrs Merkel’s “welcome culture”. It now looks tenuous even at home.SINCE the attacks in Cologne several commentators have argued that Europe has a “man problem”. Writing in Politico Magazine, Valerie Hudson, a political scientist, argued that “the sex ratios among migrants are so one-sided...that they could radically change the gender balance in European countries in certain age cohorts”—especially young ones. Is this the case? More young men than young women have indeed been coming to Europe. Of the 1.2m asylum applicants in the last 12 months of available data, 73% were men, up from 66% in 2012. Those men skew increasingly young: according to Eurostat, the proportion of male asylum claimants who were 18- to 34-year-olds was 40% in October 2015 (the latest available data), up from 35% in 2012. Males between 14 and 17 years old accounted for 11% of all asylum-seekers, up from 5% in 2012. The numbers, however, differ by nationality. Around 60% of all male asylum-seekers from Algeria and Morocco were 18- to 34-year-olds. By contrast just 48% of the Iraqis, 38% of the Syrians and 31% of the Afghans fell into this age group. Proportions of young males also differ by host country (see chart). Sweden took three asylum-seekers for every 1,000 inhabitants in the 12 months to September 2015. That is the highest ratio in Europe. Alongside this, it also has more young male asylum-seekers: in the past 12 months 17% were 14- to 17-year-olds, compared with only 6% in Germany. Seeking safety: A flow diagram of asylum applications and rejections This will alter the sex ratio for some age groups in Sweden. As Ms Hudson points out, the teenage population will become more male: currently there are 106 male 14- to 17-year-olds for every 100 women. If all asylum applications are granted, this will change to 116 men to 100 women, while for those aged between 18 and 34 the male-to-female ratio will go from 105:100 to 107:100. This is worrisome. Skewed sex ratios would mean lots of sexually frustrated young men, which is a recipe for trouble. But the example of Sweden does not reflect what will happen across the whole of Europe. (Ms Hudson also conflates asylum applications with asylum granted. Not all of the 20,000 16- to 17-year-olds she says entered Sweden in 2015 will receive full refugee status; on current trends, around 17,000 will.) The countries that will be most affected are small, with populations under 10m. Sweden, Hungary, Austria and Norway would see the biggest sex-ratio changes (and only if they accepted all the asylum-seekers who applied). Germany has less to worry about. If it accepted all the young males who sought asylum in the year to October 2015, its sex ratios would go from 106:100 to 107:100 for 14- to 17-year-olds and from 105:100 to 106:100 for 18- to 34-year-olds. Europe does not have a man problem. Sweden may have.ARTUR MAS spent five years as president of Catalonia leading its drive for independence but, for the most part, he was a pro-business centrist who embraced the cause of secession because politics demanded it. When Mr Mas stepped down on January 9th after three months attempting to form a government, it was to make way for a more ideologically pure successor, Carles Puigdemont. In a speech in 2013 Mr Puigdemont said, quoting a Catalan journalist executed under the dictatorship of Francisco Franco, that “the invaders will be expelled from Catalonia”—referring to the Spanish government. On January 12th Mr Puigdemont became the first Catalan president to take the oath of office while omitting the traditional vows of loyalty to Spain’s constitution and king. Spain’s interior minister looked on in stony silence. It was Mr Puigdemont’s long commitment to independence, which much of his centre-right Catalan Democratic Convergence (CDC) party has embraced only recently, that enabled him to form a government where Mr Mas had failed. It won him the trust of the far-left Popular Unity Candidacies (CUP) party, whose members thought Mr Mas a sleazy austerity-monger but apparently consider Mr Puigdemont a more trustworthy radical. Three months after the elections, Catalonia’s independence movement now has control of the region’s government. But that control has come at a cost to the secessionists’ image. For years, the separatist movement has successfully sold itself as cool, kind and progressive. Backers of continued union with Spain were scorned as reactionaries, or even the inheritors of Franco’s legacy. Now senior members of the independence movement worry that it will be identified with the CUP, whose raised fists and chaotic assemblies frighten conservative, middle-class Catalans. Mr Puigdemont’s CDC has traditionally stood for order. The small but newly powerful CUP represents radical change. Separatism’s squeaky-clean image has found its greatest expression in pro-independence demonstrations on Catalan national day, September 11th. For each of the past four years, at least 600,000 people, or around 10% of the population, have turned out to demonstrate. The good-natured protests pull in entire families, with small children holding grandparents’ hands, banners in the red, gold and blue colours of the independence movement flying—“and not a single piece of litter on the street”, claims Jordi Sánchez, president of the Catalan National Assembly, the group that organises the festivities. Unionists complain that separatism’s civilised facade hides an unpleasant sense of moral superiority. “I call it the Kumbaya factor,” moans an anti-separatist Catalan economist. The movement’s righteous aura is aided by the participation of several nuns. One radical crowd-pleaser is Teresa Forcades, a Benedictine with a master’s degree from Harvard who is on leave from her convent on Catalonia’s Montserrat holy mountain. Mr Mas liked to be seen with one of his greatest fans, a Dominican nun named Lucía Caram. According to the coalition accord, Mr Puigdemont will now lead the Catalan government on an 18-month “road map” to independence. Yet Spain’s constitution does not allow any move towards secession, nor are there plans for a referendum on it. The acting government in Madrid, led by Mariano Rajoy’s conservative Popular Party (PP), has vowed to apply the full weight of the law as soon as it sees the constitution under threat. The question is whether Catalans will support an avowedly confrontational government. Mr Mas billed the regional elections as the referendum on independence that Madrid had refused to call. His Together for Yes coalition and CUP, which both backed the road map, jointly won more than half the seats—but only 48% of the vote. Even many separatists doubt that is enough. The ugly infighting of recent weeks and the radical antics of CUP are unlikely to have boosted support any further. The separatists’ ranks have swollen dramatically over the past half-dozen years. This has been the result, in part, of Mr Rajoy’s refusal to concede any Catalan demands for greater self-government. Most important, says Mr Sánchez, it is younger voters who are keenest on independence. That bodes well for the future of separatism. Much depends on how the central government in Madrid responds. Unfortunately, Spain’s general election on December 20th left parliament so fractured that forming a government could take months, or require new elections. Catalonia may have a new president, but the question of its independence is not much closer to being resolved.Sticking up for media freedom POLAND is in trouble with Brussels. On January 13th the European Commission launched a formal assessment of whether changes to the constitutional tribunal and public media pushed through by Poland’s new government, led by the Eurosceptic Law and Justice party (PiS), violate the rule of law. The commission is wielding new enforcement powers; in the worst case, Poland’s voting rights in the EU could be suspended. The move has “nothing to do with politics”, claimed Frans Timmermans, the first vice-president of the commission. But a big political fall-out looks likely. Since coming to power in October PiS has strengthened its grip over the security services and the civil service. In December it passed a law that requires the constitutional tribunal to approve verdicts by a two-thirds majority, crippling its ability to strike down legislation; it also appointed five new judges. A new media law sacked the management of Poland’s public television and radio broadcasters; a former PiS MP is the new television boss. Moderates are worried. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, PiS’s divisive leader, is moving like an “elephant in a china shop”, says Ryszard Petru, the leader of Nowoczesna, a new liberal party. Nowoczesna has surged in polls since the election; one recently put it ahead of PiS, with almost 30%. Thousands across Poland took to the streets in protest against the media law. Many see parallels with the illiberal path Hungary has pursued since Viktor Orban became prime minister in 2010. When PiS lost the election in 2011, Mr Kaczynski spoke of one day building “Budapest in Warsaw”. On January 6th Mr Orban and Mr Kaczynski held a secretive six-hour meeting in southern Poland. The EU has so far trod carefully. Donald Tusk, president of the European Council and prime minister of Poland between 2007 and 2014, warned that an exaggerated reaction from Brussels could backfire. Indeed, European criticism of PiS’s power grabs has already provoked a backlash from the government that could create political headaches for the EU. The relationship between Poland and Germany, which was built up under the previous government and which rests heavily on the fact that Germany buys lots of Polish exports, is coming under strain. One magazine cover depicted Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, as Adolf Hitler under the headline “Again they want to supervise Poland”. On January 10th Witold Waszczykowski, the foreign minister, summoned the German ambassador over allegedly “anti-Polish” comments made by German politicians. In an open letter to the German EU commissioner who first mentioned the rule-of-law procedure, Zbigniew Ziobro, the justice minister, alluded to the second world war and argued that Germans talking about overseeing Poland carry the “worst possible connotations” among Poles. Mr Kaczynski told a gathering of followers that no words, “especially not from German lips,” will stop PiS on its path towards justice. The Polish government has downplayed the significance of the formal assessment. Polish matters should be resolved in Poland, Beata Szydlo, the prime minister, said this week. In political terms, the government has little to worry about. It has a solid parliamentary majority, and tough action by the EU will only make it more popular with its own nationalist voters. Sceptics note that Hungary, which is far further down the path of illiberalism than Poland, has never faced serious repercussions in Brussels. This is in part because the EU lacked the rule-of-law monitoring mechanisms it now wields when Mr Orban was cementing his hold. But the Commission is still working out how to use its newfound powers. Its review of Poland’s new government may prove more of a test for the EU than for PiS.Temp after temp IN HIS New Year message President François Hollande declared a double state of emergency in France: one to fight terrorism, the other to tackle unemployment. The image was a stretch, but the self-criticism apt. In 2012 Mr Hollande was elected on a pledge to curb joblessness and make “youth” his priority. Yet unemployment has since climbed from 9.7% to 10.1%; youth unemployment is more than twice this, and still rising. On January 18th the government will unveil new plans to train young job-seekers and encourage job creation. But it looks likely to be too little, too late.  Neighbouring countries on Europe’s southern fringe have far higher absolute levels of youth unemployment than France. Yet since the start of 2014 a loosening of labour laws has helped to bring down joblessness among the under-25s in both Spain and Italy (see chart). In France, by contrast, over the same period the figure has inched up to 26%—an all-time record. Youth unemployment in France is now over three times the rate in Germany. Not only do young people in France find it difficult to get work, but when they do it is often short-lived. The labour market is divided into “insiders”, those with permanent, protected, full-time jobs, and “outsiders”, whose work is insecure and temporary. Only 5% of those over 50 are on short-term contracts; but the figure rises to nearly 30% for those under 25, who often drift for years on back-to-back temping. (In France only a fifth of temps are in permanent jobs three years later, compared with almost half in Britain, according to the OECD.) For employers faced with the mind-numbing rules governing permanent jobs (and the need to make a case to a labour tribunal before shedding them), using temps and interns is a way to eke out some flexibility. “Psychologically, it can create a real lack of confidence,” says Ange-Mireille Gnao, a young Franco-Ivorian, who has been looking for a permanent job in communications since 2012. “If you don’t have a permanent contract in France, it’s impossible to rent a flat, or get a loan.” The fruitless search for permanent work leads to “a lot of disillusion”, says Kadija James, deputy director of Nos Quartiers ont des Talents, which uses mentors to help get job-seekers from the banlieues (the heavily immigrant outer suburbs) into work. For years, the French left refused to link the country’s poor record on job creation to its over-protective labour law. But now, in an important acknowledgment, Manuel Valls, the Socialist prime minister, has called the 3,800-page labour code “unreadable”, and promised to simplify it. (He has ruled out changes to the 35-hour working week, however.) Mr Hollande has vowed to train 500,000 job-seekers through apprenticeships and other schemes. Yet in a pre-election year it is proving difficult for the government’s reformists—such as Emmanuel Macron, the economy minister, who wants bolder deregulation in order to encourage firms to create jobs—to prevail over those who fear upsetting unions and the Socialists’ friends on the left. Given the amount of public money that France pumps into subsidising jobs, the wonder is that it has not dented youth unemployment. But French rules on schemes like apprenticeships or subsidised job creation change faster than firms can fill in the forms, or decipher the alphabet soup of acronyms such schemes are known by. The number of apprenticeships fell in 2013 and 2014, in part because apprentices were siphoned into other new aided-job schemes Mr Hollande had devised. “Technically we could cut the unemployment rate in half,” says Nicolas Bouzou, a French economist; “the difficulty is political.” Much of the French left regards ideas such as a lower minimum wage for younger workers, as Britain allows, to be exploitation, not a way into the job market—even though, by default, self-employed youngsters work for less than the statutory minimum. There is still a residual snobbery within the education system about vocational training. And France’s biggest unions, for all their revolutionary rhetoric, have become talented and conservative defenders of insider privileges, at the price of shutting too many young people out of decent jobs altogether.
