ONE dodgy referendum lost Ukraine Crimea. Another threatens to lose it the European Union. On April 6th the Dutch public will vote on the “association agreement” the EU signed with Ukraine in 2014. The deal cements trade and political links with one of the EU’s most important neighbours; the prospect of losing it under Russian pressure triggered Ukraine’s Maidan revolution. But last summer a group of Dutch mischief-makers, hunting for a Eurosceptic cause they could place on the ballot under a new “citizens’ initiative” law, noticed that parliament had just approved the deal. Worse luck for the Ukrainians. Unlike the Crimeans in 2014, the Dutch will not be voting under foreign occupation. But nor are they likely to have familiarised themselves with the Ukraine agreement’s 2,135 pages. Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, says a Dutch “No” could unleash a “continental crisis”. That is a stretch: as the referendum is non-binding, the Dutch government could ratify the agreement anyway, and its most important provisions are already in force. But Mr Juncker put his finger on something, because national referendums on EU matters are turning into a throbbing headache. Margaret Thatcher once dismissed referendums as “a device of dictators and demagogues”. The opposite was true for the central and eastern Europeans who joined the EU in the 2000s; their accession votes, usually passed with whopping majorities, marked the final rejection of tyranny. Elsewhere most EU referendums have turned on one-off issues, like joining the euro or ratifying an internal treaty. Negative votes, such as the French and Dutch dismissals of an EU constitution in 2005, have at least forced Eurocrats to pause for breath before resuming the march of integration. But now the silly season is here. A few months before the Dutch referendum, Danes were asked to vote on whether their government should convert its “opt-out” on EU justice and policing matters to an “opt-in”. They plumped for the status quo, leaving their government with an awkward negotiation in Brussels. A few months earlier Alexis Tsipras, Greece’s prime minister, called a referendum on a euro-zone bail-out agreement that would expire before the vote was held. His mighty oxi (“no”) victory was quickly converted to humiliating assent when his government realised that tough bail-outs were the price of euro membership. EU referendums are held for many reasons. The hapless Mr Tsipras hoped to boost his negotiating hand in the euro zone. David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, is holding an EU membership vote largely as a tool to manage his fractious Conservative Party. Some, more cynically, are called to provide a seal of legitimacy to something a government was going to do anyway. But a growing number of referendums serve as brakes on European integration. If voters cannot throw out the bums in Brussels, they can at least lob rotten fruit at them. Politicians, too, find them useful: of the national referendums that have consequences for the entire EU (such as treaty ratifications), a third have been called for partisan rather than constitutional reasons, according to Fernando Mendez at the Centre for Research on Direct Democracy in Switzerland. The trouble is that the politics of referendums cuts both ways. Two years ago the Swiss voted to restrict immigration from the EU. That directly contradicted free-movement agreements, and Swiss officials are struggling to square the circle. Brussels threatens to suspend a raft of bilateral agreements if the Swiss go through with it—partly to avoid emboldening the British, who want immigration concessions in their EU renegotiation. In turn, should Britain vote to leave, the EU will have every incentive to take a hard line when the British come back to negotiate their post-EU trade deal. Mr Tsipras’s gambit flopped because the euro zone could not allow the precedent of a debtor state unilaterally changing the terms of its loans. No referendum is an island The tools of direct democracy are always controversial—at times, they have threatened to make American states like California ungovernable—but they are doubly difficult in the EU. First, in America federal law trumps state law, meaning no state can vex another by placing a lunatic proposal on the ballot. But in the EU, which is not a federal construction, there is nothing to stop one member holding a referendum that causes trouble for the rest. When things go wrong, the usual remedy is to tweak whatever regulation or accord made voters unhappy (usually a treaty) and to seek a second vote that produces the correct answer. A second problem is that the EU needs more integration just when many voters are turning against it. The euro zone and EU migration policy are both half-built ships. Each may require changes to EU treaties to allow more centralisation. But extending Brussels’s powers into new areas will fuel the appetite for referendums that could scupper the changes. Moreover, notes Stefan Lehne, a former Austrian diplomat, these days EU politicians test the existing treaties to breaking point in order to avoid triggering referendums. The clamour for direct democracy thus fosters the legalistic jiggery-pokery to which it has been a reaction. All this smells horribly undemocratic to some. But joining a club, or striking a deal with it, will always limit governments’ room for manoeuvre. National politicians can shoulder some of the blame for not being clear with voters about what their arrangements with the EU imply. But too often EU officials seem wedded to the views of their founding father, Jean Monnet, who wrote that he “thought it wrong to consult the peoples of Europe about the structure of a community of which they had no practical experience”. That may have worked when Eurocrats restricted themselves to tinkering with agricultural subsidies and fisheries policy. Not any more: the age of referendums is here to stay.THE starting gun for the referendum on whether Britain should leave the European Union has yet to be fired. But David Cameron has made clear that he expects to finish renegotiating his set of EU reforms in Brussels by the end of February. Since the referendum act provides for a minimum four-month campaign, some say that the vote could now take place before the end of June—though insiders think late September is still more likely. Either way, the pro and anti campaigns are gearing up, starting by raising cash. It is up to the Electoral Commission to designate, for each side, a lead organisation that gets extra money, free leafleting and broadcasting rights in exchange for strict spending limits. The choice is clearer on the Remain side: it will be Britain Stronger in Europe, chaired by Lord Rose, a former boss of the Marks and Spencer retail chain. Its director, Will Straw, says it is a broad cross-party group akin to the Better Together group that won the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence, but intent on making a more positive and patriotic case. Britain Stronger in Europe had a shaky start, but now looks more effective. Yet it still seems outgunned by its opponents, who have a simple and seductive message about escaping Europe’s chronic mess. This may be why the polls have narrowed (see chart). Alan Johnson, who runs the Labour Party’s In campaign, laments that, although his side has the best lyrics, his opponents have the best tunes. Yet the Leave campaign has problems of its own—starting with the fact that it is divided. Leave.eu, financed by Arron Banks, a businessman, is closely linked to the UK Independence Party’s leader, Nigel Farage, and focuses on immigration. Vote Leave, run by Matthew Elliott, is broader based, and includes UKIP’s sole MP, Douglas Carswell, as well as members of other parties. It seems more likely to win official designation, not least because Mr Elliott and his colleague, Dominic Cummings, are veterans of previous successful campaigns, including the defeat of a referendum on electoral reform in 2011 and of plans for a North-East regional assembly in 2004. Both sides are keen to draw lessons from previous referendums in Britain and from other countries. Among them are the view that it is important to start early; that basic concerns such as jobs and the economy weigh heavily; that there is a bias in favour of the status quo; and that, although negative messages about the other side can work, they need to be supplemented by positive ones. In the EU case, Mr Cameron’s renegotiation will count for little but his (and his government’s) view will count for a lot. And ever present is the risk of a vote being hijacked by unrelated issues. Most of these lessons ought to favour the Remain side. The main business and trade union organisations support Britain’s EU membership on economic grounds, as does most of the British establishment. The status quo or inertia vote will lean towards staying in, though on this Vote Leave is trying to argue that, since the EU is changing so fast and moving inexorably towards closer political union, the real status quo vote should be one to leave. Similarly, a negative message is harder for Vote Leave to fend off. As in Scotland, it is vulnerable to the charge that it is not offering a clearly thought-through alternative to EU membership. Would Britain keep full access to the single market, which takes almost half its exports? Might it, like Norway and Switzerland, have to accept most EU rules and even pay money to Brussels in return? The Leave campaign insists that, as a big economy and large market for other EU members, Britain would secure a favourable deal, but it remains vulnerable on the question of alternatives. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Leaders of all mainstream political parties will campaign to stay in. Mr Cameron will be a formidable asset to the Remain campaign, and he will win over some waverers by trumpeting the results of his renegotiation. Yet the Leave campaign has already dismissed this as “trivial”. And it has strong political backers besides UKIP, especially in the Tory party. Mr Cameron has conceded that cabinet ministers should be allowed to fight to leave the EU without quitting, calling for the party to remain “harmonious”. On January 13th Chris Grayling, the leader of the House of Commons, wrote in the Daily Telegraph that remaining in the EU on current terms would be “disastrous”. Bigger hitters have so far kept quiet. Vote Leave hopes to win over between three and seven ministers. A majority of Tory MPs are Eurosceptic, but many will back Mr Cameron. Steve Baker, who works with Vote Leave and runs Conservatives for Britain, reckons to have 147 backbench supporters on his books. A new group called Grassroots Out has been started by Tom Pursglove, a Eurosceptic Tory from the 2015 intake. And although the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, promises to campaign to remain, a dozen backbench Labour MPs may fight to leave. The Remain side may be the more vulnerable to extraneous events, such as renewed euro turbulence or more big rows over migration. Mr Cameron gamely insists that, being outside both the single currency and the Schengen passport-free travel zone, Britain has the best of both worlds. But whereas voters in the 1975 European referendum opted to stay in because Britain was in such a mess, many now feel the opposite. And then there is the risk from unrelated issues. Danish, Dutch and French voters stroppily used referendums to punish governments (see Charlemagne). Mr Cameron says he would not resign if he lost. But voters may want to send him a message. The result is all to play for—and the campaigns may not be wholly harmonious.Very junior doctor CARS honk cheerily as they pass a line of shivering junior medics, protesting outside the Royal London Hospital in east London during Britain’s first doctors’ strike in 40 years. Inside, most patients support the strike: doctors work hard, they say, and deserve a better deal than the one being offered to them by the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt. Further north, outside University College Hospital, an elderly passer-by goes further. “When the revolution comes,” she tells protesters, “you will have Hunt’s body for your dissection classes.” The medics (some of whom, despite the term “junior”, are actually quite senior) are angry at Mr Hunt’s proposal for a new contract, intended to improve out-of-hours care, which he has threatened to impose on them if no agreement is reached. In the strike on January 12th they provided only emergency care, and will do so again in another picket on January 26th. In February a total walkout is planned, which would leave consultants, nurses and temporary staff alone to treat emergencies. Round one has gone to the doctors: an Ipsos Mori poll this week found that 66% of the public backed the strike, which led to 3,300 operations being cancelled. But the same poll found that just 44% would support a strike that affected emergency care, as February’s would. The details of the dispute are fiddly, concerning working hours, top-up rates of pay and working-time rules. But there are two, quite straightforward, main disagreements. The first is about how much the National Health Service (NHS) should police doctors’ working time. The British Medical Association (BMA), which represents doctors, and the Department of Health have provisionally agreed on rules governing the length of shifts, and on the creation of an independent “guardian” responsible for enforcing them. But the BMA wants stricter limits (for example, for consecutive long shifts to be capped at three rather than the offered five) and argues that enforcement will be weaker than before. The second beef is about whether evening and weekend work should command higher pay than that between 7am and 7pm during the week. Assuming it should not, it is hard to disagree with Mr Hunt when he claims his reforms will leave 99% of junior doctors no worse off than before. Assuming it should, more doctors will lose out: although their basic pay will rise, top-ups for antisocial hours will be curbed (moreover, as this will make it cheaper for hospitals to roster doctors during these hours, more will be roped into evening and weekend shifts). The upshot, says the BMA, is that fewer doctors will take jobs in all-hours fields like acute medicine.   Mr Hunt’s goal of a seven-day NHS is laudable, but he has carelessly wound up medics by implying they do not work hard enough and by over-simplifying research documenting higher death rates at weekends. On the day of the strike he attempted to portray those staffing emergency departments as having “crossed the picket line”. Junior doctors (many already contemplating better paid, more leisurely careers in America or Australia) quickly turned against him. The seeds of their resentment have been nurtured perhaps too enthusiastically by the leadership of the BMA, whose rallies resonate to juvenile abuse of a health secretary who, the doctors neglect to acknowledge, has a manifesto commitment to fulfil. That the rhetoric surrounding the strike suggests that the very existence of the NHS is at stake, and not just the pay and protections of a portion of its staff, perhaps concedes that the details of the matter do not match the scale of the action. As the dispute goes on, at the Royal London Hospital the accident and emergency (A&E) waiting room is stuffed with runny noses and other non-urgent cases. “People used to go to their local priest for pastoral care; they now come to A&E,” says Chris Uff, a consultant neurosurgeon who recalls a well oiled reveller chasing down an ambulance on New Year’s Eve to ask whether he had money on his bus pass. Such gentle grumbling about patients is common, but there is a more serious way in which the public is to blame for the sickness of the health service. The electorate that notionally adores “our NHS” and propels a saccharine song by health workers to the top of the Christmas charts shows remarkably little willingness to pay more in tax towards what remains a relatively cheap system. Without extra money and facing ever wider and wrinklier patients, the NHS must tighten its belt by £30 billion ($43 billion), or about one-fifth, by 2020. It is in this context that Mr Hunt is trying to expand services to evenings and weekends. Pity the well meaning health secretary, pity the hardworking doctors—and blame the sentimental but hypocritical British public.WITH Britain’s property market fizzing, the obvious cure for bubbly prices is to ramp up housebuilding. The Conservative government wants to get the country building 200,000-250,000 homes a year, up from the current rate of about 140,000. Reaching that target is seen by many—including the Labour Party, which had an almost identical aspiration when last in government—as the acid test for any government’s housing policy. A bill approved by the House of Commons on January 12th contains a number of measures to boost construction. The idea that Britain needs to build 250,000 houses a year comes from an official review of housing supply carried out in 2004. It reckoned that such a level of private building was consistent with “real” (ie, inflation-adjusted) house-price increases of 1% a year. To get Britain up to the magic number of 250,000, the government will loosen planning rules and offer subsidies to boost the construction of “starter homes”, properties costing up to £250,000 ($360,000), or £450,000 in London. The bill also grants central government more power to bulldoze opposition to housing projects from sluggish or NIMBYish local councils. Even if these plans succeed in spurring on the builders, prices may continue to gallop upwards. For one thing, Britain is bad at putting houses where they are most needed. Since 2009 prices in the south-east have risen twice as fast as the national average. Land in the south-east is already intensively used, making development particularly difficult. New houses also mean building new infrastructure, such as schools and parks; the “green belts” of protected land that encircle most cities make it hard to squeeze all this in, says Adam Challis of JLL, a property company. Over the next two decades London is expected to require 50,000 new homes a year. Last year the city built less than half that number. On January 4th the government announced that it would supply building companies with publicly owned land where planning permission is already in place. Happily, most of the proposed sites are in overheating parts of the country, such as Northstowe, a proposed development near booming Cambridge. Yet some economists suspect that even this may fail to tame prices: a recent paper from the London School of Economics found that new developments may actually increase the value of housing in their surrounding areas, by bringing in new infrastructure and boosting the local economy through extra spending on shops and services. What to do? The focus on housebuilding overlooks a bigger potential source of supply in the form of existing homes. Although overcrowding (as measured by the number of people per bedroom) has been drifting upwards for 20 years, more than one-third of households have two or more spare bedrooms. Allocating housing more efficiently—encouraging elderly couples to downsize after their children fly the nest, for instance—would free up some of these 16m or so rooms. Turnover in the second-hand housing market, though, is slow. In the late 1980s more than 2m properties were bought and sold each year, twice as many as change hands today. As the population has aged, the average homeowner has become less likely to want to move, says Bob Pannell of the Council of Mortgage Lenders, an industry body. Moreover, with prices rising fast, people are not rushing to sell up. Stamp duty, a tax on housebuyers, has risen steeply over the long term, providing another disincentive to moving: someone buying an average-priced home in London faces an upfront bill of £15,000. Abolishing stamp duty would boost transactions by 8-20%, according to different estimates. Mr Challis reckons the government could boost transactions further by supporting bridging loans, in which a bank offers short-term finance to someone to buy a home before they have sold their current one. The government is beginning to act to accelerate the building of new houses. To bring prices into line, it must next free up the supply of old ones.High rise or sink? “THE street wears us out; it is altogether disgusting!” wrote Le Corbusier, a modernist architect, in 1929. “Why, then, does it still exist?” His question set the tone for much post-war British planning, resulting in the construction of housing estates detached from streets and surrounding communities. They have often been accused of incubating social problems. Now David Cameron has weighed in to the debate, announcing that 100 of them could be demolished to attack poverty and crime. In a Sunday Times article on January 10th he denounced the “brutal high-rise towers and dark alleyways that are a gift to criminals and drug dealers”, and pledged £140m ($200m) towards replacing them with lower-rise, better-integrated estates that would help improve social order. Rioters in several English cities in 2011 “came overwhelmingly from these post-war estates”, he wrote. Research by Bill Hillier, a professor of architecture at University College London, suggests that the design of housing estates can contribute to social problems. He says there can be too many walkways, resulting in empty spaces where criminals can lurk. In a paper with Ozlem Sahbaz, based on five years of crime data in one London borough, he concludes that a higher density of people helps to deter crime (high-rises are often not as densely populated as medium-rise blocks built closer together), and that integration with streets, even full of strangers, is safer. Jeremy Till, another architect at the University of the Arts London believes the opposite is true: that “space arises out of...the social”. He calls Professor Hillier’s conclusions a “cul-de-sac of architectural determinism”, by which social malaise is too conveniently attributed to spatial, not political, causes. A forthcoming report by Create Streets, a research institute, agrees with Professor Hillier’s research, however, using regression analysis to link general well-being with connection to the street and community. “If you get the architecture right, you create a virtuous upward cycle that is good for community, for health and for economic vitality,” says Tim Stonor of Space Syntax, a consultancy that helped redesign Heygate, a notorious London estate that has been demolished and replaced with lower-rise housing. A report by Savills, an estate agent, suggests the space could be more efficiently used: there is room for up to 500,000 new homes on existing estate land, in addition to the rebuilt social housing, it says. The bigger problem for Mr Cameron may be how the process is funded and managed. In Heygate, residents like the new design, but former social tenants are angry that many of the new flats are being sold to pay for the regeneration. You can reconnect to the street, but it may then be put up for sale.ACCORDING to KPMG, an accountancy firm, Britain’s banks handed over a whopping £38.7 billion ($56 billion) in fines and customer remediation between 2011 and 2014. This represented over 60% of their profits during the period. The scale of these payouts gives some idea of the toll that a succession of scandals took on the industry, from the manipulation of the LIBOR interest rate to the mis-selling of payment-protection insurance (not to mention the banks’ role in the financial crash of 2008). Once “masters of the universe”, bankers are now viewed with the same contempt that people reserve for politicians, and even journalists. Particularly after the LIBOR scandal of 2012, a lot of the blame for what went wrong has been attached to a “failure of professionalism and ethics”, to quote the Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards (PCBS). This was a heavyweight body set up to recommend changes to the industry. Its was one of many investigations into banking culture, launched in the hope that by forcing bankers to behave more ethically, the debacles of the past might be avoided in future. Last year the Banking Standards Board, funded by the banks themselves, started work to improve banks’ practices and new rules were introduced governing bonuses. Those can now be clawed back in misconduct cases; on January 13th regulators suggested that the rules be tightened further. One inquiry into banking culture, by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), a regulator, was shelved on New Year’s Eve, leading to allegations of political interference by the Conservative government which, the opposition claims, is going soft on bankers. Even if that were true, bankers face an imminent step-change in the way that they have to behave, arising out of recommendations made by the PCBS in 2013. Its supporters hope for a cultural Big Bang, analogous to the deregulatory explosion that liberated financial markets in 1986. But as ever with new regulations, all will depend on how they are implemented. The “Senior Managers Regime” and “Certification Regime” will come into force on March 7th, largely the brainchildren of Andrew Tyrie, a Tory MP and chair of the PCBS. The rules for senior managers will introduce, for the first time, a criminal offence of “reckless misconduct” for managers whose actions lead to bank failure. There will also be civil charges for lesser offences. No longer, it is hoped, will bosses merely get a polite grilling before a parliamentary committee as their banks crash around them. Banks will have to submit organisational maps to regulators, to make clear who is responsible for what. In the event of bank failure, managers will have to prove that they took “reasonable steps” to prevent any breaches of rules in their particular areas. The Certification Regime requires banks to carry out annual reviews of the fitness and propriety of staff who could cause “significant harm” to the bank or its customers. This will probably cover thousands of jobs. The two schemes will be monitored by the FCA and another regulator, the Prudential Regulation Authority. However, much of the responsibility for implementation is left to banks, and as Mr Tyrie warns, “the spirit is willing at the top, but the flesh is weak. Several of these firms are still far too big to manage. The board may will the change and culture, but not enough happens lower down.” Mr Tyrie is also troubled by the effectiveness of the FCA, whose leader was pushed out last year and which has yet to find a replacement. “It required a good deal of prodding to get the FCA to start to implement certification,” he says. “The FCA has been struggling to adapt to the new regulatory environment. It should rely far more on its own judgment rather than on bureaucratic box-ticking and back-covering. For that we need a change in mindset not just at the banks, but also of the regulators. They are on a learning curve too.” For the banks, meanwhile, the biggest incentive to implement these new schemes properly is that they might help them to avoid paying out most of their profits in fines in future. That might even leave a bit more money for the bonus pool.Just a wee dram POPULAR lore has it that the older a distilled spirit, the finer and costlier it will be. But growing numbers of upstart young drinks-makers who are bringing gin back into fashion aim to disprove this. Moreover, they are challenging the mighty Scotch whisky industry. In a converted Perthshire farm building, Tony Reeman-Clark, whose career began in brewing before shifting to civil engineering and IT, started a small gin distillery in 2013. Its success means he is now contemplating doubling its capacity to 280,000 bottles a year; he has also moved into whisky production. His is one of more than 60 such distilleries to have started in Britain since 2011. Unlike whisky, which must be stored for at least three years, gin can be sold almost as soon as it is made. Although it requires juniper berries, it can also be infused with many herbs to produce a range of tastes and colours, adding to its craft-made appeal. Mr Reeman-Clark’s sales jumped after television featured one of his pale brown gins that turns pink when tonic water is added. Like most newcomers, his drink sells at roughly twice the price of big-brand gin. It seeks to cash in on the fad among “millennials” for traceable craft-made products, rather than big-name stuff. The Wine and Spirit Trade Association reckons this is why, although the volume of gin sales in Britain is up only 6% since 2012, their value has risen by 18%. Now Mr Reeman-Clark and others plan some novel whiskies. His three-year-old whiskies are being matured in casks made of wood other than the prescribed oak. He says: “I was told ‘You can’t do that.’ Yes, I can, I just won’t call it Scotch whisky.” He claims a lot of Scotch has become bland, produced in vast computer-controlled distilleries supervised by bored process technicians. The big distillers may splutter that, from peaty Islay malts to smoother Speysides, Scotch has plenty of variety already. Diageo, a big drinks multinational, is well aware of millennial fashions, unashamedly marketing Johnnie Walker, which sells more than 200m bottles a year, as a craft whisky. It has also created new whisky concoctions with crafty-sounding names such as Smoky Goat and Boxing Hares. The new kids may be tapping a rich new vein in the market, but the big boys are there too—and they have bigger budgets.Canal plus SALFORD docks were once among the busiest in the country. The city was boosted by the construction of the Manchester Ship Canal at the end of the 19th century. But, unlike neighbouring Manchester, the docks did not bring lasting prosperity. By the 1970s, trade was in decline—and the city was, too. The canal, once the largest navigation in the world, was not big enough for modern container ships. So in 1982 Salford docks closed. Television executives have since replaced toiling dockers. Redevelopment of the area began in the early 2000s when the Lowry, an arts centre, and a branch of the Imperial War Museum opened, both clad with striking metallic facades. Then, in 2007, the BBC chose the docks as the site for a new northern base to house departments previously located in the capital. The broadcaster, which has a commitment to be less “London-centric”, was attracted by a proposal from a consortium that included the local council and Peel Group, a property firm, which saw the broadcaster as the centre of a hub of media businesses. The move has had plenty of critics. Some cite it as an example of the broadcaster’s profligacy: moving cost £224m ($324m). Southern celebrities complain of the distance from London (one suggested the BBC’s bosses had “lost their marbles” by setting up shop in a “not very nice part of Salford”). One-fifth of BBC staff still commute from outside the north-west; most of those who moved to the area live in Manchester (or its more salubrious suburbs) rather than Salford. Even many locals are miffed. Few work in MediaCityUK, as the hub is now branded, and those who do tend to be cleaners or security workers, says Stephen Kingston of the Salford Star, a community-run newspaper. On a cold Friday afternoon, MediaCityUK is quiet; its gleaming buildings (which won Building Design magazine’s annual Carbuncle Cup for ugliness) stand above empty squares. BBC staff complain about the limited number of places to eat. But there are signs of improvement. The number of people employed in MediaCityUK has doubled in the past three years. “We wouldn’t have struggled in here a couple of years ago,” notes one businessman searching for a seat in a local private members’ club. And facilities are improving fast; it took 15 or 20 years for Canary Wharf, an east-London wasteland reborn as a financial-services district in the 1980s, to become a place that “wasn’t bloody awful,” says Mike Emmerich of Metro Dynamics, a consultancy with offices in London and Manchester. The pick-up partly reflects the BBC’s success in drawing other businesses to the area. Although some had hoped the hub would be bigger by now, less than half of the 6,100 people who work in MediaCityUK are employed by the BBC. Other employers include the University of Salford, which opened a campus on the site in 2011, and ITV, Britain’s second-biggest broadcaster, which moved some of its operations there in 2013. Smaller offices contain more than 200 media, technology and marketing businesses. The aim is to double the amount of office space in the next ten years, says Stephen Wild of MediaCityUK. The number of flats and hotel rooms is also due to grow. This will require better infrastructure. So far, the majority of investment has come from Peel Group, which has spent a total of £750m on the venture (and last year sold half its stake in MediaCityUK to Legal & General Capital, an insurance firm). Public bodies have spent a further £30m, mostly on improving transport links. The future of MediaCityUK is still uncertain. “The fact that fewer top decision-makers came up than expected means there is a slight feeling we may be five or six bad decisions away from the BBC creeping back to London,” says Mr Emmerich. The site faces competition from local rivals, particularly Manchester’s trendy Northern Quarter, for media and technology companies. And its growth has hardly come cheap. Nevertheless, it has shown that world-class firms can get on fine outside London—and that when they move, others follow suit. In a country so dependent on its capital, that is a valuable reminder.“WE NEED more Quixotes,” urged Pablo Iglesias, the mass before him hanging on his every word: “We are dreamers, but we take our dreams very seriously.” The rally in Madrid’s central square last January was a milestone in the transformation of Podemos from a gang of professors into the movement that it is today. Last month it polled 21% in Spain’s general election. Like their counterparts in Greece’s Syriza, Mr Iglesias and his comrades take inspiration from the late Ernesto Laclau, an Argentine sociologist at Essex University. He wrote that lefties should embrace populism; combining charismatic, top-down leadership with bottom-up assemblies, marches and occupations. To know how much Podemos inspires Jeremy Corbyn is to understand the Labour Party today. Rare is the senior Corbynite who has not visited Madrid. Last summer Mr Iglesias endorsed his British admirer, who had hailed the Spaniard’s “new way of doing politics”. Seumas Milne, now Labour’s head of strategy (and, long ago, a trainee at this newspaper, where he learned of capitalism’s wickedness), wrote of the similarities between the two men. Momentum, the group that agitates for Mr Corbyn in local branches, is partly based on Podemos “circles”. The intellectual fingerprints of Laclau and Mr Iglesias are all over the Labour leader’s bid to restructure his party. Founded to secure political representation for the working class, Labour has long been dominated by its MPs and—such is the British system of cabinet government—its front bench. In their efforts to make the party newly electable, Tony Blair and his predecessors prised decision-making powers away from its left-wing members; by creating a loyal National Policy Forum, for example. Mr Corbyn is reversing such reforms in favour of a new, Laclauian vision. First, he is tightening his grip on the leadership. He has appointed allies to the most essential and sensitive roles: John McDonnell as shadow chancellor, Mr Milne as chief aide, Ken Livingstone, a former mayor of London, as defence adviser. In a reshuffle finalised on January 13th, Mr Corbyn swapped front-bench critics for loyalists; most notably appointing Emily Thornberry, a fellow opponent of Britain’s Trident nuclear deterrent, as shadow defence secretary. Meanwhile he has nudged Labour’s executive committee further in his direction and is now trying to strengthen it with a review that may give it the final say on big party policies and thus sideline the shadow cabinet. Second, and in true Podemos style, Mr Corbyn is shifting his party’s focus from its MPs to its grassroots. Momentum is already threatening heretical backbenchers with deselection. It may make good on the threat when impending constituency boundary changes put seats up for grabs. Meanwhile Labour’s leader is giving members much more say. In October he polled them before a vote on military action against Islamic State in Syria (75% were opposed, like him) and in an interview on January 11th near-confirmed that he would do the same ahead of any vote on the renewal of Trident, which he loathes. Mr Corbyn wants to use regular online consultations of members and registered supporters to set Labour’s policies. Tilting at Basildon All of which is jolly interesting—but electorally suicidal. Last month one in five voting Spaniards may have backed Podemos. But Britain has a more majoritarian electoral system, a less loathed establishment, a less fiery left-wing tradition and a youth unemployment rate of 14%, compared with 48% in Spain. Basildon is not Barcelona. Nor does Mr Corbyn possess Mr Iglesias’s flair and youthful appeal. Moderate MPs are responding to their rolling marginalisation in three ways that broadly map onto their ideological stances. The old Labour right, centred on West Midlands MPs and the Labour First group, is the most active in countering the Corbynite takeover; partly as it has a tradition of machine politics (tough, tribal Brummies were a bastion against the extreme-left in the 1980s) and partly because in Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, it has someone ready to take over if Mr Corbyn falls. The soft left, including those around Ed Miliband, Labour’s previous leader, has a gentler strategy: to temper Mr Corbyn, reason with the new members and ultimately guide the party towards some sort of compromise. Meanwhile the liberal, Blairite right is in internal exile; quietly building up its resources, fighting off deselection bids and concentrating on other causes like an In vote at the upcoming EU referendum. It has no obvious figurehead, so is the most reticent of the moderate groups. Here one is most likely to hear the argument that Mr Corbyn must fail on his own terms; that his defeat must be unequivocally his fault. Labour’s problem is that none of these responses confronts the fact that its leader is getting stronger. More centrist members are leaving as lefties sign up (over half the party has joined since the election in May). The prospect of a candidate with the infrastructure to beat Mr Corbyn is more remote than ever. Swathes of centrist MPs could lose their seats—if not at deselections then when the party sallies into the next election opposing Trident. Joe Haines, who was press secretary to Harold Wilson, the last-but-one Labour leader to win a majority, propounds a fourth, better option. He urges moderate MPs to declare independence from Mr Corbyn and sit as a separate group in the Commons (a “nuclear option” some moderates refuse to rule out). The new party would forfeit Labour’s infrastructure, but would not struggle to attract donations. Some members may defect with their MPs. If larger than Mr Corbyn’s parliamentary caucus, this new social democratic party would be designated the official opposition. The genius of this option is that it would turn Mr Corbyn’s Laclauian strategy against him. He loves to talk of mandates and movements. But together Labour MPs have a mandate of 9.3m to his 250,000 supporters. The masses have spoken. Economist.com/blogs/bagehot
