IF YOU live together like a husband and wife for a number of years, then in the eyes of the law you are married. It is startling how many people in England believe this. Yet it is a myth. Despite an information campaign, over half of unmarried English couples living together in 2006—when the campaign had been running for three years—believed that their legal position was the same as that of married couples. Half the general population did, too. In fact, common-law marriage has not legally existed in England since the 16th century. In America, family lawyers push the message that living together for seven years—or any amount of time—does not make you a married couple. Why so many Americans believe in this seven-year cut-off is mysterious. A handful of American states, including Alabama and Colorado, do recognise common-law marriage, meaning that a couple may be legally treated as married if they live as a family and present themselves as a husband and wife. But people all over the country mistakenly believe that this is also the case in their state.   In Canada, says Robert Leckey of McGill University in Montreal, a similar confusion results from laws that call unmarried couples “legal spouses” for the purposes of tax and benefits. Many assume that they are as good as married for everything else, too. Even when unmarried people know what the law says, research shows, optimism may mean they neglect pragmatic measures such as ensuring that they are recognised as co-owner of the house they share. Most couples who move in together, whether they marry or not, believe that they will either stay together for life or separate amicably. Some fear being viewed as gold-diggers or spoiling the ardour if they brandish paperwork that says who gets what if things turn sour. Prodding and advice do not help much either. Before gay marriage became legal in America, few gay couples named each other as next of kin or drew up wills in each other’s favour, despite reminders from activists, says Gordon Morris of Unmarried Equality, a lobby group. In England researchers followed up with 102 people in unmarried couples who had visited an official website with information and model agreements about property, next-of-kin wishes and so on. None had gone on to sign one: the most common reason was that they had not got around to it, though they intended to.SQM, Chile’s biggest lithium producer, is the kind of company you might find in an industrial-espionage thriller. Its headquarters in the military district of Santiago bears no name. The man who for years ran the business, Julio Ponce, is the former son-in-law of the late dictator, Augusto Pinochet. He quit as chairman in 2015, during an investigation into SQM for alleged tax evasion. (The company is co-operating with the inquiry.) Last month it emerged that CITIC, a Chinese state-controlled firm, may bid for part of Mr Ponce’s controlling stake in SQM, as part of China’s bid to secure supplies of a vital raw material. The focus of CITIC’s interest appears to lie on a lunar-like landscape of encrusted salt in Chile’s Atacama desert. It is a brine deposit washed off the Andes millions of years ago, containing about a fifth of the world’s known lithium resources. (Even more are in adjacent Bolivia but they are mostly untapped; see chart 1.) Just weeks before, CITIC had bought a stake in a Hong Kong electric-vehicle maker that uses lithium-ion batteries, indicating its growing interest in clean-energy technologies. At SQM’s facilities the brine is pumped from an underground reservoir into hundreds of ponds. As it evaporates it turns into shades of blue and green, making the plant resemble a giant artist’s palette. It produces mostly potassium compounds but also a viscous liquid, lithium chloride. This is taken by tanker to a plant near the coast where it is turned into finely powdered lithium carbonate and hydroxide, which are then shipped around the world. It is not a big business: lithium accounts for only about 5% of the materials in some car batteries, and for less than 10% of their cost. Worldwide sales of lithium salts are only about $1 billion a year. But the element is a vital component of batteries that power everything from cars to smartphones, laptops and power tools. With demand for such high-density energy storage set to surge as vehicles become greener and electricity becomes cleaner, Goldman Sachs, an investment bank, calls lithium “the new gasoline”. SQM is part of a global scramble to secure supplies of lithium by the world’s largest battery producers, and by end-users such as carmakers. That has made it the world’s hottest commodity. The price of 99%-pure lithium carbonate imported to China more than doubled in the two months to the end of December, to $13,000 a tonne (see chart 2). The spike mostly reflected concerns about the future liquidity of China’s spot market. China gets much lithium from spodumene rock in Australia, an alternative to South American brine. Albermarle, an American miner, and Tianqi, its Chinese joint-venture partner, plan to use spodumene from a big Australian mine to process more battery-grade lithium carbonate and hydroxide. That will mean less ore available on the spot market in China. The industry is fairly concentrated, which adds to the worry. Last year Albermarle, the world’s biggest lithium producer, bought Rockwood, owner of Chile’s second-biggest lithium deposit. It and three other companies—SQM, FMC of America and Tianqi—account for most of the world supply of lithium salts, according to Citigroup, a bank. What is more, a big lithium-brine project in Argentina, run by a joint venture of Orocobre, an Australian miner, and Toyota, Japan’s largest carmaker, is behind schedule. Though the Earth contains plenty of lithium, extracting it can be costly and time-consuming, so higher prices may not automatically stimulate a surge in supply. Demand is also on the up. At the moment, the main lithium-ion battery-makers are Samsung and LG of South Korea, Panasonic and Sony of Japan, and ATL of Hong Kong. But China also has many battery-makers. Adam Collins of Liberum, another investment bank, talks of an “inflection-point” in Chinese demand for lithium salts. Its government is stepping up the promotion of lithium-ion batteries and electric vehicles, with the biggest emphasis on buses. Sales of “new energy” vehicles in China almost tripled in the first ten months of 2015 compared with the same period in 2014, to 171,000 (though they remain less than 1% of total vehicle sales). Tesla Motors, an American maker of electric cars founded by Elon Musk, a tech tycoon, is also on the prowl. It is preparing this year to start production at its “Gigafactory” in Nevada, which it hopes will supply lithium-ion batteries for 500,000 cars a year within five years. J.B. Straubel, Tesla’s chief technical officer, says the firm wants to secure supplies of many battery materials, not just lithium. “There’s so much hype in the lithium market right now...people look at it as this magical element,” he says. Nonetheless, in August Bacanora, a Canadian firm, said it had signed a conditional agreement to supply Tesla with lithium hydroxide from a mine that it plans to develop in northern Mexico. Bacanora’s shares jumped on the news—though analysts noted that shipping fine white powder across the United States border would need careful handling. Bigger carmakers also have a growing appetite for lithium. In a recent shift, Toyota has begun offering lithium-ion batteries instead of heavier nickel-metal hydride ones in its Prius hybrid. Mr Collins notes that tougher emissions standards in Europe and America are likely to boost carmakers’ need for lithium. Another big source of demand may be for electricity storage. The holy grail of renewable electricity is batteries cheap and capacious enough to overcome the intermittency of solar and wind power—for example, to store enough power from solar panels to keep the lights on all night. Tesla says that next month it will start installing “Powerwall” battery packs in American and Australian homes to store solar energy, at a cost of $3,000. Enel, an Italian utility, is launching similar storage products this year in South Africa, where homes and businesses suffer frequent black-outs. Power utilities will increasingly use giant battery packs, charging them at times of low demand and tapping them to provide short bursts of electricity at peak times, an alternative to building a fossil-fuel plant that will sit idle the rest of the time. AES Energy Storage, a big provider of energy storage, won a contract in 2014 to provide a “peaker plant” in Southern California that will provide up to 100 megawatts (MW) of power into the grid at moments of maximum demand. In December, the firm agreed to buy, over several years, enough lithium-ion batteries from LG to provide ten times this level of peak power—that is, 1 gigawatt, or more than the output of an entire, typical-size coal-fired power station. “We’re hybridising the power grid,” says John Zahurancik, its boss. Lithium-ion technology nonetheless attracts legions of sceptics—and not just petrolheads. In a paper published last month, researchers linked to the federally-funded Argonne National Laboratory in Chicago wrote that large-scale batteries need to offer hundreds of miles of driving range, be rechargeable in minutes instead of hours, and provide power at costs comparable with natural gas. These demands are “beyond the reach” of lithium-ion technology, they argued. Tesla’s Mr Straubel, however, foresees at least another doubling in the performance of lithium-ion batteries, and thinks lithium will continue to shape the battery of the future. The juice still to be squeezed from lithium-ion batteries can be seen at the Angamos power plant on Chile’s northern coastline. It uses 1m lime-green battery cells in ten shipping containers to regulate the electricity grid across the Atacama region at times of peak demand, including at SQM’s lithium-mining operations hundreds of miles away across the desert. For the lithium the power plant uses, it is a homecoming. Extracted at SQM, it was sent to China to be turned into cells, put into battery packs in America, and shipped back to Chile by AES Energy Storage. That is a long journey for a tiny element of a little battery cell—but one that may embody the future of the world’s energy supplies.Ren and a piece of his chemicals empire DESPITE the anaemic state of the global economy, companies from mainland China are investing abroad like never before. Chinese firms closed overseas deals worth $61 billion last year, according to a new analysis by the Rhodium Group, a consulting firm. This was up by 16% on 2014, and is the highest level on record. What is more, these firms are not all chasing natural resources such as oil and copper, as in the past. On January 12th Dalian Wanda, a Chinese property and entertainment conglomerate, confirmed its long-rumoured purchase of Legendary Entertainment for about $3.5 billion. The acquisition of the American film studio behind “Jurassic World”, “The Dark Knight” and other blockbusters fulfils the dream of Wang Jianlin, Wanda’s boss, of becoming a global movie mogul. The same day, news surfaced that Beijing Kunlun Tech, a Chinese online-games firm, has acquired a majority stake in Grindr, an American social network for gay men, for about $93m. However, perhaps the most intriguing Chinese foreign purchase of the week is the acquisition by a state-owned chemicals firm of an obscure German maker of machinery to process rubber and plastic. China National Chemical Corp, more commonly known as ChemChina, bought KraussMaffei for about $1 billion. ChemChina itself rose from obscurity thanks in large part to Ren Jianxin, its chairman. Three decades ago he borrowed 10,000 yuan (less than $2,000 at today’s rates) to start a solvents factory. In the following years, he forged the ChemChina empire by taking under his wing more than 100 distressed state-owned chemical plants across the country, with the government retaining ownership. He minimised lay-offs by shifting workers to one of the group’s sidelines, Malan Noodle, a restaurant chain. He professionalised management by bringing in outside consultants. Even a foreign chemicals boss who insists that “90% of ChemChina’s assets are rubbish” grudgingly praises Mr Ren’s vision and management style. ChemChina is now emerging as the most dynamic globaliser among China’s state enterprises. Already, it has a string of foreign acquisitions under its belt (see table). Most notable among these is its $7.7 billion deal last year to buy Pirelli, an Italian tyremaker, which will be completed shortly. That was the largest Chinese purchase yet seen in Italy, and the KraussMaffei deal will be the biggest foray by a mainland Chinese firm into Germany. ChemChina is also in a bidding war with Monsanto, an American agribusiness firm, for control of Syngenta, a big Swiss rival. If ChemChina prevails with its latest reported bid for 70% of Syngenta, valuing it at $44 billion, it will be the biggest Chinese foreign acquisition yet. Why are Chinese firms so keen to go abroad? Some pundits suspect that the firms’ bosses, afraid of getting caught up in President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption purge, are parking assets abroad. Yet there are easier and quieter ways to get yuan through China’s porous currency controls. Anyway, some of the firms buying abroad, such as ChemChina, are owned by the state itself. Others think investment opportunities are drying up on the mainland. But even if Chinese growth is only 5-6% rather than the reported rate of around 7%, it would still be stronger than in the rich countries where Chinese firms are buying. The main reason for Chinese firms’ buying spree is to get the brands, technologies and talent they lack, to capitalise on future waves of growth at home. That is not new in itself; what has changed is the warmth of the welcome they get. In the past, ruthless mainland firms, gobbling up resources firms, caused a backlash in the countries they entered. Today’s Chinese globalisers, says Klaus Meyer of the China Europe International Business School, are more sophisticated and hands-off with their acquisitions. “ChemChina could be a good owner” of Syngenta, agrees Jeremy Redenius of Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, pointing to the success of its earlier acquisition of Adama, an Israeli firm. Some rich-world firms may now find Chinese ownership more attractive than suffering the rules of Western stockmarkets or the meddling of private-equity firms. The marauders from the Middle Kingdom may be more welcome than the barbarians at the gate.BACK in November 2013 at the Dubai Air Show, the aviation cycle was clearly in full upwards swing. The four big Gulf carriers alone, Emirates, Etihad, Flydubai and Qatar Airlines, bought planes worth more than $170 billion, at list prices, off Boeing and Airbus in one day. Fast forward two years to the most recent Dubai show, in November 2015, and the picture is, at first sight, more worrying for the world’s two biggest planemakers. There was only one big airline order of note, by Vietjet of Vietnam, for Airbus planes worth $3.6 billion. Could this signal a downswing in the aviation cycle, and a collapse in demand for planes? That is the question on investors’ minds as Boeing prepares to announce its full-year results on January 27th, with Airbus to follow in February. Although in recent days Boeing and Airbus have revealed record production figures for 2015, new orders net of cancellations fell by almost half at Boeing and a third at Airbus compared with the previous year (see chart). With bulging order books that ought to keep them busy into the 2020s despite planned production increases, the planemakers are not panicking yet. Indeed, the fall in orders in 2015 was in part because airlines saw little point in buying planes that might take almost a decade to be delivered. The fear is that, as happened in the past, the order book will unravel, with a wave of cancellations hitting profits. This time really should be different, analysts believe. Even a global economic downturn should only result in a soft landing for the industry. One explanation is that the reason why airlines buy new planes has changed since the financial crisis, explains Jason Gursky of Citigroup, a bank. In the aviation cycles before 2008, around 70% of demand for new planes was from airlines and leasing companies planning to add capacity, with the replacement of their older jets accounting for just 30%. But since then, demand from customers seeking to replace old planes has risen to more than half of deliveries. Such orders are less affected by the state of the economy than planes being bought to expand the airlines’ schedules. The airlines are busy swapping old jets for new because the planemakers have brought out more fuel-efficient versions of the Boeing 737 and Airbus A320, their short-haul models; and introduced new long-haul models, the Boeing 787 Dreamliner and Airbus A350, which are also more efficient than older equivalents. The slump in oil prices means that jet fuel is a lot cheaper than it used to be. But it is still a big part of an airline’s operating costs. And since any given carrier’s rivals are upgrading their fleets, it has little option but to buy new planes itself. Fortunately, the falling cost of fuel has boosted airlines’ profits, giving them the money to renew their fleets. And the full effect of the oil slump has yet to be enjoyed: some European airlines hedged their jet-fuel requirements at an equivalent crude price of $90 a barrel in 2015, whereas the spot price had fallen below $40 by the year-end, and is now around $30. Another reason why the aircraft market has become less volatile is the rise of no-frills airlines. Since they are more willing than full-service airlines to vary prices to smooth the ups and downs of demand for flights, that means their demand for planes is less bumpy. Budget carriers’ strong position in emerging markets, where demand for air travel is growing fast, is helping. They account for around 60% of seat capacity in India and South-East Asia, compared with about 40% in Europe, according to CAPA, an aviation-consulting firm. State-owned planemakers in China and Russia are bringing out rivals to the 737 and A320, but their fuel efficiency is poorer than that of the two Western planemakers’ latest models, says John Leahy, Airbus’s chief operating officer. So their impact is likely to be limited. A Canadian new entrant, Bombardier’s CSeries, has won little interest from airlines. So, Boeing and Airbus can continue steadily expanding their output while maintaining a healthy backlog. This will give them plenty of scope for coping with any dips in demand for planes, notes Mr Gursky—and if demand keeps growing, the lack of good alternatives will allow them to put their prices up. Although the overall appetite for new planes has become less cyclical, orders for individual models can still be quite volatile, says Thomas Picherit at AlphaValue, a research firm. For example, airlines have held back from buying Airbus’s medium-range A330 until a revamped version, the A330neo, has its maiden flight, expected later this year. The lull in orders has dented the profits of Rolls-Royce, which builds engines for the planes. At the big end of the commercial-aircraft market, a lack of new models may be depressing sales. The latest version of Boeing’s 747 jumbo, and Airbus’s even bigger A380, are starting to look dated. Some airlines want to see newer, more fuel-efficient versions before they will place fresh orders. So those planes’ assembly lines, and their suppliers, are going slow, even as the output of smaller planes soars. Even if Boeing and Airbus are likely to enjoy more predictable demand than in the past, the airline business will continue to be a turbulent one, with some carriers retreating, and occasionally failing, in the face of rising competition from more efficient upstarts. That will produce some cancellations of aircraft orders. Planemakers will not care, so long as the winners in this battle for the skies simply take the place of the losers in their order books.AS PERSONAL service goes, few big retailers can match the tailor-made offerings of India’s 15m or so tiny, family-owned shops known as kiranas. In addition to selling all manner of goods, most are happy to cut and deliver small amounts of fresh food—1kg of onions, say—and let customers buy on credit. The steady advance of home-grown supermarket chains has so far done little to dim the kiranas’ prospects; and successive Indian governments have been reluctant to let in foreign grocers, for fear that many households would lose their livelihoods. With more than 200m Indians now able to access the internet on their mobile devices, e-commerce might appear a bigger threat. A clutch of Indian and foreign-owned online grocers has been set up in the past few years. Rather than supplying all their goods from central warehouses, however, most have struck partnerships with kiranas and other physical retailers. They employ an army of young workers to collect orders from kiranas and other local shops, and deliver them to the customer, often within the hour. Aniket Moré, aged 18, is one such worker. His employer is Grofers (as in “grocery gofers”), founded in 2013. When a customer uses the firm’s app to order, say, a cake, a bottle of Coke and bag of tomatoes, Aniket hops on his bike, collects the tomatoes from a small depot run by a contractor (this is how it ensures the quality of fresh produce), buys the Coke from a local kirana and then calls in at a nearby cake shop. He has a colleague riding pillion to help him. “The cake needs protection,” he says. Grofers also deploys a shopper at some kiranas, who is notified of orders on his smartphone. He buys the necessary items from the shopkeeper and has them ready for when the deliverer swings by. On busy days, just before the shopper runs out of cash, another company man calls at the kirana to top it up. Grofers, and other firms trying this labour-intensive model, reckon that by linking with the myriad small shops in Indian cities, they will be spared having to spend heavily on warehousing in a country where urban land is scarce. It will also, they hope, help them to scale up fast, and make deliveries rapidly. For the big foreign firms entering the Indian market, such as Amazon, even if they do build central warehouses, it may also suit to be seen working with small local retailers rather than going all out to squash them. Critics such as Arvind Singhal of Technopak, a retail consultant, argue that adding another layer to the supply chain just makes the business inefficient. Customers also need to be won round. Grofers has pulled out of nine cities, blaming “low acceptance of its service in these areas”. LocalBanya, another online grocer that sourced products from local shops, ceased operations in October. Earlier in 2015 Paytm, an Indian e-commerce firm backed by Alibaba of China, shut down a similar grocery app within two months of launch. These struggles are not, so far, deterring Grofers’ bosses. They argue that a volume-driven business such as theirs takes time to build. “We are still in the habit-forming stage,” says Saurabh Kumar, one of the firm’s founders. Nor is it putting off Amazon, whose KiranaNow service has a slightly different model, letting kiranas set up virtual stalls and take orders by smartphone app, to be delivered either by the kirana’s own workers or by Amazon’s delivery service. BigBasket, currently the largest among India’s online grocers, offers two levels of service: for a household’s big monthly shop it fulfils orders from a central warehouse. But it also has tie-ups with kiranas so that consumers can order daily top-ups from them. None of the online grocers is yet in profit. Last month Grofers reported losses of 39m rupees ($591,000) on revenues of 7.3m rupees in its first full year of operations. Hari Menon, the boss of BigBasket, expects it to break even by 2018, on revenues of more than $1 billion. Investors so far seem patient. Grofers’ backers have provided $166m in the past two years, and BigBasket is about to close a $120m financing round with a consortium of lenders. It remains far from certain which, if any, of these attempts to bring kiranas into the age of smartphone shopping will succeed, even though India has a plentiful supply of young deliverers, like Mr Moré, prepared to work hard for modest pay. In the long term, large-scale online retailing, using central warehouses, will surely prove more efficient. Even then there is likely to be a place in Indians’ hearts, and wallets, for the local shopkeeper who knows them by name and for whom no order is too small.DISTANCE is not dead. In biotechnology, as in other tech-based industries, the clustering of similar firms is more important than ever. Some American biotech startups are based in the San Francisco and Silicon Valley area, huddled with its many digital and IT startups. But the Boston metropolitan area—and in particular Cambridge, across the Charles river from central Boston—seems to be holding its own as the world’s pre-eminent biotech hub. The San Francisco area’s pool of venture capital is beyond compare; and a biotech-industry body there, the California Life Sciences Association, argues that California is the number one state for biomedical employment. But in part that is simply a reflection of the state’s large population, which means its health-care business is necessarily big. The Massachusetts Biotechnology Council claims that its state employs more people in biotech research and development than any other. A study published last month by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) found that although, per head, the Boston area had fallen well behind San Francisco and Silicon Valley in creating software and internet startups, it was more or less keeping pace in life sciences. The density of research institutions in Massachusetts means that it receives $351 per head in funding from the National Institutes of Health, well ahead of the Golden State’s $88. This density of research was a reason cited by General Electric, which has a big medical-technology division, in its announcement this week that it will move its group headquarters to Boston. The history of the Boston area cluster can be traced to the late 1970s and early 1980s, when Biogen and Genzyme, two biotech drugmakers, were founded by scientists from nearby academic institutions. Other scientists, especially from MIT and Harvard, Cambridge’s two internationally renowned universities, followed suit and created innovative startups of their own. This encouraged global pharmaceutical giants, struggling with poor productivity in their existing research facilities, to set up labs in and around Cambridge. Novartis of Switzerland began work on its outpost in 2002, followed by such names as AstraZeneca of Britain and Baxter of Illinois, which in 2015 spun out its Cambridge labs as Baxalta, a specialist in “orphan” diseases. This week Baxalta agreed a $32 billion takeover by Shire, an Irish drugs giant. The cluster lacked a clear focal point until 2010, when MIT, the main landowner around Kendall Square—an area about a mile in all directions from the Kendall/MIT subway station in Cambridge—decided to spruce it up. One report suggests the square currently hosts firms that have absorbed about $14 billion in venture-capital investments. Silicon Valley’s overall pool of capital may be deeper, but much of it flows to areas other than biotech. And the global drug giants with outposts in the Boston area provide an alternative source of finance, and of eventual buyers for startups. Tom Andrews of Alexandria Real Estate, a property agent specialising in science buildings, notes that the Boston area’s universities, teaching hospitals and other institutions are a sink, as well as a source, of talent. Anyone who accepts a risky job at a startup can be sure that if things don’t work out there are lots of big employers nearby to fall back on. The cluster’s promising young firms include four—Editas Medicine, CRISPR Therapeutics, Intellia and Bluebird Bio—that are working on “gene editing”, currently one of the hottest areas of biotech. WuXi NextCODE, another local startup, specialises in analysing genomes. Alnylam concentrates on drugs that interfere with RNA, the messenger molecule through which genes express themselves. Not satisfied with just editing, deciphering or blocking nature’s blueprints, Synlogic is seeking to create medicines through entirely artificial sequences of genes. Synlogic’s boss, Jose-Carlos Gutiérrez-Ramos, formerly of Pfizer, has worked around the world and praises the “density of intellectuals” in Boston and the opportunities that come from being able to make easy connections. With little travel time between appointments, it is easier to arrange meetings. Dan Budwick of Pure Communications, a public-relations firm which represents some of the area’s startups, says that “You can jump on a bike and see 30 companies in a mile. You can’t do that in San Francisco or Manhattan.” Boston’s tech cluster has a different vibe from Silicon Valley’s in other ways too. For some locals, beer is the recreational drug of choice, rather than cannabis. Boston’s biotech crowd are a more formal bunch, who wear proper shirts—and tuck them in. And Edward Farmer of WuXi NextCODE says that Bostonians know which fork is for the salad because salad is not the only thing they eat.  The cranes sprouting across the skyline suggest more growth ahead. But demand is still running ahead of supply. In the Boston area rents for laboratory space rose by 7% last year to around $47 a square foot ($505 a square metre), compared with $37 in San Francisco. Already, some companies are having to seek space in districts like Alewife or Watertown, on the far side of Harvard’s campus. Though it is on a roll, the Boston biotech cluster must keep a nervous eye on its West Coast rival, especially if, in future, biotech ventures come to rely on software, wearable sensors and big-data analysis, areas in which Silicon Valley is strong. At least that is a problem it can try to address. The weather is not. The biggest annual jamboree for investors in biotech, organised by J.P. Morgan, a bank, opened this week in its customary location of San Francisco. The temperature was a balmy 13º Celsius, to Boston’s shivering -1º. Clarification: The last-but-two paragraph of this article has been amended since publication to make it clear which comments we are attributing to Edward Farmer of WuXi NextCODE.SOFTWARE firms are supposed to be a paradise for “talent”. Not only are their workers fabulously paid, but they are showered with perks as well. They can gorge themselves on free food cooked by Cordon Bleu chefs. They can snooze in nap pods or, if they feel more energetic, work out in on-site gyms or take yoga classes. There are dry-cleaners on the premises to do their laundry and buses to ferry them to and from work.   There is some truth in this. Such companies have few resources other than their employees’ brains. And the battle for those brains is becoming more intense as the digital revolution reconfigures swathes of the business world. Giants such as Google and Facebook are seeking to reinforce their position at the heart of this new economy by investing heavily in research and expanding into ever more areas. Google’s headcount has grown by 157% in the past five years, to about 60,000. Smaller startups are also scrambling to attract talent; and manufacturers are responding to the digitisation of their industries by hiring coders and other tech geeks. Carmakers such as GM, Ford, Nissan and Toyota have all set up research outposts in Silicon Valley. This is producing a pay-and-perks arms race. The biggest companies are building awe-inspiring headquarters: Apple’s “spaceship”, designed by Norman Foster, will cover 2.8m square feet (260,000 square metres) and Google’s new offices will sit under a vast, translucent dome. Some firms, such as Netflix, offer staff “unlimited” holidays. Facebook is offering up to $20,000 to female employees who want to freeze their eggs. Uber and Airbnb, two stars of the sharing economy, have lured away a couple of Google’s top chefs, Alvin San and Rafael Monfort. However, a career as a software developer or engineer comes with no guarantee of job satisfaction. A survey last year of 5,000 such workers at both tech and non-tech firms, by TINYPulse, a specialist in monitoring employee satisfaction, found that many of them feel alienated, trapped, underappreciated and otherwise discombobulated. Only 19% of tech employees said they were happy in their jobs and only 17% said they felt valued in their work. In many areas they were even more discontented than non-tech workers: 36% of techies felt they had a clear career path compared with 50% of workers in areas such as marketing and finance; 28% of techies said they understand their companies’ vision compared with 43% of non-techies; and 47% of techies said they had good relations with their work colleagues compared with 56% of non-techies. Tech firms that offer lavish perks to their staff do not do so out of the goodness of their hearts. They offer them because they expect people to work so hard that they will not have time for such mundane things as buying lunch or popping to the dry-cleaners. As Gerald Ledford of the University of Southern California’s business school puts it, they are “golden handcuffs” to keep people at their desks. Some of the most extravagant perks are illusions: “take as much holiday as you like” may really mean “take as little as possible, and as much as you dare.” Some have vaguely sinister undertones: might the option for women to freeze their eggs end up becoming the expectation? The tech economy is a ruthless meritocracy. “A great lathe operator commands several times the wage of an average lathe operator,” Bill Gates once said, “but a great writer of software code is worth 10,000 times the price of an average software writer.” The most talented workers can command princes’ ransoms. Google reportedly offered a star engineer $3.5m in stock to dissuade him from defecting to Facebook. And Facebook paid $1 billion for Instagram, mainly to hire its 13 employees. But in this business those who are merely good, rather than great, are expendable; they can expect to labour in obscurity while the stars get the credit. On top of this merciless meritocracy is a layer of cruel fortune. No amount of talent or effort can make up for having chosen to work at Sidecar, a ride-sharing service which shut down in December, rather than Uber or Lyft, its still-expanding rivals. Moreover, tech startups typically attract talent by offering shares. Employees work like dogs in return for supposedly making a fortune when the firm goes public. However, such firms often use multiple classes of shares that preserve the biggest gains for insiders, leaving the employees with common stock that can easily lose value. In particular, startups have taken to offering later-stage investors guarantees that they will get their money back, if either a subsequent funding round or an eventual initial public offering (IPO) values their shares at a lower price than they are paying. When firms have to pay out on such guarantees, they generally do so by issuing extra shares, which dilute other common shareholders such as their staff. Unicorns and unicorpses Disappointments of this sort are becoming more common. A succession of startups, such as Square and New Relic, have sold their shares at substantial discounts to their previous valuations on going public. Others have been bought at a discount after abandoning hopes of an IPO: Gilt Groupe, an e-commerce firm, sold itself to Hudson’s Bay Company for $250m, having reportedly enjoyed a “unicorn” valuation of above $1 billion in its earlier fundraising. Michael Moritz, a venture capitalist, talks about “subprime unicorns” and James Clark, an entrepreneur, talks about “unicorpses”. If there is another tech bust, it will be the employees who will be most hurt. The tech industry offers fabulous rewards for a fortunate few: almost half of the world’s billionaires aged under 40 are tech types. It offers a wonderful life for many thousands more: they get to make serious money by turning science fiction into reality. But the industry is also rife with disappointments: endless toil that produces meagre returns; and dreams of reinventing the world that turn into just another tough and insecure job.THE crane that looms over Sainty Marine’s shipyard on the lower reaches of the Yangzi river had been motionless for weeks when a worker climbed it late last year. The struggling company had stopped getting orders and, rather than deal with the headache of laying off its employees, it simply stopped paying them. The man on the crane threatened to jump to get the attention of local officials, coming down only when they promised to help him. Other workers took a somewhat safer, though (in a country where strikes are illegal) no less provocative measure to demand their missing wages: they marched out and blockaded a nearby highway. That Sainty Marine workers have resorted to such actions is perhaps not surprising. The global shipping industry is depressed, plagued by oversupply at a time when slowing trade means demand for new ships is shrinking. Chinese firms that rushed to expand are now gasping. Sainty Marine, which overextended itself by buying another shipbuilder, is veering towards bankruptcy. Withholding wages is a common tactic for Chinese companies in trouble; in Yizheng, the gritty town that is home to Sainty Marine’s shipyard, the local government has published statements admonishing employers for doing so. Many workers at other hard-hit companies, especially in heavy industry, are facing similar frustrations. The China Labour Bulletin, a watchdog group based in Hong Kong, recorded 2,774 strikes and worker protests nationwide in 2015, double the 1,379 posted in 2014. Police arrested four labour activists last week in the southern province of Guangdong, China’s manufacturing heartland—a sign of the authorities’ unease over the growing protests. Although the swooning stockmarket and falling currency have captured global attention in recent days, the effect of slowing growth on employment is a more sensitive problem for the government. The Communist Party has always treated markets and, by extension, investors with a certain disregard. Workers are different: the steady improvement in their living standards over the past three decades has helped to legitimise the party’s rule. How worried should it be? The stresses have made only a small dent so far in overall employment figures, at least in the official telling. The jobless rate crept up to 5.2% at the end of September from 5.1% at the start of last year, according to the latest government survey of 31 big cities. Manufacturing firms are clearly cutting jobs: the employment index in the closely watched Caixin survey of the sector dipped to 47.3 in December—its 26th consecutive month below 50, the threshold marking a contraction. But for services, a bigger share of the economy than manufacturing, Caixin’s employment index hit 51.3 in December, above last year’s low of 50.1 in August. That points to an expansion. However, the employment data are flattered by two uniquely Chinese shock-absorbers. First, the hukou system of household registration means that some 270m migrant workers who have gone to cities for jobs do not enjoy a permanent right to live in them, let alone collect unemployment insurance there. When they lose their jobs, they are expected to return to their original homes, often in the countryside, and do not count as unemployed. In 2008, at the height of the global financial crisis, tens of millions of migrants simply went back to rural areas, tilling fields or scrabbling for meagre pay in villages. There has been no similar exodus this time, but the countryside remains a safety valve that can help to absorb the unemployed. Daily dispatches: China's stockmarket mess The other buffer is one of the things hobbling the economy in the first place: state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Private firms are better run and more profitable, but SOEs, with their political backing, have far easier access to finance and dominate a series of restricted sectors, from energy to transport. These privileges carry with them political duties, including an obligation to help maintain social stability by refraining from laying off workers. With the army planning to cut some 300,000 positions as part of a modernisation plan, the government reminded SOEs last month that they are required to reserve 5% of vacancies for demobilised soldiers. In a working paper last year, analysts at the International Monetary Fund noted signs of “increased labour hoarding in overcapacity sectors”, helping to suppress unemployment at the cost of weaker productivity. But even SOEs do not have infinite resources. Loss-making companies with little prospect of turning round their performance are starting to shed workers. Longmay Mining, the largest SOE in the northern province of Heilongjiang, said in September that it would cut up to 100,000 jobs, nearly half its workforce. China’s economy should, in theory, be able to accommodate many of the unemployed. The working-age population peaked in 2012, so all else being equal, there is less competition for jobs. At the same time, the economy’s tilt towards the services sector, which is more labour-intensive than industry, generates jobs even as growth slows. Services probably accounted for more than half of China’s GDP last year for the first time in decades, and their share is growing: in nominal terms, service output grew by 11.6% year-on-year in the first nine months of 2015, whereas manufacturing grew by just 1.2%. The central bank estimates that as long as the service sector’s share of GDP increased by one percentage point in 2015 (in fact, it did better), the economy could have slowed by nearly half a percentage point and yet still generated the same number of new jobs as it did in 2014. This helps to explain why employment centres around the country still report a shortage of workers: an average of 1.09 vacancies for every applicant (see chart). For those hoping to be hired by accounting firms or restaurants, opportunities are plentiful. The problem for shipbuilders and coalminers is that many of the service jobs are destined for younger people with more education, and the jobs they can get, whether as janitors or cooks, often pay less well than their current work. The government has promised to provide retraining for those who lose jobs in industry, but that can only help so much. “Most of these guys can’t just go from making a living by their brawn to making a living by their brains,” says a recruiter at the human-resources centre in Yizheng. For the employees of Sainty Marine, the question of what their next job might be is not the most pressing one. They have been showing up to work without getting paid. Mr Wang, 45, a welder, has a note signed by a manager stating that he is owed several months’ salary, money that he needs to pay back relatives who lent him cash to build a house. He joined the group blocking the highway, but that achieved nothing. He has tried to corner his bosses, but that also got him nowhere. Lately, he says, he has been looking at the crane, sizing it up for a climb.GLOOM seems to have descended at the start of 2016. Equity markets have had the worst start to the year in at least two decades. The great and the good have queued up to warn of the dangers ahead. George Soros, a fund manager, said the Chinese financial environment reminded him of 2008, when the financial crisis was at its height. Larry Summers, a former American treasury secretary, declared in the Financial Times: “The global risk to domestic economic performance in the US, Europe and many emerging markets is as great as any time I can remember.” George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor, spoke of a “cocktail of threats” facing the global economy. The chart shows a number of indicators of concern, from rising credit spreads (the interest-rate premium paid by risky borrowers) to slumping stockmarkets in the emerging world. Investors have many worries. The first is that the Chinese economy is weaker than the GDP statistics suggest. Falling commodity prices, the collapse in the Baltic Dry index (which tracks the cost of shipping bulk goods) and the sluggish growth of global trade can all be seen as signs of weakness. Given China’s importance to global growth, this means that 2016 may turn out to be yet another year when growth disappoints. Mr Soros sees a parallel with 2008 in the rapid credit growth in China and other emerging markets. If growth slows, borrowers may be unable to repay their debts. Similarly, emerging-market companies that have borrowed in dollars may be in trouble if their currencies depreciate. Asian nations might be forced to devalue if China lets the yuan fall sharply (see Free exchange). The second concern is that the Federal Reserve might have miscalculated when it pushed up interest rates in December—the first increase since 2006. The employment numbers in America may still be strong, as December’s muscular payroll numbers showed, but the labour market is a lagging indicator. The Atlanta Fed’s nowcasting model suggests that GDP growth in the fourth quarter was just 0.8% at an annualised rate. Manufacturing looks weak: the purchasing managers’ index has been below 50 (which signals contraction) for two straight months. A related worry is that the global economy has become over-dependent on the stimulus provided by low interest rates and quantitative easing (QE). Such policies may have saved the world from another depression, but they have not led to a return to pre-crisis growth rates. Moreover, by pushing up asset prices, they have spurred inequality. Nor has the problem of high debt levels been eliminated; the debt has simply been shifted from the private to the public sector. A swift return to what used to be thought of as “normal” interest rates (3-4%) would prove crippling. Martin Taylor, manager of a hedge fund called Nevsky Capital, detailed his concerns in a farewell letter to clients. Despite having earned an average annual return of 18% for 15 years, he is closing the fund. He fears that the global economy has become too dependent on China and India, where he does not trust the economic data. Individual equities have also become riskier, since companies have taken advantage of low rates to borrow more. And the equity market is less transparent, with trading dominated by index funds and computer programs. The risk of sudden, sharp shifts in prices has grown. “We could be caught up in an erroneous market trend, which could then persist for far longer than we could take the pain,” Mr Taylor wrote. All this is in stark contrast with the idea of fund managers as “masters of the universe” or the Thatcherite mantra, “You can’t buck the markets”. Since 2008 central banks have shown they can bend the markets to their will, at least for a while. Investors have to devote a lot of their time to poring over every word of central bankers’ speeches and statements for a change in policy emphasis. But perhaps this year’s sell-off indicates that central banks are losing their grip or that investors are less confident the authorities know what they are doing. Albert Edwards, an ultra-bearish strategist at Société Générale (SG), a French bank, says: “The Fed and its promiscuous fraternity of central banks have created the conditions for another debacle every bit as large as the 2008 global financial crisis.” He thinks a global recession and widespread deflation are on their way. This may still be a minority view, but more people are listening: SG’s annual bearfest in London this week had 850 attendees, a record audience. Economist.com/blogs/buttonwoodDEBT crises, capital flight and corruption are all familiar problems for poor countries trying to finance their development. A bulwark, say some, is remittances: money sent home by migrants, worth $580 billion in 2014. Unlike portfolio flows, which tend to flee at the first sign of trouble, remittances usually increase in tough times. And unlike aid, they go directly into the pockets of ordinary people, bypassing corrupt officials. All this is true, and important. But even remittances, alas, cannot always be relied upon. The experience in 2015 of Central Asia and the Caucasus, regions exceptionally dependent on remittances from Russia, shows why. Some countries there export oil or gas. Others export people. In Tajikistan four in ten working-age adults have sought jobs abroad; in 2014 they sent home remittances equivalent to 42% of GDP, proportionally more than any other country in the world received. Armenia, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan also received remittances worth at least 10% of GDP—more than the Philippines, a country famous for its migrant workers. Most migrants go north, to Russia, finding work on building sites or in other low-income jobs. But Russia’s economy contracted last year, and remittances have plummeted. In dollar terms, money sent home from Russia by Tajik migrants was down by 44% in the first six months of 2015 compared with the same period in 2014, according to the Russian Central Bank; remittances from Russia to Uzbekistan fell by half, and those to Kyrgyzstan fell by a third. These figures partly reflect the weakness of the rouble. Other currencies in the region have also fallen, but not as far: every rouble a Tajik migrant sends home buys 35% fewer somoni than in June 2014, for example. Migrants also have less money to spare. Real wages are falling in Russia: they were 9% lower in November than a year before. And migrant numbers are down too, because of job losses and tighter immigration laws (though not for migrants from Armenia and Kyrgyzstan, which this year joined the Eurasian Economic Union, a Russian-centred economic bloc). Lower remittances are contributing to lower growth. The IMF expected GDP to grow at 2.3% last year for oil and gas importers in the region, down from 4.7% in 2014 and 5.7% in 2013. Those numbers understate the real effects. Since GDP is a measure of domestic production, it only captures declines in remittances to the extent that recipients spend less on local goods or services. Purchasing power has dropped by more than 10%, says the World Bank, once the direct impacts of remittances and declining terms of trade are taken into account. Working longer hours or tapping into savings is helping some scrape by, but even so, 40% of households in Tajikistan say they cannot afford enough food. As people spend less, governments are spending more to support demand: in the main remittance-receiving countries, fiscal deficits are expected to have widened by about two percentage points of GDP last year. The falling price of regional exports such as aluminium, copper and cotton is adding to economic woes and putting further strain on government finances. The Central Asian experience is unusual. Elsewhere, remittances grew in 2015. In South Asia they were up by 6%, according to projections from the World Bank. The region’s remittances come mainly from America and the Middle East; a strong dollar and fiscal expansion in the Gulf have kept the money flowing. But small countries such as Nepal, where remittances were equivalent to 30% of GDP in 2014, look vulnerable to future shocks. Central America and some Pacific islands also depend on remittances: they suffered in 2009, the only year this century that global remittances have fallen. In the long run, the solution is to diversify. Central Asian countries are trying to improve their infrastructure, supported by Chinese investment; trade with China has increased tenfold in a decade. The lesson of a tough year is obvious: though remittances can finance development, they are not a substitute for it.
