SINCE the new year, the price of oil has surprised even the most bearish punters, plunging by 18%. On January 12th West Texas Intermediate (WTI), America’s benchmark, briefly dipped below $30 a barrel, its lowest level since 2003. The next day an incipient rally was undone by the news that American stocks of crude oil and petroleum products had reached 1.3 billion barrels, a new record. Firms are hunkering down. BP this week announced hefty job cuts; Petrobras, Brazil’s state-controlled oil firm, slashed planned investment. Some blame factors other than supply and demand for turning increasingly bearish. For instance, Standard Chartered, a bank, said oil might need to fall as low as $10 a barrel before speculators concede that “matters had gone too far”. But it’s mostly guesswork. Such is the level of uncertainty that American derivatives contracts tied to deliveries in April imply an oil price of anything from $25 to $56 a barrel, according to official number-crunchers. Neil Atkinson of the International Energy Agency (IEA), a forecasting outfit, finds lots in the physical oil market to be bearish about—particularly regarding consumption, which was one of the few factors supporting prices last year. The sell-off in oil in the past fortnight has occurred concurrently with a slide in the Chinese stockmarket and the yuan, which some investors think reflects weakness in China’s economy and hence in demand for oil. Though Mr Atkinson acknowledges that possibility, he thinks this risk is overplayed: figures on January 13th showed China imported a record 6.7m barrels a day (b/d) of oil in 2015. The trouble, though, is that apart from India and a wobbly China, demand is not looking promising anywhere this year. Europe is unlikely to see a repeat of its relatively strong oil-demand growth in 2015. Although America’s economy continues to grow, tightening fuel-efficiency standards cap the upside. Drivers in the Middle East, where fuel use rose last year, are more likely to keep their cars off the road after their governments raised petrol prices or eliminated fuel subsidies altogether to shore up public finances. “There are now considerable uncertainties about oil-demand growth globally,” Mr Atkinson says. Adding to the gloom, producers are not turning off the taps as fast as people expected. The latest rout stems from an OPEC meeting in early December in which the producers’ cartel abandoned output quotas. Saudi Arabia, which used to curb output to rescue prices, now refuses to play that role, and instead is bent on driving high-cost producers out of business. Saudi officials privately say that they expect the price of oil to rebound late this year or early in 2017 as global output begins to lag behind demand. The natural decline as fields are depleted saps production by at least 5% a year, they argue, even before accounting for the effects of reductions in new drilling by embattled oil firms. But there remains huge uncertainty about how much Iran will export when UN sanctions are lifted, possibly in coming weeks. What is more, Mr Atkinson says, production continued to rise last year from high-cost wells in the Gulf of Mexico and Canada’s tar sands because, however much oil prices fell, operating costs were lower. “The habit of the industry is to keep producing for as long as you can. Anyone who blinks first is handing a lifeline to their competitors,” he says. INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability To be sure, production in America is falling, thanks chiefly to cutbacks by struggling shale-oil producers. With oil prices at $30 a barrel, America’s oilmen will have an even tougher task shoring up output by drilling new wells, and will face further pressure from their bankers to reduce borrowing. AlixPartners, a consultancy that advises troubled firms, says more will go bankrupt this year. It forecasts a funding gap of $102 billion this year between American oil firms’ projected cash flows and their interest payments and capital spending, up from $83 billion in 2015. It said the downturn “could be one of the most severe and prolonged ever”. But however big the cutbacks, they are not yet enough to reduce the glut (see chart). Global inventories are at record highs, the IEA says. The Energy Information Administration, an American government agency, predicts they will rise a further 700,000 b/d before supply and demand begin to balance out in 2017. It adds that storage at Cushing, Oklahoma, which can hold 73m barrels, is at record highs of 64m barrels. Brian Busch of Genscape, an industry data gatherer, says it’s a similar story in China, with ships carrying oil spotted waiting at anchor out at sea because storage tanks appeared to be full. Based on the high level of stocks, Mr Busch thinks it could take up to a year and a half before the bear market ends. The only certainty is, the quicker the oil price falls, the sooner that day will come.THE billboards advertising Powerball, an American lottery, were not big enough to display the size of the jackpot in the draw that took place on the evening of January 13th: $1.6 billion. That prize will be split among the three winners, who bought their tickets in California, Florida and Tennessee. For several days beforehand, Lotto fever gripped the nation: long queues formed outside shops selling tickets and on the day of the draw sales were ringing up at a rate of $787,000 per minute. Powerball’s website had some advice for its frantic customers: “Swinging a live chicken above your head while wishing for the future numbers does NOT work.” A more useful bit of counsel would have been that buying a lottery ticket is fun but financially foolish. A punter buying a Powerball ticket has a 1 in 292m chance of winning the jackpot. Buyers are around four times more likely to be killed by an asteroid impact this year. Lotteries are designed to be a bad deal, hoovering up participants’ money in order to plug state budgets and fund good causes. What’s more, the designers are getting better at their jobs. Victor Matheson, professor of economics at the College of the Holy Cross in Massachusetts, explains that sales are much more sensitive to the size of the jackpots than to the likelihood of winning. After a particularly big prize is won, there is a halo effect, whereby ticket sales remain high even though the jackpot has reverted to the norm. So lottery designers go to great lengths to boost the size of the big prize. One easy trick is to make the jackpot seem bigger than it is. The sums advertised by Powerball represented the pre-tax value over 29 years of an annuity that winners can opt to receive. If the winners choose a lump sum instead, they get just over 60% of that, on which they would have to pay tax of at least 40%. Another approach is to boost the jackpot by expanding a lottery’s geographic scope, and thus its potential pool of participants. Powerball and Mega Millions, the two largest American lotteries, have both taken this tack. By forging alliances among state lotteries, they are both now available to residents of 44 of America’s 50 states. Similarly, EuroMillions, a lottery that covers nine European countries, has twice offered a jackpot of €190m ($206m). Powerball’s record-breaking jackpot stems mainly from a riskier strategy, however. If the chances of winning become so slim that no one guesses the right combination of numbers, the prize rolls over, growing to a vast sum. Both Powerball and the British national lottery changed their rules to this effect in October, by increasing the number of balls in the draw. In Britain the change slashed the chance of a winning guess from 1 in 14m to 1 in 45m. In America it fell from 1 in 175m to 1 in 292m. There is a catch: make it too hard to win a lottery, and punters will lose interest. So even as lottery designers have been lowering the chances of winning the jackpot, they have been boosting the chances of winning lesser prizes, notes David Spiegelhalter of the University of Cambridge. As larger jackpots draw more customers, the chance that someone will win shoots up. But so does the chance of multiple winners, which lowers the expected value of a ticket. In the run-up to this week’s draw, Powerball’s organisers expected that roughly 86% of all possible numerical combinations would have been bought, suggesting sales of some 570m tickets. With that many tickets sold, the chance of a winner having to share the pot with others (as indeed happened) was around 68%, compared with just 4% for more typical sales of 25m tickets. Only very rarely have so many players piled in that the expected value of the jackpot has fallen, and mostly when there are huge jackpots on offer. But the affliction is set to become more common. Britain’s National Lottery enjoyed unprecedented demand in the run-up to the record £66m ($95m) jackpot won on January 9th. Sales for the 28 Powerball draws since its rule change in October (excluding the draw on January 13th) were 134% higher than for the 28 preceding draws. According to Mr Matheson, the customers who are drawn in by higher jackpots tend to be richer than the average. So while lotteries may be snaffling ever more money for an ever smaller chance of striking it rich, at least the burden is tilting away from the very poorest.FOR centuries liberals have argued that people should be trusted to make their own decisions. Regulators increasingly want to protect them from themselves. In the wake of the financial crisis, the administration of Barack Obama established a new agency, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The CFPB has so far focused on regulating mortgages, for example by making their terms more digestible. But it is now weighing stricter curbs in other markets: new rules on payday loans are expected in the first quarter. Other new rules are on the horizon, too. The Department of Labor is proposing a “fiduciary rule” for financial advisers who help Americans to invest their pension pots. Currently, many advisers earn juicy commissions by recommending costly products. A study by the White House suggested such “conflicted” investment advice costs consumers roughly one percentage point in returns a year, and that clients are largely unaware of the costs. The new regulations would require that advisers always act in the best interest of clients. Republicans tried, and failed, to kill the proposal in budget negotiations late last year, and the fight isn’t over. Economists might once have pooh-poohed the bureaucrats. Most assumed that individuals act rationally when making decisions. But when it comes to head-scratching financial choices—how much to save, where to invest—that assumption looks ever more iffy. Take mortgages. Most American home loans last for 30 years, with the interest rate fixed. When rates fall dramatically, most borrowers would be better off if they refinanced. Yet too few do. In 2013 42% of American borrowers paid rates exceeding 5%, when the average rate paid on new mortgages was less than 4%. People make similar mistakes when saving, failing to take advantage of their employer’s obligation to contribute to their pensions, for instance, and stashing money in taxable rather than tax-free accounts. In a lecture at the annual conference of the American Economic Association earlier this month, John Campbell of Harvard University asked what liberal policymakers should do in the face of these apparent errors. American financial literacy is very low, he noted, particularly among the young. Over half of American men aged 18-24 and nearly 70% of women of that age cannot correctly answer at least three of five basic financial questions, such as whether it is riskier to invest in a single stock or in a mutual fund (see chart). Savvy increases with age, though so does overconfidence. People who wrongly think that they know what they are doing are particularly liable to make costly mistakes, as they will not seek help. Many now worry that firms that exploit the ignorance of such consumers will rack up profits, or use the revenues to subsidise juicy deals for other customers. Financial mistakes can also make inequality worse, if poorer folk are more likely to make them. In “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”, Thomas Piketty speculated that richer investors earn higher returns, and showed that this is true of university endowments. Recent work has uncovered a similar phenomenon among individuals. Mr Campbell and his colleagues analysed returns between 2002 and 2012 for investors with an account at an Indian securities depository. They found that the “Piketty effect”—fatter accounts earning greater returns—accounted for 43% of the variation in investors’ income. What to do? One possible solution is financial education. Yet the evidence that this works is surprisingly weak. A recent state-by-state study found that it had no beneficial effect, while using up valuable classroom time. More paternalistic interventions are rightly controversial: a right-wing campaign group recently ran an attack ad against the CFPB, portraying it as a Soviet-style bureaucracy crushing the dreams of hapless borrowers. Some instead prefer the idea of “nudging” people towards better decisions, while preserving their freedom to choose. In weighing up the merits of liberty and protection, it is easy to make a mistake.WHEN a financial firm boasts of offering the biggest loans at the lowest rates with the slimmest collateral, it has either devised the underwriting equivalent of a better mousetrap or is setting itself up for an almighty fall. At first glance SoFi, a startup based in San Francisco, looks like it is up to the sort of tricks that would make even a pre-2008 banker blush: lending youthful customers $975,000 to buy a $1m house, say. Yet few “fintech” firms seem quite as threatening to America’s incumbent banks. Social Finance, as it once was, started life in 2011 as a way to match students who needed money to pay for a degree at Stanford with alumni with lots of dough. Engineering graduates from one of America’s grandest universities, the firm’s founders reasoned, were unlikely to welch on their debts, especially with Silicon Valley booming. That allowed SoFi to price student loans below even the notionally discounted rates available under government schemes, attracting lots of customers. Well-to-do alumni, meanwhile, were happy to lend via SoFi’s platform, understanding what a safe bet the borrowers were. The firm also raised money to invest in its own loans, largely to package them as securities it could then sell on, a variant on “marketplace lending”, a crowded field in fintech. SoFi quickly expanded—to borrowers from other prestigious universities, and to other forms of lending. Having provided many of its customers with their first loans, SoFi then worked to cater to their expanding financial needs after graduation, offering them personal loans and mortgages. Again, the firm’s lending algorithms ignore the rigid credit scores used by banks in favour of common-sense indicators of ability to pay. High Earners Not Rich Yet, or HENRYs, are its main customer base. To distinguish itself from banks, SoFi smothers customers with personalised service. Its 100,000 or so borrowers are “members”, invited to parties thrown by the firm. Entrepreneurs among them can apply to have their loan repayments suspended, and make use of SoFi’s offices for meetings with investors. Lost your job? Whereas a bank might foreclose, SoFi will tap its network to help you find a new one. Mortgages can be obtained by pecking at a smartphone and sending snaps of required documents. Pen-and-ink signatures are for fuddy-duddies. The easygoing branding belies an outfit that can hold its own on Wall Street. Mike Cagney, its founder and boss, is a former trader at Wells Fargo. Like many other fintech lending operations, SoFi obtains the money it lends from hedge funds and investment banks. Its balance-sheet is turned over every two to three weeks; some of the loans it issues get sliced, diced and repackaged in much the same way subprime mortgages once did. Most fintech startups aim to do one thing well and sell that service as widely as possible. SoFi is the opposite: its customer base is focused (though it now lends to graduates of over 2,200 schools) but it is busy diversifying its offering. Beyond student loans and mortgages, it aspires to manage its customers’ wealth and offer them insurance. It even wants to launch something akin to a current account, without officially becoming a deposit-taking institution. But SoFi faces three obstacles if it is to keep growing fast enough to justify a recent investment that valued it at around $4 billion (it is not listed). The first is growing without lowering its lending standards. Of the $6 billion it has lent in total, more than $4 billion went out the door in 2015. Such rapid growth usually comes with more than a few dud loans. Mortgages seem an obvious concern. Banks like to lend to buyers with a 30% deposit. SoFi is happy with 10%—and now has a scheme to help borrowers raise most of the down payment too, in exchange for a slice of the increase in the value of the house. Can that be sensible, given that its loans are concentrated in pricey property markets, which are likeliest to deflate? Mr Cagney says his customers will keep paying even if their houses are worth less than their mortgages. That is placing an awful lot of faith in Americans, who have walked away en masse from underwater mortgages before, and particularly in millennials, a generation often derided for its feckless and unpredictable behaviour. Like other young fintech lenders, SoFi has never had to weather a recession. The second obstacle is rising interest rates. SoFi has made a packet by refinancing student loans which were in effect mispriced by government programmes. If interest rates rise substantially, the scope for existing borrowers to save money by refinancing will disappear. Mortgage refinancing will also dry up. Mr Cagney says he assumes much higher interest rates are unlikely anytime soon and that the firm will have diversified enough to handle them by the time they appear. The third is regulation. Especially if it starts gathering something resembling deposits, SoFi will have many of the attributes of a bank while insisting it should not be regulated like one. In part it simply wants to skirt the red tape that comes from accepting deposits, along with the government guarantee they attract. But there is also a libertarian bent to the shaggy-haired Mr Cagney, who clearly believes that governments meddle too much in markets. The brief he received from his biggest investor, SoftBank, which led a $1 billion funding round in September, is to reach a valuation of $100 billion or go bust, but not to settle for the status quo. That is the kind of talk that might panic regulators, who prefer financial institutions to be boring.THE past six months have been hard on the reputations of China’s economic managers. Their attempts to bring troublesome stockmarkets to heel border on slapstick. The uncertain handling of the country’s exchange rate, on the other hand, is no laughing matter. Unexpected wobbles in the value of China’s currency roil global markets. Yet no exchange-rate policy offers a sure and safe route forward. Some see a resemblance in China’s predicament to the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s. Then, fast-growing countries like Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand faced outflows of capital as investor sentiment flipped from bullish to bearish. Governments were forced to abandon currency pegs as their foreign-exchange reserves dwindled. Massive depreciations led to financial havoc, as asset prices tumbled and these countries’ enormous debts ballooned in dollar terms. Painful recessions ensued. The lessons of the Asian crisis were not lost on China’s leaders, however. During its great boom, in the 2000s, China maintained tight capital controls, permitting foreign direct investment while eschewing “hot money”. The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) intervened heavily in foreign-exchange markets to keep the yuan cheap, building up $4 trillion in reserves in the process. Where the crisis countries of the 1990s ran persistent trade deficits, China kept its current account in surplus; thus adding to, rather than draining from, its foreign-exchange reserves. Despite these prophylactics China now faces its own financial crunch. Its reserves are down by almost $700 billion from their peak, thanks to capital flight and sinking asset values. Determined money has long seeped out of China’s stockade; signs of a bigger leak emerged in the latter half of 2015. In December alone reserves fell by more than $100 billion. Capital slipped abroad at an annualised pace of $1 trillion in the second half of 2015. In the third quarter, China’s outward foreign-direct investment rose from $29 billion to $32 billion while inward investment fell sharply, from $71 billion to $39 billion; at $7 billion, the net flow of inward investment was the lowest since 2000.   An anti-corruption drive, slowing growth and rising American interest rates are all partly to blame. Once begun, however, capital flight can be hard to control. Chinese citizens can move a maximum of $50,000 abroad each year. If just 5% of the population used its quota, China’s reserves would evaporate. The authorities are desperate to prevent such an outcome, and the severe tightening of domestic credit conditions it would entail, but there is no painless way to do so. Many economists reckon China will allow the yuan to fall. After all, the currency has appreciated by 20% against a broad range of currencies since 2012, thanks to rising wages and a peg to the strengthening dollar. Yet a sinking yuan poses threats. Roughly $1 trillion of China’s accumulated debts are denominated in dollars. That is small beer next to $28 trillion in total Chinese debt. But because Chinese firms are so highly leveraged, even a small rise in the cost of servicing dollar-denominated debts could force some into asset sales or bankruptcy. That, in turn, would encourage more capital outflows, depressing the yuan’s value still further. The economy could expect only a modest boost to exports for its trouble. Since much of the material that goes into Chinese exports is itself imported, devaluation does not boost exports that much. It also squeezes the purchasing power of Chinese consumers and thus slows the rebalancing of its economy from investment to consumption, while irking America and encouraging competitive devaluations elsewhere. Alternatively, China could hold the yuan’s value steady. The big depreciations of the late 1990s were done out of necessity rather than by choice, after all. Investors fleeing from Thailand, for instance, converted their baht to dollars on their way out. When the government ran short of greenbacks, it had no option but to repay investors with many fewer dollars per baht. Yet China still has $3.3 trillion of hard currency in reserve. Stability poses its own problems, however. If China resists depreciation and capital outflows continue, the erosion of reserves could puncture the PBOC’s air of invulnerability, leading to faster capital leakage. A commitment to a strong yuan could also constrain China’s monetary policy. Cuts to interest rates tend to diminish a currency’s value. Any attempt to maintain it under such circumstances hastens the depletion of reserves. Why not strengthen capital controls, in that case? In 1998 Malaysia imposed controls on fleeing investors and outperformed some other crisis-hit economies, such as Indonesia. The government is cracking down on the underground financiers in Macau and banks in Hong Kong that help sneak Chinese cash past the controls. If ordinary citizens began moving savings abroad in greater numbers, China could reduce the limit on foreign transfers. Yet backtracking on planned reforms would be a huge embarrassment for China’s leaders, who have laboured long and hard to raise the yuan’s status internationally. It would also deter foreign investors, worsening the short-run foreign-exchange picture and long-run growth prospects. Faith no more Ample reserves, capital controls, a trade surplus and a determinedly interventionist state mean that China is a long way from a full-fledged crisis. Neither is all the apparent capital flight as worrying as it might appear: purchases of foreign securities by Chinese corporates may look like a stampede for the exits, but can serve to hedge firms with foreign-currency debts against depreciation. But there is good reason for nervousness, in China and elsewhere. All the countries afflicted by the Asian crisis combined accounted for a much smaller share of global output in 1998 than China does now. And China seems not to have absorbed the most important lesson of that crisis: that confidence matters.WHEN selecting a base for preparing attacks, jihadists should choose flats that are on the ground floor, hard to peer into, not near government buildings and unsecluded in a newly built neighbourhood. So advises “Declaration of Jihad Against the Country’s Tyrants”, an al-Qaeda manual found in Manchester in 2000. Flats conforming to these specifications make it easier to dig secret storage areas under the floor, to melt away into the city and to avoid attention from neighbours who, were they longtime residents, might take a greater interest in newcomers. Thanks to the clever use of software, tips from this and other manuals obtained by intelligence agencies are proving increasingly valuable to counter-terrorist forces deployed both in the West and abroad. Technologists are modifying existing mapping software to produce “geographic profiling” programs that show which areas should be searched or put under surveillance first in the hunt for hideouts, bomb workshops and weapons caches. “Declaration of Jihad Against the Country’s Tyrants”, for example, was a cornerstone of Building Intent, a geoprofiling program developed by Alper Caglayan of Milcord, in Massachusetts, for America’s defence department. In addition to terrorist guidelines on which buildings to use, software such as Building Intent is fed the co-ordinates of bombings and other actions thought related to the group of interest. These are useful because such groups are often reluctant to conduct operations far from their bases, be it to save time, to remain in familiar or friendly territory, or to reduce the likelihood of encountering a checkpoint. SCARE story At the same time, such people also tend not to operate too close to base, in the hope of sparing it scrutiny. Data from years of home-made-bomb (IED, or “improvised explosive device”) attacks and discoveries in Iraq, analysed by Roy Lindelauf of the Dutch Defence Academy, suggest that those planting bombs in urban areas almost always carry the device at least a couple of hundred metres from where it was stored, though rarely much more than a kilometre. Also—suicide missions aside—few IEDs are built, stored or detonated in the territories of rival groups. Data from as few as five IED blasts can thus more or less pinpoint the location of a workshop or cache. What is true of IEDs is true also of those places from which insurgents launch mortar rounds and rockets. Taliban fighters in Afghanistan, for example, do not like to tote their weaponry far, lest they be caught or killed before getting a good opportunity to use it. The American army has therefore developed, for use in Afghanistan, geoprofiling software called SCARE-S2. This crunches data on the times and co-ordinates of enemy attacks, analysing these in the context of information about the country’s terrain, road network and ethnic make-up, as well as what is known at the time of the shifting pattern of tribal alliances in the area of interest. The software then identifies a handful of villages that are most likely to host the commander behind the attacks or the weapons cache used to make them. Details about SCARE-S2’s performance are, understandably, scarce. But a publicly available analysis by Paulo Shakarian, who led the program’s development, used data on hundreds of earlier Taliban attacks in Kandahar and Helmand provinces to test its effectiveness. The areas this test flagged up as worth searching had an average of 4.8 villages in them, and NATO records of discoveries of Taliban commanders and weapons caches showed that the density of such discoveries in these flagged areas was 35 times that of discoveries in the two provinces as a whole. Guerrillas and terrorists are not fools. They are aware they may be under surveillance, and take what they hope are appropriate counter-measures. They are unlikely, for example, to make calls from inside a safe house in which they are living. Instead, they typically make calls from roughly spaced out nearby locations, taking care not to call too often from the same spot. They hope, thereby, that if their activity is being monitored, it will appear random and therefore meaningless. Spacing things out like this is, in mathematical fact, anything but random: that, in itself, is suspicious. But true randomness would also be odd. As Ian Laverty, the boss of ECRI, a geoprofiling-software firm in Vancouver, observes, innocent phone calls have geographical patterns, because people have routines. Those who take steps to elude the authorities thus often end up unwittingly creating a profile of where their home base is—a profile that a piece of ECRI’s software called Rigel Analyst can spot. This software is used by more than 90 intelligence agencies around the world. Its applications include searching for Taliban rocket caches in Afghanistan. Geoprofiling is thus already an important counter-insurgency tool. It is likely to become more so in the future, because the number of pertinent actions that can be plotted by it is booming, according to a geoprofiler in Denmark’s intelligence apparatus who prefers to remain anonymous. This operative uses geoprofiling software called ArcGIS that analyses Global Positioning System (GPS) data provided unwittingly by insurgents’ growing use of smartphones and other gadgets that are equipped, by default, with GPS kit. For example, simply right-clicking on propaganda images posted online often obtains a GPS “geocode” that reveals where the picture was taken. “I’d like to keep my job, so we won’t say any more,” his colleague chimes in. Here I go again Other experts are more forthcoming. Geoprofiling software is now being fed the locations of extremist groups’ leafleting and graffiti, says Kim Rossmo, who led the development of Rigel Analyst and also trains intelligence and military geoprofilers in America, Australia, Canada and the Netherlands. The locations of muggings and robberies are also analysed, because many terrorists finance themselves from the proceeds of such crime. Even data on income distribution are plugged into geoprofiling software according to Matthew Degn, who was once an adviser to the Iraqi interior ministry’s intelligence directorate. The poorer an area is, he says, the more likely a flat there houses people paid to store weapons or, say, to snip off countless match heads to make bombs. The likelihood increases if there have been lots of violent deaths in that quarter, for bloodletting often spawns extremists, or at least acceptance of them. Geoprofiling works especially well in countries like Iraq, in which sectarian splits limit where people are willing to live or work. It is, nonetheless, still a useful tool in places, such as Western countries, where patterns of belief might be thought of as less tied to geography. As Brent Smith, of the University of Arkansas’ Centre for Advanced Spatial Technologies observes, right-wing extremists rarely hole up near gay bars, abortion clinics and other places they consider “pollutants of urban life”. In the matter of politically motivated violence, the ideas thought worth killing and dying for vary. To the geoprofiler it makes no difference.IT IS getting ever trickier to find incandescent bulbs. Almost all rich countries are phasing them out because they squander so much energy as heat rather than visible light. But they have ardent fans. Unlike many of their would-be successors, such as compact fluorescent lights (CFLs) and light-emitting diodes (LEDs), they cast a full spectrum of colours reminiscent of daylight, need no time to warm up and can be dimmed. Ahead of the European phase-out in 2009, for example, Vaclav Klaus, the Czech president, urged people to hoard a lifetime’s worth. Such stockpiling may have been premature. This week, researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, led by Marin Soljacic, demonstrated a modified incandescent bulb that maintains the technology’s advantages while vastly improving its energy credentials, giving it the potential to trounce CFLs and LEDs. Incandescent bulbs are so named because their light comes from heating their central filaments up until they glow. The colour of such a glow (ie, the wavelength of the radiation) depends on how hot the glowing object is. The sun, whose light an incandescent bulb attempts to approximate, is hotter than a filament, so radiates more strongly at shorter wavelengths (see chart). But in both cases the visible light produced is accompanied by a lot of infrared—or heat, as it is more familiarly known. Dr Soljacic has therefore sought a way to let the former pass while reflecting the latter. This reflected infrared heats the filament, meaning less electricity is needed to keep that filament at a given temperature and thus at a given visible-light output. Prior efforts to accomplish the same thing, stretching back to the 1970s, tried to do so with some kind of coating on the bulb itself. Dr Soljacic and his colleagues realised that the filament would capture more reflected heat if it were flattened out rather than being made from a thin coil of wire, as is now the case, and if the reflection happened nearer to it. To design a reflector suitable to the task, the team relied on an idea similar to that used in the anti-reflection coatings applied to spectacle lenses. These coatings are made of thin layers of materials of slightly different refractive indices (that is, light moves at slightly different speeds within them). The layers’ thicknesses and compositions are chosen so as to force light waves to add together or subtract from one another as they are reflected from the various layers. This process of interference is governed by the wavelength of the light in question, so it can affect light of different wavelengths differently. And visible light and infrared light do have different wavelengths (infrared waves are longer). Engineering a stack of layers that can pass visible light unchanged and reflect infrared—and do so from all of the angles from which the filament radiates—was no easy task. For that, the team used a computer program which was able to learn from its mistakes to work out what material each layer should be made from, and how thick it should be. Their first attempt involved stacks of 90 alternating layers of silica and tantalum oxide, two common coating materials, of varying thicknesses, from 17 to 426 nanometres (billionths of a metre). As they report in Nature Nanotechnology, a pair of such stacks, arranged on either side of the flat filament, led to a bulb that converted about 6.6% of the electrical energy running through it into visible light. That is far better than the 2% or so of a conventional incandescent bulb, and is comparable with low-efficiency LEDs. Their calculations show that adding layers of aluminium oxide to the mix and increasing the number of layers to 300 should increase that efficiency to 40%, far better than even the most efficient fluorescent lights. Whether Dr Soljacic’s process can be industrialised remains to be seen. But if it can, then the likes of Mr Klaus may come to find that their hoards are worthless.MENTION the phrases “greenhouse gases” and “global warming” in the same breath and most people will think of the carbon dioxide produced by burning fossil fuels such as coal and oil. But CO2 is not the only greenhouse gas and fossil fuels are not the only source of such gases. A surprising and neglected one is the world’s ruminant livestock—cattle, sheep and so on. Ruminants play host to bacteria that digest the otherwise undigestible grass and other cellulose-rich plants those animals eat, making nutrients such as fatty acids available to the beasts the bacteria inhabit. But the complicated ecosystem of a ruminant’s stomach includes other creatures, too. Many are methanogens—organisms that react carbon dioxide with hydrogen made by the cellulose-digesting bugs, to create water and methane. A lot of methane. A hundred million tonnes of it a year for all the world’s domesticated ruminants, according to the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organisation. And methane is a greenhouse gas 25 times more powerful than CO2. Altogether, according to estimates by Andy Reisinger, of the New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre, methane emitted from livestock is responsible for about 14% of global warming since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. Pardon me for being rude! New Zealand is one of the guilty parties. Its 40m head of sheep and cattle mean that a third of its contribution to global warming is ruminant-belched methane. But Peter Janssen of AgResearch, the country’s main farming-science institute, hopes to change this. He and his colleagues are looking for ways to reduce the amount of methane the country’s animals burp up. Their first approach is to develop methanogen-specific drugs. Though methanogens look like bacteria, they belong to a completely different branch of life, the archaea. That means their enzymes are different from bacterial ones (and also, of course, from mammalian ones), so there is a reasonable hope of finding chemicals which interfere with methanogen enzymes while leaving those of both bacteria and host animal unaffected. Dr Janssen and his team have thus been screening thousands of compounds that might block the action of enzymes methanogens need to survive. A handful seem to, and are now being put through their paces—firstly in bubbling bottles of rumen contents (the rumen is one of the animals’ stomach chambers), and then in real cattle and sheep. So far, the best of them reduce methane emissions by 20-30%, with no apparent detriment to the animal. The problem with this approach is that it requires animals to be treated continuously, to stop the methanogens returning to full strength. This is fine when beasts are being farmed intensively, as is often the case in Europe (indeed, DSM Nutritional Products, a European firm, is working along the same lines). But cattle in New Zealand, and sheep everywhere, are normally put out to pasture, so Dr Janssen has a second string to his bow: vaccination. To do this, his team identified and synthesised proteins found on the surface of ruminant methanogens, and injected these into sheep and cattle, to try to raise antibodies to those proteins. In that they have succeeded. The desired antibodies turn up in both the blood and the saliva of injected animals. At the moment, however, these antibodies work against methanogens only in test tubes. The vaccinations that raise them do not seem to reduce methane output. A third approach is to breed animals with a lower propensity to burp methane. Among sheep, for example, some animals emit as much as 10% less of the gas than others. These low emitters have smaller rumens, meaning the contents pass through faster. This limits production of the hydrogen that is methanogens’ food source without, apparently, limiting that part of the digestive process which feeds animals—for sheep with small rumens do not grow more slowly than those with large ones. Rumen size, moreover, is heritable. This means that a breeding programme for low-emission sheep is a plausible idea. Dr Janssen’s fourth approach is to alter what animals eat. Certain food plants—forage rape and fodder beet, in particular—curb methane emission by as much as 25% compared with the belchings of animals fed on grass and clover. However, though rape and beet are planted by some farmers as supplementary food crops, particularly for winter forage, they do not, unlike grass and clover, keep growing after being grazed. They also have a mixture of nutrients different from grass and clover, and take more effort to establish. Most farmers, therefore, would require quite a lot of persuading to use them more widely. It was not me, it was my food... In New Zealand, such persuasion is being discussed. Its most probable form would be what is known memorably, though inaccurately, as a fart tax (most ruminant methane is belched, not farted). Whether such a tax could actually pass through the political process of a country so dependent on farming is moot. But if an effective way of dealing with methanogens were developed, farmers might find it in their interests to adopt it anyway. Some microbial ecologists think methanogens exclude other microbes which could produce yet more fatty acids for the host animal to turn into milk or meat. If that were true, and someone such as Dr Janssen were to come up with an effective way to suppress them, no persuasion at all would be needed. One of the simplest answers, though, may just be better husbandry. Clever pasture management, and the breeding and victualling of animals so that they produce more milk and meat for less fodder, means New Zealand’s production of milk has trebled since 1990 while methane emissions from dairy cattle have only doubled over that period. Similarly, the number of sheep in the country has almost halved, with a concomitant emissions reduction, yet as much lamb and mutton is produced as ever. Reduced release of methane may only be a by-product of these gains in efficiency, but it is a welcome one.Lieutenant Pigeon HIS was a daunting task. It was October 1918 and, with the 77th Infantry Division cut off from all other American forces, Major Charles Whittlesey sent him to inform allies of the soldiers’ predicament. Shot after shot was fired from the trenches as he made his perilous journey. Then, just as he reached Rampont, the local headquarters, a bullet severed his leg. He died eight months after the war ended, and received the Croix de Guerre posthumously, for the message he delivered had saved the lives of 194 men. He was then stuffed and shipped to the Smithsonian Museum, in Washington, DC, to be remembered as Cher Ami, the bravest homing pigeon of the first world war. Being shot at will hasten anyone’s journey. But might the thick smoke of battle have helped Cher Ami on his way too? That, at least, is the suggestion of a study just published in Scientific Reports by Li Zhongqiu of Nanjing University, in China, and Daniel Blumstein and Franck Courchamp, who both work at the University of California, Los Angeles. Dr Li and his colleagues have sought to study how air pollution shapes the behaviour of migratory animals by collecting information on homing-pigeon competitions organised by the Chinese Racing Pigeon Association. In particular, they have analysed 415 pigeon races run between the same two points, 300km (200 miles) apart on the heavily polluted North China Plain, during the autumns of 2013 and 2014. They noted rainfall, wind and air quality during each race, and expected to see numerous delays and lost birds on days when the smog was exceptionally thick. But that is not what they found. Of the 1,591 pigeons released in the races the team analysed, 715 made it home. This 45% return rate remained the same regardless of whether the air was thick with pollution or not. What did change was the time it took the pigeons to return to their natal lofts. When the sky was a thick soup of noxious smog, with an air-quality index of 500, pigeons returned home at an average speed of 68.2kph. By contrast, when the index value was zero and the air pure, the birds flew at only 55.6kph. Why the birds travel faster under terrible conditions is unclear. Homing pigeons are well known to use the sun, magnetic fields and infrasound to navigate but, in recent years, researchers have started speculating that they use odours too. With this in mind, Dr Li and his colleagues suggest that the birds have come to learn what the pollutants common to the biomass boilers and power plants found in different parts of northern China smell like, and are using this information to navigate. They do, however, have an alternative hypothesis. This is that the birds are flying faster to get out of the vile conditions as quickly as they can. One reason could be the obvious fact that thick pollution is hard to breathe, but the researchers argue that fear may also be a factor. Thick clouds of haze make it nearly impossible to detect predators, and pigeons may not be smart enough to understand that this lack of visibility works the other way around, too. They thus just want to get the hell out of there as fast as they can—quite possibly the true motive of Cher Ami as well.Not all prehistoric monsters were big ONE of the nastier ways an insect can make its living is as a parasitoid. Female parasitoids lay their eggs inside other insects, usually at the larval stage of the host’s life cycle. The grub that hatches then eats its host alive, reserving the vital organs until the moment when it is, itself, ready to pupate. Most parasitoids are wasps, but some are flies, and this fossil, dubbed Zhenia xiai by its discoverer, Bo Wang of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, is an early example of such an insect. The specimen shown, which Dr Bo describes in Naturwissenschaften, was trapped 99m years ago in tree resin that has solidified into amber, in a part of the world now known as northern Myanmar. Its sticky death has preserved features, such as the needle-like egg-laying organ, called an ovipositor, at its rear, and the host-grasping claws on its legs, that are often characteristic of a parasitoid way of life. Zhenia xiai belongs to the Eremochaetidae, a family which palaeoentomologists have long suspected were parasitoids, but whose previously known representatives were not well-enough preserved for them to be sure. Now, thanks to Dr Bo’s discovery, they are.  
