LIKE this reviewer, many parents will have given their children electric toothbrushes for Christmas, hoping that the sensors that buzz after two minutes will keep them brushing longer than their flimsy elbow grease. Both generations may, however, be ignorant of the fact that in that time the toothbrushes produce more than 62,000 strokes; that the power to generate such motion comes from tiny magnets using three rare metals, neodymium, dysprosium and boron; and that some of these metals are so coveted that in 2010 they were at the centre of a dangerous rift between China and Japan. In all, an electric toothbrush is made of 35 metals. The journey they take to children’s gums may involve China, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Chile, Russia, South Korea, Indonesia, Turkey and other countries too. They are rare, says David Abraham in “The Elements of Power”, a thought-provoking book that follows the trail of these elements, not because they are necessarily scarce or hard to extract. It is because they are used in tiny yet essential quantities—like yeast in a pizza. In terms of amounts consumed, these metals pale compared with base metals such as aluminium and copper. But, as the book argues, they are no less transformative—and possibly just as valuable—as oil and coal. That is a bold claim, but the author backs it up convincingly. Using vivid detail, he injects life and purpose into the story of elements that are so light, strong, heat-resistant and elusive that an American general in the 1950s quipped that they should be called “unobtainium”. Indium, part of an iPhone’s screen, is an “invisible link…between the phone and your finger”. Just a pinch of niobium, a soft, granite-grey metal mined mostly in Brazil, greatly strengthens a tonne of steel used in bridges and pipelines. Lithium is so light that it has become essential for rechargeable car-batteries. Dysprosium, as well as making an electric toothbrush whirr, helps power wind turbines. Military technology depends on numerous rare metals. Tungsten, for instance, is crucial for armour-piercing bullets. America’s forthcoming F-35 fighter planes are “flying periodic tables”, Mr Abraham writes. As with oil, those who can secure the resources have access to immense power. The problem, the book laments, is that China, Japan and South Korea are more keenly aware of the strategic importance of rare metals than Western countries, including the United States. Yet it is not just the rare metals that the book explores. As Mr Abraham follows their extraction, he finds geologists, refiners, traders, smugglers and boffins whose stories add to the intrigue of this shadowy trade. Deals are done in backrooms by likeable mavericks. One, a New Yorker called Noah Lehrman, is described as “likely the only person in history to perform at the Jewish Grateful DeadFest and advise the US Congress on resource security”. “The Elements of Power” turns out to be a critic as well as an advocate of the rare-metals trade. One concern is what the author calls the “long tailpipe” of pollution left in the wake of mining and refining, notwithstanding the role of minor metals in creating greener products. Supplies are also a worry. In 2010 a Chinese trawler rammed Japanese coastguard vessels in waters near islands called the Senkakus in Japanese and the Diaoyu in Chinese (their ownership is disputed by both countries). After the Chinese captain was detained, supplies of rare metals from the mainland to Japan suspiciously dried up. Though China never acknowledged an export ban, the incident caused rare-metal prices to spike, and unsettled manufacturers around the world. Though Japan quickly released the captain, repercussions of the affair pop up through the book. Mr Abraham would have done well to use more such central narratives—the story, perhaps, of dysprosium, which has one of the most fascinating and fragile supply chains. Yet he persuasively explains the danger of underestimating a business that, by one estimate, generates $4 billion of revenues a year and also plays a critical role in systems worth about $4 trillion. China, which develops more rare metals than any other country, understands the calculus. The West, his book suggests, does not. The Elements of Power: Gadgets, Guns and the Struggle for a Sustainable Future in the Rare Metal Age. By David Abraham. Yale University Press, 319 pages; $30 and £20.What more do you want? Couple Mechanics. By Nelly Alard. Translated by Adriana Hunter. Other Press; 307 pages; $16.99. ALL marriages are suspense thrillers, in a way. From the outside, any relationship is a mystery. But even from within there is much that is unknown and unsaid; no one really knows how it will all end. Years in, when responsibilities replace the romance and the days all look alike, staying together can feel less a desire than a duty. This is the moment when many marriages fall apart. There is “an element of will in love”, writes Nelly Alard in “Couple Mechanics”, the new English translation of her award-winning novel “Moment d’un Couple”. Every relationship forces couples to “decide to love, to keep on loving, or to stop loving.” Such negotiations are invariably tricky, as Ms Alard shows in this elegant and gripping tale about a marriage on the rocks. The couple at the centre of this book live in Paris, but they could be any of the countless young-professional duos who are steadily gentrifying outer boroughs in increasingly unaffordable big cities around the world. Olivier is a journalist, Juliette a computer engineer, and they strive for a balance between home and work, juggling their careers and their two children. The novel begins at their moment of rupture: “Okay, so I’m seeing a girl,” Olivier blurts out over the phone. He is hastily explaining to Juliette that he cannot make it to the cinema that night because the “girl”, a socialist politician whom he has known for only a short time, is having a fit. No, he does not want to leave Juliette, he says later, but yes, he may be in love. He promises to extricate himself from his affair, but “it’ll take a bit of time.” This book is really Juliette’s story, told in the third person. With a bit of whiplash, she finds herself thrust into a banal “French farce”, assuming a role she had never imagined for herself. Olivier says he intends to stick around, yet he is often distant and discouraging. Juliette tries to play it cool, but she finds herself turning into the kind of “pathetic creature consumed with jealousy” who searches her husband’s phone for evidence of foul play. Suspense builds throughout this months-long saga, as it is never quite clear whose needs, and which union, will win the day. Ms Alard tells this tale with admirable restraint. Olivier’s mistress may be a bit too mad, but “Couple Mechanics” shies away from melodrama. Instead, it offers a keen look at the work of love at that point—tough for everyone—when passion must be replaced by will.FEW figures were cooler or calmer than Pierre Boulez on the podium. He conducted without a baton, lifting the phrases and flicking them away with long, elegant fingers. The rest of his body did not move, impassive and commanding as a man lightly trimming a hedge; his face was a stone mask, only his darting eyes revealing how he was excavating the music, uncovering the layers and rebuilding them in structures of crystal clarity. Many said he was the finest conductor-composer since Richard Strauss. Every inch of him suggested that he was well aware of that.    Inside the statue, though, was gelignite. Music, to him, was in permanent revolution; but since there had been no proper upheaval since the Renaissance, he was leading one. For 50 years he was at war, or in a state of uneasy truce, with the musical establishment, fighting to make the deaf, incurious or plain uncultured appreciate the works of their own time. The composers of the 20th century—Schoenberg, Webern, Nono, Ligeti, himself—were woefully neglected and unplayed. This he vowed to change, first by challenging the canon known as “popular”. Opera houses, “full of dust and shit”, should be burned down. Original scores should be destroyed and accepted “masterpieces” vandalised, in order to recreate them. He cursed the grim custodians of the standard repertoire, and mocked his teachers at the Paris Conservatoire: Olivier Messaien, who wrote “brothel music”, and René Leibowitz, who dared to “correct”, in red pen, his first piano sonata. This was not a war he fought single-handed. He dragged into it, often kicking and screaming, great orchestras, audiences and even governments. Instrumental players were bullied out of their traditional routines, made to interleave their comfortable Haydn and Brahms with works based purely on the pitch of notes and their duration. In New York, where he conducted the Philharmonic from 1971 to 1977, horrified audiences found the Avery Fisher Hall stripped of seats for his “rug concerts”, and programmes spiky with unfamiliar stuff. He could chalk up victories, as at Bayreuth, where his performance of Wagner’s “Ring” in 1976 was booed on the first night and cheered for 85 minutes on the last. More often he left to sighs of relief. Music as maze In his pocket, primed like bombs, were his own compositions: in germination from his teenage years, when he had fallen under the spell of Stravinsky’s percussive, discordant “Chant du Rossignol”, and tested from 1946, when he was in charge of music for a decade for Jean-Louis Barrault and Madeleine Renard at their avant-garde theatre company. His works ranged from piano sonatas in which the whole keyboard was ravaged, plucked and battered to the delicate teaspoonfuls of notes dispensed in “Le Marteau sans Maître” (The Hammer without a Master, 1955), or the dreamy soprano wanderings of “Pli selon Pli” (Fold following Fold, 1958), his setting of poems by Mallarmé. Ever seeking new sounds, he introduced Asian and African timbres, gourd and gamelan, and tried every newly invented electronic device in the hope that computers might play, in real time, with orchestras. When he had made peace with the French government (after telling André Malraux, the culture minister, in 1966 that he was going “on personal strike” against him), he was given his own music department in the Centre Pompidou, where he set up an orchestra, the Ensemble Intercontemporain, to play new works, and collaborated with scientists to try to expand the sounds of music into realms so far unthought of and unheard. Paradoxes dogged him. He fought to set music free; but he also longed for order in it. He imagined the answer lay in Schoenberg’s serialism, where melody, harmony and counterpoint vanished, notes were related only to one another, and music “left the world of Newton for the world of Einstein”. But he soon found the dry 12-tone system a burden. The inspiration for “Le Marteau sans Maître” was his urge to weave colour, imagination and spontaneity into it—combining opposites to make music that was more like Debussy’s, and which opened up another world. Both composition and conducting—to him an essential pairing, each informing and enriching the other—were explorations. Music was a maze through which listeners should wander freely, stumbling on the unexpected and not knowing the end. His own works were revised constantly; some were deliberately left unfinished, for in writing and making music he was also, he believed, discovering himself. Of the private Boulez, almost nothing was revealed; he was a solitary, isolated by choice and cloaking his charm, much of the time, in arrogance. His favourite mental associates were bad-boy poets, Rimbaud and Baudelaire, or abstract painters like Kandinsky, all smashers of boundaries and shockers of the status quo. When he composed, he once explained, he dug down through layers of himself towards the “core of darkness” from which, in extraordinary flashes, his music came. Though the music might be wildly radical, this core—another paradox—would never change. Towards that unknown, like Orpheus, he made the most tumultuous and controversial journey of any modern classical musician.In our review of Molly Crabapple’s book (“When anger turns to ink”, January 9th) we refer to her drawing Libyan snipers. They were Lebanese. Sorry.IN JULY 1969 men walked on the moon, a technological leap all but unthinkable 50 years before. Three years later they abandoned it, and have renounced all return ever since. What boosters saw as the great opening act of the space age turned out to be, in effect, its culmination. Within a few years presidential corruption, economic stagnation, military ignominy and imagined catastrophe had warped post-war America’s previously impervious belief in progress, a belief that had resonance across the then free world. After Apollo, the future would never again be what it used to be.    David Bowie’s greatest years began nine days before Apollo 11 touched down in the Sea of Tranquillity, with the release of his single “Space Oddity”; they ended 11 years later, with the single “Ashes to Ashes”. Over that decade he used imagined futures to turn himself into something contradictory and wonderful—an epitome of alienation with whom the alienated flocked to identify. In doing so, he laid bare one of the key cultural shifts of the 1970s: the giving up of past dreams. Mr Bowie’s future-fixation was most obvious in his appropriation of the themes of pulp science fiction, of space travel and aliens from other planets, of “Ziggy Stardust” and “Life on Mars”. Other impresarios—most notably L. Ron Hubbard, the founder of the Church of Scientology—had ransacked the genre for mythologies of personal growth. But none did so with Mr Bowie’s sense of dress and theatre, his sexual thrill, his salesmanship and his understanding of what his fans wanted to hear. His alien allegories made the possibility of change—the heart of the future’s appeal, especially for adolescents—a matter not of remaking society or piling up technological progress but of revealing, or remaking, yourself. The difference between the future and the past lay not in it, but in you. The proof was in the playing. Mr Bowie grew up as David Jones, a sharp-toothed kid from dull suburban Bromley whose parents held no aspirations for him. Through a talent born of yearning he had transformed himself into Ziggy Stardust: extravagant, flawed and sexually polymorphous, tottering on platform shoes and hiding behind a mask of paint. “Nijinsky meets Woolworths” Mr Bowie called him: a character who ran through 73 different outfits in 21 months. If he could so transform himself, what could make-up and attitude do for you—especially if you had outcast Ziggy, your leper messiah, to sexily show you the way? He thinks he’ll blow our minds Mr Bowie had taken a while to attract attention. Stuck in 1960s London, he picked up a saxophone and considered jazz, then flitted between bands; he moved from mod to Buddhist, from rocker to folk artist, hanging around London’s Soho with its sex shops and music clubs, exploring sexual ambiguity. Despite the success of “Space Oddity” his early albums drew little attention. It was only with the fifth, “The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars”, (1972) that millions of teenagers in semi-detached houses just like the one back in Bromley took him to their hearts and turntables. Through these years and after Mr Bowie’s focus on the future was clear in his relentless reinvention of himself and his music: always wanting to see what was next, ceaselessly leaving the places he had lived and the music he had played for what was to come. “I can think of no other rock artist” wrote Charles Shaar Murray, a rock journalist, “whose next album is always the one I’m most looking forward to hearing.” Some called him a chameleon, but he was the reverse. Chameleons change hue to blend in with their background; he changed to stand out, and dared others to mimic him. He was never afraid to murder his darlings. Ziggy was killed off in 1973 as he finished an exhausting worldwide tour at London’s Hammersmith Odeon; he was being too much imitated, and Mr Bowie always had to be one step ahead. One successor was Aladdin Sane, a zigzag of painted lightning across his face; another, the most troubled, was the Thin White Duke, an aristocratic cabaret singer in black trousers, waistcoat and white shirt, needing only a skull to play Hamlet. The tragic garb was well judged. As he dashed from persona to persona, station to station, so the worlds he pushed into became darker. Shaped by the threat of nuclear war, the cultural imagination took a catastrophic turn in the 1970s—one ever-present future was no future at all. Mr Bowie was there at the turning point; his song “Five Years” says more about impending annihilation than a shelf full of reports from the RAND Corporation. Spectacular levels of cocaine abuse also shaped this nihilistic trajectory. Settled in Los Angeles from 1975, he stayed up for days on end, sitting cross-legged behind black curtains, surrounding himself with black candles and painted pentagrams. His diet was “red peppers, cocaine and milk”; always slender, he became skeletal. He would work madly on a song for a week, only to realise that he had got no further than four bars. Nicolas Roeg had originally been set on Peter O’Toole to play the titular alien in his film “The Man Who Fell To Earth”. But on seeing television footage of Mr Bowie sitting utterly isolated in the back of a limousine he knew he had his not-quite-man. Mr Bowie, true to form, remembered almost nothing of the filming. There is no alienation like drugged alienation, and perhaps no worse place to experience that than “the most repulsive wart on the backside of humanity”, as he described the City of Angels. In “Space Oddity” Major Tom, floating in a most peculiar way, had been an isolated spaceman; by “Ashes to Ashes” his isolation was a junkie’s. Mr Bowie later said that this funereal nursery rhyme (only his second British number-one single) served to wrap up the 1970s. In the 1980s he reconnected, refashioning himself into a much more straightforward, and less interesting, pop star and something of a Thatcherite poster-boy; embracing consumerism was another side of his celebration of the individual over all else. He found huge audiences in America with “Let’s Dance” (1983); he sang a camp cover of Martha Reeves & the Vandellas’ “Dancing in the Street” with Mick Jagger for Bob Geldof’s Band Aid. His skills were still there, yet his sense of daring had faded. For the first time since Ziggy, he no longer drove the cultural agenda; like many an ageing rocker, he found himself seen as part of the establishment he had spent his life wrong-footing. His better work in the 1990s, 2000s and 2010s, like the late work of many artists, seemed more a response to his own earlier achievement than a reflection of the world outside—but the stature of that earlier work, and the fact that it had done much to shape that world outside, still made the last albums far more interesting than those of most of his peers. Most poignant was his 27th and last, “Blackstar”, released on January 8th. The video for the track “Lazarus” shows him singing “I’ll be free—ain’t that just like me?” before walking backwards, trembling, into a wardrobe, and pulling the door closed. He had choreographed his own death—a step ahead, as usual, and a profound shock for a world that had been unaware of his cancer. Within days “Lazarus” had been watched 17m times, and “Blackstar” topped the charts. His producer, Tony Visconti, confirmed that it was Mr Bowie’s “parting gift”. INFOGRAPHIC: David Bowie’s genre-hopping career Just for one day “Blackstar” in fact harked back to his greatest period: the one, in the late 1970s, in which he escaped from Los Angeles to Berlin and laid the future to rest in a grave of strange, powerful sound. He chose Berlin to save money and live in a place where he would be unknown. Despite his fascination with Nietzsche, it was the city’s cultural ferment, not a dalliance with fascism, that induced him to stay. He and Iggy Pop, a drug-addled rocker who was part-muse, part-playmate, part-protégé, shared a flat in Schöneberg. In earlier days Mr Bowie had planned his albums meticulously; now he and his collaborators, including Mr Visconti and the remarkable Brian Eno, worked on the fly in the studio, the lyrics assembled with scissors-and-paste montage—or left out altogether. Much of the music was bleak, its synthesisers industrial, its guitars angry, its words disturbing. Take “Breaking Glass”: “Baby, I’ve been breaking glass in your room again. Listen. Don’t look at the carpet. I drew something awful on it”—presumed to be a reference to the pentagrams of Los Angeles. But in this darkness there was grace. Freedom and honesty characterise the Berlin recordings, the veneer of masquerade abandoned. He had a sense, he said, “of closing the blinds and saying, ‘Fuck them all’.” And in a city as freighted with history as any in Europe, he felt he had at last captured “a sense of yearning for a future that we all knew would never come to pass”. It is no accident that his greatest song of this period, “‘Heroes’”, both celebrates its protagonists’ potential and constrains it: while everything might be possible, it is all “just for one day”. It is an embrace of the present that acknowledges the passing away of future dreams, but in its intimate immensity absorbs the sadness of that loss. It is, like much great art, universal precisely because of its response to a particular place—and time.Sanctions on Iran were lifted after the regime was found to be in compliance with its obligations to dismantle parts of its nuclear programme. Yet America almost immediately imposed a new set of sanctions on companies and people linked to Iran’s ballistic-missile programme. Iran also freed four Iranian-Americans it had held prisoner, including a reporter from the Washington Post, in exchange for seven Iranians held in America. See article.  The UN said that Islamic State has enslaved as many as 3,500 people in Iraq. Most of these are women and children from the minority Yazidi community. Speaking in Paris, America’s defence secretary, Ashton Carter, said America and six other countries were stepping up their military campaign against IS in Iraq and Syria. Members of the two main factions in Libya’s civil war formed a unity government as part of a peace process brokered by the UN. But several militias in control of different parts of the country, including some in the two main factions, rejected the deal. In Burkina Faso jihadists attacked a hotel in the capital, Ouagadougou, killing at least 30 people. The attack, an echo of one last year in neighbouring Mali, was the first by Islamists in the country. The letter of the law Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency, downgraded Poland’s credit rating from A- to BBB+ over concerns about the rule of law in the country. The agency said changes to Poland’s media law and to the composition of its constitutional court, made by the new right-wing government of the Law and Justice party, implied that institutional checks and balances could be threatened. Poland has been placed under review in a European Commission rule-of-law procedure. In Britain a public inquiry into the murder in 2006 of Alexander Litvinenko, a KGB defector, found that Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, had “probably” approved the killing following a feud. Litvinenko was poisoned by tea laced with radioactive polonium-210 at a restaurant in London. Two Russian men accused of the murder deny any involvement. François Hollande unveiled a plan to boost job creation in France, which provides subsidies to small firms if they hire young or unemployed workers and more vocational training. Economists are sceptical of the plan. The French president has promised to bring France’s unemployment rate down before running for a second term in 2017. Firsts all round Taiwan elected Tsai Ing-wen as president, the first female one in the Chinese-speaking world. Ms Tsai’s Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) also won its first majority in the island’s legislature. The DPP favours Taiwan’s formal independence from China, but Ms Tsai says she wants to maintain the status quo. She is likely to be more cautious than was her predecessor, Ma Ying-jeou of the Kuomintang, in pursuing free-trade and other agreements with China. See here and here.  Gunmen killed 22 people and left 17 others injured in an attack on Bacha Khan University in north-west Pakistan. Four assailants were killed by security forces. It is not yet clear whether they were linked with militants who have carried out other deadly attacks in recent months. See article.  A Swedish human-rights activist, Peter Dahlin, was shown on Chinese television apparently confessing to crimes. State media said Mr Dahlin, who works for a Beijing-based human-rights group, had “sponsored activities jeopardising China’s national security”. Earlier a publisher from Hong Kong, Gui Minhai, who had gone missing in Thailand, was also shown on Chinese TV saying he had turned himself in to the authorities in relation to a drink- driving conviction 12 years ago. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, began his first trip as president to the Middle East. He travelled to Saudi Arabia and Egypt, and is also due to go to Iran. More than half of China’s imports of crude oil come from the Middle East. See article.  North Korea’s official media said scientists in the country had invented an alcoholic drink that does not cause hangovers. It is said to be made of a type of ginseng and glutinous rice. Implausible claims are a North Korean staple. Economic mismanagement Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, declared a state of economic emergency and asked parliament for powers to reform the economy by decree for 60 days. After withholding the release of economic indicators for more than a year, the Central Bank reported that inflation in the 12 months to September 2015 was 141.5% and that GDP shrank by 7.1% over the same period. See article.  Colombia’s government and the FARC guerrilla army asked the UN to send an unarmed mission to monitor a ceasefire between them after a peace agreement is signed. The joint request is an indication that negotiators in Havana are close to reaching a final agreement to end a conflict that has lasted for more than 50 years. See article.  Jude Célestin, who came second in the first round of Haiti’s presidential election in October, said he will boycott the run-off on January 24th because of alleged fraud. The leader after the first round was Jovenel Moïse, who has the backing of the current president, Michel Martelly. Overstepping his authority? America’s Supreme Court took up a case that challenges orders issued by Barack Obama in November 2014 to lift the threat of deportation from up to 5m illegal immigrants and allow them to work. The orders were blocked when 26 states, led by Texas, filed suit in lower courts against the Obama administration. Scientists at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration confirmed that 2015 was the hottest year on record. The average global temperature was 0.9{+o}C (1.62{+o}F) above the long-term average for the 20th century. Cold comfort for those living in the northern hemisphere as various cold snaps start to bite. In an unusually stilted performance, Sarah Palin, John McCain’s running-mate in 2008, endorsed Donald Trump for president. A day earlier Mr Trump was the hot topic in Britain when Parliament debated a voter petition to ban him from the country for making Islamophobic statements. The government said it couldn’t comment on individual immigration cases. Global markets had another rocky week, as rapidly falling oil prices reignited concerns about the health of the world economy. With oil stockpiles rising, partly because mild winter weather has reduced the demand for fuel, Brent crude dropped to below $28 a barrel. Now that sanctions hindering Iran’s oil sales have been lifted, the International Energy Agency has warned that oil markets “could drown in oversupply” if the forecast surplus of 1.5m barrels a day is not cut.  Oil spillover Declining oil prices were the main factor behind a fall in annual profit at Shell; it thinks it made up to $10.7 billion last year compared with $19 billion in 2014. Total said its profit would be 20% lower. In Azerbaijan, where the economy is dependent on oil, the government imposed stiff capital controls amid an economic crisis. It recently abandoned a peg to the dollar. Markets were also perturbed by news that China’s economy grew at its slowest pace since 1990 last year. GDP increased by 6.9%, compared with 7.3% in 2014. Underscoring the official economic rebalancing that is under way, services accounted for more than half of output for the first time, while manufacturing’s share dropped to 40.5%. Steel production contracted for the first time in 25 years. The slowing Chinese economy is not stopping Chinese firms from launching foreign takeovers. In the latest sizeable deal Haier, China’s biggest maker of large electrical appliances, agreed to buy General Electric’s white-goods business for $5.4 billion. GE had tried to sell the division to Electrolux, but the deal fell apart over antitrust concerns. Foxconn, a Taiwanese assembler of gadgets for Apple, was reported to have offered around $5 billion to buy Sharp, a struggling Japanese electronics firm. A fund backed by Japan’s government was also said to be considering a bid for Sharp. Hold on, hold on Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, suggested that the central bank was not contemplating raising interest rates soon, because the British economy faces repercussions from turbulence in the world economy. This week more cuts were announced in the British steel industry, which has shed 5,000 jobs. The markets now do not expect rates to rise until 2017, but Mr Carney reiterated that any decision would “depend on economic prospects, not the calendar”. The pound sank to its lowest level against the dollar since 2009. America’s big banks started reporting their earnings for the final three months of 2015. A legal charge to settle allegations that it mis-sold mortgage securities before the financial crisis reduced net profit at Goldman Sachs to $765m. Morgan Stanley’s profit came in at $908m, despite an ailing debt-trading business. A solid quarter at Bank of America helped boost annual profit to $15.9 billion, its most since 2006. JPMorgan Chase’s profit for 2015 was $24.4 billion, its best year ever. Deutsche Bank warned that legal and restructuring charges it has incurred will contribute to a loss for the fourth quarter. Revenue will come in below expectations because of “challenging market conditions”. Its share price, already under pressure amid uncertainty about the bank’s strategy, plunged. Separate allegations of wrongdoing at Renault and Fiat Chrysler hurt their share prices (prompting a brief suspension of trading in Fiat’s shares on the Milan exchange). Renault said it would recall 15,000 cars, and offered to fix hundreds of thousands more, because tests showed they exceeded emissions limits. The company’s offices have been searched recently by French authorities investigating the issue. Fiat Chrysler’s shares fell after two car dealerships in Chicago accused it of manipulating sales figures. The carmaker said that the allegations were “baseless” and had been made by “disgruntled” dealers. Walmart announced that it would close 269 underperforming stores in the United States and Latin America. These include all its Walmart Express stores in America. It had opened these primarily in urban areas to compete with discount grocers. Spanish Onion Univision, the largest Spanish-language broadcaster in the United States, bought a 40% stake in the Onion. The company’s digital officer said he expected the satirical news site “to play a key part in the 2016 presidential-election process”. He wasn’t joking. At the other end of the media spectrum, WHSmith, a British retailer that used to dominate high-street sales of books and stationery but is now less storied, had its best Christmas in years because of the craze for colour therapy to reduce stress (colouring books and pencils for adults).More KAL's cartoons
