THE birds of Diyarbakir are doing very little perching these days. Just when they manage to settle on a satellite dish, a blast of artillery or machine-gun fire sends them dashing skyward. The humans who live here are distraught, too. “We can barely get any sleep,” says a woman walking her son to school just outside the Sur district, the city’s historic centre, where Turkish forces are battling militants aligned with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). In July the PKK, which has waged a decades-long war for Kurdish self-rule, returned to killing Turkish police and soldiers after a two-year ceasefire. The group accused Turkey of tacitly supporting Islamic State (IS). (The jihadists had tried to wipe out the Syrian Kurdish border town of Kobane as Turkish soldiers looked on, and have killed scores of Kurds in bomb attacks across Turkey.) Turkey responded with air raids on PKK camps and a crackdown in the largely Kurdish south-east. Since then, fighting in Diyarbakir and other Kurdish cities has killed at least 230 Turkish security officers, up to 240 civilians and hundreds of PKK fighters, says the International Crisis Group, a think-tank. Last week a PKK car bomb killed a police officer, three children and two other civilians. In Diyarbakir Turkish tanks, along with 2,000 police and soldiers, appear bent on burying in rubble the PKK fighters still holed up in Sur. The region’s governor, Huseyin Aksoy, has heard reports of 50 to 70 militants left in the old city. He insists that the army has trained most of its firepower on the militants’ booby-trapped ditches and barricades: “The heavy weapons are not being used against people.” Locals disagree. Residents fleeing Sur say swathes of their neighbourhood have been destroyed by artillery fire. Historical sites, including a 16th-century mosque and a newly restored Armenian church, have been damaged, says Ahmet Ozmen, deputy head of the local bar association. In November the bar’s president, Tahir Elci, was shot dead during a gun battle moments after making a televised plea for peace. The local economy, which was just emerging from decades of war, is again reeling. Metin Aslan, of the local chamber of commerce, estimates the cost to Diyarbakir alone at more than $300m; the unemployment rate threatens to climb from 16% last year to over 30%. The city’s gleaming new international airport, a reminder of the faith investors once placed in peace talks between the PKK and the government, is nearly empty. The PKK, its ambitions fanned by Western support for Kurdish victories over IS in Syria, is facing a reality check in Turkey. Its fighters may hold out for a few more weeks in Sur, Silopi and Cizre, but it stands little chance of wresting territory from a government that boasts NATO’s second-biggest army and has few qualms about using force. Yet the rebels may not care. The longer the fighting lasts, the more recruits are driven into the group’s arms, says Cengiz Candar, a Turkish analyst: “The way they see it, even if they lose militarily…they stand to gain politically.” The ruling Justice and Development (AK) party of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan also feels it has little to gain from de-escalation. After a decisive win in November’s election, brought about in part by the fighting and a surge in Turkish nationalist sentiment, Mr Erdogan believes he has a mandate to pummel the rebels. “As unfeasible as it is, Turkish voters are focused on eradicating the PKK,” says Akin Unver, an academic. “That’s the dream the government sold to the electorate.” Mr Erdogan, who for years has wanted to change the constitution to grant himself an executive presidency, may even be considering another snap poll after two ballots last year. “He thinks he can get another 5% of the vote,” says Mr Unver. That could be enough to keep the pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democracy Party (HDP) out of parliament and give AK enough votes to change the constitution. Grid of grievances: Enemies, alliances and animosity in the Middle East AK was once the party that broke taboos by acknowledging the Kurds’ past persecution. Now prosecutors have placed over 1,100 Turkish academics under investigation for writing a letter calling for an end to military operations in the south-east. The producer and host of a TV show are under investigation after a caller pleaded for compassion for bystanders. It is civilians who pay the greatest price. Of the roughly 24,000 residents caught in the fighting in Sur, at least 20,000 have fled the district. Yilcan Tas abandoned what was left of her family’s house last month. She, her husband and their six children now live in a pair of cramped rooms next to refugees from Syria. Ms Tas blames PKK militants for packing a ditch next to her house with explosives, putting her family’s lives at risk, and the army for destroying the neighbourhood. “In the end, we are the ones who are wretched,” she said. “We are the ones being ruined.” TWO decades ago a small wave of Arabs arrived in Bosnia, jihadists coming to fight on the side of the country’s Muslim Bosniaks. Today another wave of Arabs is coming—this time for skiing, saunas and condos. In 2010 Sarajevo, the capital, registered about 1,000 tourists from the six Arab oil monarchies in the Gulf combined; in the first ten months of 2015, over 19,000 came from Kuwait and Saudi Arabia alone. Arab property investment has ballooned. For a country mired in bureaucracy and political stalemate, the new investments provide a welcome bright spot. The thermal baths of the Sarajevo suburb of Ilidza have drawn tourists since Roman times, and took off as a resort under the Austro-Hungarian Empire. After the Bosnian war of 1992-95 the resort seemed doomed. But the past three years have seen an extraordinary renaissance. First came Libyan militiamen, benefitting from Bosnian expertise in therapy for wounded veterans. Other Arabs followed. Now estate agents, restaurants, hotels and dentists all advertise in Arabic. In the café of the Hotel Hollywood (where NATO forces snatched two alleged al-Qaeda members in the weeks after the September 11th attacks), Ayyad Salim Al-Ayyad, a Kuwaiti estate agent, says business is “fantastic”. A few tables over, Bosnians working for a Kuwaiti developer are doing the hard sell on their new condominium complex. Another estate agent looks askance when a Bosnian woman asks about buying into a new holiday complex in nearby Hadzici. This is not the place for you, the agent explains; it has been built by a Saudi company for Arabs. The buyer might be better off in a development in Polinje, in the hills above Sarajevo, constructed by the Saudi Al-Shiddi group but marketed to wealthy Bosnians and Arabs alike. Information on the Polinje development is available at the Sarajevo City mall—also built by the Al-Shiddi group, in 2014. In summer the mall is packed with Arab families, some of whom may be staying in the company’s alcohol-free Hotel Bristol. This investment will be dwarfed, however, by a project in nearby Trnovo where construction is set to start in April. Buroj, a developer from Dubai, plans to build at least 3,000 villas, flats, a hospital and a sports stadium. The total investment could come to €2.5bn ($2.7bn). Arab tourists “feel at home here”, says one travel agent. In mainly Muslim Sarajevo, much of the architecture and heritage is Ottoman, and halal meat is easy to find. There are few other countries where hiking and skiing are within striking distance of a mosque. The property market, meanwhile, is targeted at middle-class buyers who would like a bolt-hole far from the war and chaos enveloping the Middle East, but who cannot afford London or Geneva. In Bosnia a new three-bedroom villa can be yours for €200,000. Because Bosnian law requires foreigners to buy property through a local company, data are hard to come by, but property agents’ testimonies confirm that the market is thriving. Bosnians are both delighted and worried by all this. The investment is welcome, but locals are wary of Arab visitors bringing with them stricter interpretations of Islam, as Arab religious charities have done over the past two decades. Al-Jazeera Balkans, Qatar’s local-language television station, has been broadcasting from Sarajevo since 2011, and competes with Russian, Western and Turkish news organisations. A Qatari government “friendship fund” for Bosnian small businesses is preparing to open soon. Bosnians do not want to be caught in the middle of an international battle for hearts and minds. Even FIPA, the Bosnian foreign investment agency, is curiously reticent about Arab construction projects. Gulf countries do not rank among the top 12 investing in Bosnia, the agency protests. (In part, this may be due to Gulf investments being made through third-country holding companies.) They have “no special relationship” with the country, and invest only “because they can make a profit, and not because they love Bosnia”. One wonders whether investors would be expected to evince a disinterested love for Bosnia, if they were European.A MEGA-MOSQUE is growing on George W. Bush Street in Tirana, the Albanian capital, near the country’s parliament. When finished, it will be the largest mosque in the Balkans—one in a long string of such projects bankrolled by Turkey. By its own estimate, Turkey’s directorate of religious affairs, known as the Diyanet, has helped build over 100 mosques and schools in 25 countries. In Bosnia, Kosovo, the Philippines, and Somalia, it has restored Islamic sites damaged by war and natural disaster. In Gaza it is rebuilding mosques destroyed by Israeli military operations in 2014. Current projects alone are expected to cost $200m. All of the money comes from private donations, insists Mazhar Bilgin, a senior Diyanet official. Critics suspect Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, of deploying mihrabs and minarets to revive his country’s imperial heritage in former Ottoman lands. Secular nationalists in Albania, which was strictly atheist under communism, bristle at seeing their parliament dwarfed by a mosque, and urban planners complain about the project’s bland, “McOttoman” design. But most Albanians are sympathetic. While post-communist governments allowed Catholic and Orthodox Christians to build cathedrals in Tirana, Muslims were left out in the cold. Worshippers regularly found themselves praying outdoors, unable to squeeze into the city’s tiny 19th-century mosque. It is not clear why Albania’s government waited until 2013 to approve a new one. Turkey’s role in Albanian Islam goes beyond building mosques. Six of the country’s seven Islamic seminaries are managed by foundations linked to the Gulen community. Turkey’s development agency, TIKA, has completed 248 projects in Albania. Besides the fiscal aid, many Albanians welcome Turkish influence as a counterweight to the spread of Islamic militancy. According to Tirana’s mufti, Ylli Gurra, up to 150 Albanian nationals have joined Islamic State (IS) jihadists in Syria. He blames the zealous salafist foundations from the Gulf monarchies that poured into the region in the 1990s. (Many were expelled after the September 11th attacks.) Mr Gurra says most Albanian Muslims reject such radicalism: “They have more affinity for Turkish Islam.” In fact, Muslims in Albania are far less devout and more pro-Western than their Turkish co-religionists. Meanwhile, Turkey’s religious outreach is hobbled by an internecine conflict at home. Mr Erdogan’s ruling Justice and Development (AK) party once worked hand in glove with the Gulen movement. All that changed two years ago, when the AK launched a vendetta against the movement, accusing it of orchestrating a corruption scandal that had tarred senior government figures. Scores of Gulenist bureaucrats remain behind bars. During a 2015 visit to Albania for the groundbreaking ceremony of the new mosque, Mr Erdogan asked his hosts to shut down schools run by the Gulenists. Albanian officials turned down the request. Yet in Albania and elsewhere, Muslim communities that benefit from Turkish largesse still face pressure. “Erdogan is forcing them to take sides,” says Kerem Oktem, a Turkish studies professor at the University of Graz. The Diyanet, meanwhile, has extended its mosque programme to countries whose connection to Ottoman history is tenuous. In 2014 Mr Erdogan suggested that Cuba had been settled by Muslims long before it was spotted by Christopher Columbus, and unveiled a plan to build a new mosque there. Another mosque is under construction in Haiti. The building spree has become a vehicle for broadcasting Turkey’s religious credentials to Muslim audiences domestic and foreign. The ultimate objective is “claiming new territory,” says Mr Oktem. “It’s about the idea that Turkey should be the leader of the whole Muslim world.”Talk to the hands ITALY, a cabinet minister mused recently, was seen in the past as a country that did not make trouble. But that was in the past. Lately the left-right coalition of the prime minister, Matteo Renzi has provoked a succession of acrimonious disputes with the European Commission and Germany. This week, in the latest sign of Mr Renzi’s determination to be the bad boy of Brussels, he sacked Italy’s permanent EU representative, Stefano Sannino, a former Commission official who was seen as too accommodating. His replacement is the junior trade minister, Carlo Calenda, a member of Mr Renzi’s Democratic Party. The conflict burst into the open on January 15th, when Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the commission, accused Mr Renzi of attacking his institution at every turn. Mr Renzi replied that the days when Italy let itself be “remote-controlled” from Brussels were over. Four days later Manfred Weber, the German who leads the centre-right group in the European Parliament, said Italy’s prime minister was jeopardising the EU’s credibility. Mr Weber was referring to the sharpest of all the current disputes: Italy is blocking refugee aid funds the EU had promised Turkey as part of a deal to crack down on smuggling of migrants into Europe. Germans are especially bitter because Italy has been accused of failing to process migrants who arrive on its soil, instead hurrying them on to other EU states. Ministers in Rome say they doubt that paying the Turks to hold back Syrian refugees will work. But Mr Weber claimed Italy’s real motive is to secure concessions on other issues. Talks with the commission over the sale of Italian banks’ daunting inventory of non-performing loans are also bogged down. The urgency of the issue was underlined by a run on the shares of Monte dei Paschi di Siena, Italy’s third-biggest lender. Rome wants to guarantee minimum prices for the loans. But the commission has yet to rule on whether that would constitute state aid. Here again, an extra ingredient sours the mix: many Italian officials believe the commission applies EU rules less strictly to Germany. The bad loans reflect more than a decade of stagnation and Italy’s slower-than-expected recovery from the euro crisis. In December, parliament in Rome approved an expansionary budget aimed at speeding the recovery. But it would also slow Italy’s reduction of its budget deficit and the repayment of its public debt, which in the euro zone is second only to Greece’s as a proportion of GDP. Mr Renzi’s ministers argue they are entitled to flexibility as a reward for structural reform, notably of the labour market. But Brussels may yet ask for adjustments. The budget’s centrepiece, a €3.6 billion ($3.9 billion) cut to taxes on first homes, looks more likely to woo middle-class voters than boost GDP. The view in Berlin is that Mr Renzi’s belligerence is intended to burnish his image at home. The Italian prime minister’s personal ratings have fallen sharply since mid-2015 and in June he faces mayoral elections in several important cities. After a string of corruption scandals in Rome, there is a chance the capital could fall to the populist Five Star Movement (M5S). This is where the issues at stake in Italy’s rows with the EU become fuzzier. Seen from the Italian government’s standpoint, Mr Renzi’s electoral interests and those of the EU are identical. The alternatives to his left-leaning coalition are either the intermittently euro-sceptic M5S, or a conservative government—led this time not by Silvio Berlusconi’s centre-right Forza Italia party, but by the virulently euro-sceptic Northern League and its populist leader, Matteo Salvini. Polls show barely half the population favours the single currency any longer. In an article this week in the Guardian, a British newspaper, Mr Renzi argued that EU austerity fuels the rise of his populist rivals. According to this view, self-interest would counsel the authorities in Brussels and Berlin to do all in their power to help Mr Renzi. That was also the view of Mr Renzi’s predecessor, Mario Monti. But whereas the urbane Mr Monti, a former EU commissioner, opted mostly for quiet persuasion (sweet-talking the German chancellor, Angela Merkel), the swaggering Mr Renzi likes nothing better than a scrap.IN BERLIN they speak of “Plan B”; in Brussels the fear is of the U-turn. Whatever the term, the prediction is the same: that Angela Merkel is on the brink of reversing the generous policy towards asylum-seekers that saw more than a million of them reach Germany last year. For now, Mrs Merkel sticks to her well-worn line: Wir schaffen das (“We will handle this”). Over the past six months she has slowly assembled a hard-headed, coherent migration strategy. But each of its elements is starting to give way. First, numbers. The winter weather has dented the refugee flows to Greece from Turkey, but not as quickly as hoped. Over 1,600 a day have reached Greece this month, a higher rate than last July when the crisis was already in full swing. Border controls erected along the migratory route since then complicate the journey, but determined migrants still make it to Germany. Wrong-footed by the explosion in arrivals last autumn Mrs Merkel’s government tightened asylum rules, but few were put off. A growing number of Moroccans and Algerians, hailing from poor but peaceful countries, are coming to Germany, exploiting the trail blazed by Syrians and Afghans. Meanwhile the howls from regional officials who must house and feed the arrivals grow ever louder: last week a mayor bussed 31 Syrians to the federal chancellery in Berlin, saying his small town could no longer cope. To cut the numbers reaching Europe, Mrs Merkel has turned to realpolitik. German officials aim to strike deals with countries in the Maghreb and Asia to make it easier to return failed asylum-seekers, and are prepared to use development aid as a weapon. Their main hopes, though, lie in an “action plan” the EU cooked up with Turkey in October, which promised money and other prizes in exchange for efforts to stem the migrant flows. Mrs Merkel believes that Turkey can help by disrupting people-smuggling networks and stepping up coastal patrols. But, despite the incentives, there is little sign of Turkish action so far. Without it, the refugee numbers will start to climb again once spring arrives. To deal with the influx Mrs Merkel has backed an EU plan to register asylum-seekers arriving in Italy and Greece and to relocate them around the club, with national quotas calculated in Brussels. A million asylum-seekers should be no great burden for a union of 500m people. But the relocation scheme has flopped too: many countries want nothing to do with refugees, and refugees have no interest in most countries. So the Germans are changing tack, seeking allies willing to help them resettle hundreds of thousands of Syrians directly from Turkey. France is among the countries prepared to take in the same number of resettled refugees it agreed to take under the relocation scheme. But this will work only if the illegal flows fall dramatically, which means the Turkey deal must kick into gear. In the meantime, Germany is beginning the difficult work of integrating hundreds of thousands of newcomers. The new-year horrors of Cologne, when hundreds of women were sexually assaulted by marauding groups of men, many of them Muslim asylum-seekers, focused minds on cultural differences. But bringing refugees into the workforce, the main engine of integration, represents at least as big a challenge. The assumption that Germany’s tight labour market was tailor-made for job-hungry migrants has given way to the grim realisation that most are an ill fit for an economy mainly seeking highly skilled workers. The head of one business group reckons almost 80% of refugees have next to no skills at all. Mrs Merkel is racing against time. Her Christian Democratic Union and its coalition partners are increasingly restive. Cabinet ministers have openly challenged the chancellor’s position. The anti-immigration Alternative for Germany party is notching up double-digit polling results for the first time. Refugees languish in supposedly temporary accommodation months after arriving in Germany. Mrs Merkel continues to insist that there can be no cap on the number of refugees Germany accepts, and the constitution agrees with her. But increasingly, reality does not. Very well, alone What if nothing works? Despite the pressure Mrs Merkel is unlikely to shut Germany’s borders, because she wants to preserve the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone. But other plans are being drawn up inside the chancellery, including a sealing of the Greece-Macedonia border across which most refugees travel to reach Germany. Once refugees see that Greece has become a dead end, says one German official, they will think twice about setting sail from Turkey. Other routes will no doubt emerge, perhaps across the Black Sea. But the plan might at least buy time. Such schemes show how far Germany has travelled since its “welcome culture” lifted European liberals’ hearts last summer. Back then Mrs Merkel’s model presented an inspiring alternative to the small-minded xenophobia of leaders like Hungary’s Viktor Orban. Now, after the chaos and trauma of the past six months, Mr Orban feels vindicated and the chancellor looks increasingly isolated. Germany has tried to lead in Europe, but others will not follow. To Mrs Merkel’s immense frustration, other EU countries agree to policies like relocation and then ignore them. While German officials try to knit together the geopolitics of the crisis, from Iraq to Turkey and Russia, most other countries would prefer it simply to go away. As for the European Commission, which sometimes looks like the chancellor’s last ally, it has gamely advanced common policies but is too weak to enforce them. “The European dream is vanishing,” sighs one of its senior officials. Mrs Merkel, to her credit, is desperate to keep it alive. But time is running out. Germany has perhaps two months to hope that the jigsaw pieces fall into place before the refugee flows pick up again, and each part of the job gets harder every day. Can Germany still handle this? We will continue to make the case, says a government official. “But nobody believes it.”SPIES need secrecy and the public wants privacy. So finding the right legal framework in which the intelligence and security agencies can do their work, including—when necessary—intruding into people’s private lives, is inherently tricky. Britain’s laws on bugging and snooping are out of date. Written in a pre-internet era, they give sweeping powers to the home secretary to authorise the interception and collection of electronic information, and the planting of bugs (in spookspeak, “equipment interference”). Without a stronger legal basis, these powers could fall foul of European judges on human-rights and data-protection grounds. Moreover, until the revelations by Edward Snowden, a fugitive American intelligence contractor now living in Moscow, most people had no idea of the reach of Britain’s digital spy agency, the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), and how close its ties are with America’s National Security Agency. The Snowden revelations infuriated digital-privacy advocates and also alarmed the technology industry, which feels squeezed between government demands and its customers’ expectations. The draft bill on investigatory powers going through Parliament attempts to sort out this mess. It follows the failure two years ago of a previous bill, dubbed the “snoopers’ charter”, and the hurried passage of a stopgap bill that expires this summer. The bill is under scrutiny by a joint committee of peers and MPs, which will report on February 11th. Arguments rage over both form and content. Critics say the consultation is too hurried for one of the most important pieces of legislation in recent years. They object to the vagueness of some of the language (including new bits of jargon such as “internet connection records”, which could mean the complete history of somebody’s activity on the internet). The definition of these terms, and of such words as “urgent”, “necessary” and “proportionate”, will be contained in codes of practice, yet to be published. For some, the fact that GCHQ has long had the capabilities it now avows is no reason to accept them. The bulk collection of information, they say, breaches privacy. Overly zealous spooks might link databases, and trawl them looking for patterns, drawing conclusions purely on the basis of inference, with no redress for those concerned. The data could be passed to (or pinched by) other countries, notably America, which could then decide, say, to put innocent people on no-fly lists. British Muslims already complain of costly, humiliating and unexplained last-minute blocks on trips to America, apparently based on their behaviour on the internet. Warehouses of sensitive data are magnets for criminals and other malefactors. Critics of the bill also worry about a conflict of laws, under which Britain might oblige them to hand over data about their clients even when another country expressly prohibits this. Big technology companies such as Google, Facebook and Apple have written to the parliamentary committee to highlight this danger, though they declined to send their bosses to give evidence in person. Some of this is posturing. The bill does not mandate the creation of a central database of everybody’s internet history. Nor, contrary to some claims, will it force technology companies to install back doors in their encryption software to meet requests from GCHQ. Most supposedly encrypted products are already transparent to their providers: it is only by analysing its users’ e-mails and browsing activity, for example, that Google is able to sell advertisements tailored to their tastes. The law authorises GCHQ to ask for help. But when it comes across genuinely uncrackable encryption (“end-to-end”, in industry jargon), it has other options, such as planting software on the device concerned. The tech companies, say cynics, are pretending to show how fiercely they resist government requests, while remaining happy to co-operate in private. The purported conflict of laws is somewhat overblown as well. GCHQ will not force a company to break other countries’ laws (risking an embarrassing public spat). The bigger worry for the government is how to protect the agency’s intelligence capabilities from judges in Luxembourg and Strasbourg, whose view of espionage is rooted not in the British tradition of royal prerogative and empire, but in continental memories of totalitarianism. For this reason the bill introduces a new idea. The home secretary’s warrants will be reviewed by judges, who will check them for lawfulness and reasonableness. The creation of these commissioners was recommended in a report last year by David Anderson, a lawyer who is the independent scrutineer of Britain’s anti-terrorist legislation. The spooks have no objection. Their activities are already scrutinised retrospectively by commissioners. They would also like their warrants to have more legal force in foreign eyes. The committee is now debating the commissioners’ hiring, firing and remit. It is also mulling evidence from lawyers and media-freedom campaigners. Communications between lawyers and their clients enjoy almost bulletproof legal protection: spies too should be told explicitly to steer clear of them. Journalists fret that sources (especially whistle-blowers) may have insufficient protection. Another issue is a provision in the bill requiring “communication service providers” (ie, internet and telecoms firms) to store customers’ internet records. It is unclear what this will mean in practice, how intrusive it will be, what it will cost and whether, since people get on the internet in many different ways, it can even work. The biggest divide is not over the technicalities of intelligence oversight, but in attitudes to what spies do. Some believe the agencies to be overmighty, beguiling politicians with tales of derring-do and lobbying zealously for their cause in the media. Such worries are not groundless. Parliament’s intelligence and security committee was surprised and annoyed by a drooling series of articles that resulted after GCHQ gave the Times unprecedented access to its headquarters in Cheltenham. Yet nobody has evidence that GCHQ acts unlawfully or menacingly under the existing system. Most Britons—and most politicians—think the spooks do a good job and, beset by fears of terrorism, crime, child abuse and foreign spies, want a legal structure that lets them keep at it. Donald Trump has topped another ranking, this time in Britain. An e-petition started by a woman from Aberdeen, where Mr Trump owns a golf club, suggested banning the Republican candidate from Britain for hate speech. It amassed a record 576,000 signatures, far more than the 100,000 benchmark for debate in Parliament. The debate, held on January 18th, concluded that his views are not welcome. This was noted in America so may have embarrassed the government. Yet e-petitions are meant to foster political engagement. The next two most popular concern migration, one against, one for. A petition not to ban Mr Trump got only 44,000 signatures; a third, for him to address Parliament, just 100.The young and the old BEWARE politicians who say they plan to simplify something. The details will often be more complex. That is especially true of the new pensions regime starting in April. The flagship proposal is a “flat rate” pension, fixed initially at £155.65 ($220.35) a week. It will replace the confusing mix of a basic pension of £119.30, an earnings-related supplement and means-tested benefits. However, the term flat rate is a misnomer. Some retired people will get more than £155.65 because they will carry over earnings-related benefits from the old system. But others will get less. Qualifying for the full rate requires a history of 35 years of national insurance contributions (NICS), with a minimum of ten years to get anything. There will be exceptions. Those who spend time caring for children or elderly relatives can count such years for qualification, although proving what they have done may be tricky. There will be means-tested benefits to ensure that those without any other income get at least £155 a week. But the means tests apply to couples, not individuals, so married people without the right NICS record may get less than the flat rate. Many will find the new “simple” system as confusing as the old. In the first 20 years or so of the scheme, most retiring workers will be better off. But by 2040, the majority (those aged 40 or less now) will be worse off. That is because, under the old system, the earnings-related bit of their pension would have been higher than the flat-rate payment. This is another example of the older generation benefiting at the expense of the young. Nor is this the only complication. Workers in salary-linked pension schemes have “contracted out” of the earnings-related element of the state pension, so they paid lower NICS. But the new pension will stop contracting out, so employees’ NICS will rise. That will translate into a pay cut in April. Worse, employers’ NICS will go up too, and private-sector employers may try to recoup the cost by cutting pension benefits or raising employee contributions. For workers, that means a choice between cutting future or current pay. The government is also under attack over a change to equalise the state pension age. From 1940, the state pension age was set at 65 for men and 60 for women; since husbands tended to be older than wives, the idea was that couples would retire together. But the European Court of Human Rights deemed this gap discriminatory, so the government legislated to equalise the pension age at 65, with the change being phased in between 2010 and 2020. The cost of providing pensions has been rising as people have been living longer. So in 2011, the government decreed that the state pension age for both men and women should rise to 66 by 2020. For women born between 1953 and 1958, this means a big increase in retirement age, with very little warning. A group called Women Against State Pension Inequality has launched an e-petition to protest, especially against the failure to give individuals sufficient notice. Older women are less likely to be working than men and less likely to have private pensions. After getting more than 100,000 signatures, the petition will be debated in Parliament (see article), but change is unlikely. This government has treated pensioners better than other benefit recipients, notably by maintaining the “triple lock” under which pensions rise by the bigger of wage rises, price inflation or 2.5%. But in the world of pensions, any change, however simple, will make some unhappy.UNEMPLOYMENT in Britain is just 5.1%, the lowest since 2006. Economists expect that when joblessness falls, wages will rise as employers must compete more fiercely for staff. After a long slump brought on by the recession, by mid-2015 wages were growing nicely (see chart). But as unemployment has continued to decline, the economists have been left scratching their heads. In November three-monthly average growth in pay was just 1.9% year on year, far below levels in the years leading up to the 2008-09 global crisis. The shaky world economy is partly to blame. The oil-price slump is biting: wages in the oil-and-gas industry, which are about 50% above the average, have fallen by 12% in the past year. Cheaper oil also prompted a flirtation with price deflation in the middle of 2015, making workers less inclined to demand pay rises. In the year to December 2015 the pound appreciated on a trade-weighted basis by 7% as nervous investors hoarded British assets (it has since been falling back). As exporters’ competitiveness suffered, they tried to cut costs, including pay. The manufacturing sector, which is heavily export-oriented, has seen especially low earnings growth in recent months. A more pessimistic view is that wages were bound to come down to earth. In the latest figures a strong rise in August fell out of the rolling three-month average. Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, pointed out on January 19th that long-term unemployment is still 50% higher than in 2007 (though it is falling). In addition, Mr Carney noted that Britons have in recent months reduced the number of hours they work, which is also suggestive of weak demand for labour. Yet talk of labour-market “slack” is hard to reconcile with businesses’ complaints (which are growing, according to surveys by the Bank of England) about finding labour—especially the skilled sort. Firms may be sating their desire for skills without paying full whack, argues Doug Monro of Adzuna, a job-search website. Mr Monro reckons that, instead of hiring people with experience, more businesses are choosing to hire youngsters, whose wages crashed in the crisis, and train them up. Penguin Random House, a publisher, has announced that it will no longer require job applicants to have a degree. In recent months the workforce has thus become younger, pushing down average wages. However, with youth unemployment now lower than in mid-2008, firms may struggle to continue this practice for much longer. On top of this, flows of people moving from one job to another, which fell sharply during the recession as workers clung on to whatever position they could find, have picked up and are now back at pre-recession levels, says Samuel Tombs of Pantheon Macroeconomics, a consultancy. A year ago there were slightly more vacancies than jobseekers, according to data from Adzuna; now there are twice as many openings. Those workers happy to flit between jobs ought to be able to drive a harder bargain on pay. Add in the new “national living wage”, which is coming into force in April and is worth £7.20 ($10.20) an hour for workers who are 25 or older, and wage growth may pick up again in the coming months. The biggest threat to workers realising these gains, though, is home-grown. Thanks to worries over the forthcoming referendum on membership of the European Union, business investment is slowing, say economists at Barclays bank. If investment shrinks, productivity will suffer. Britons could then once again face measly pay growth, just as the economy was picking up speed.
