WHEN Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour Party’s hard-left leader, was asked about his policy on renewal of Britain’s Trident missiles submarines by an interviewer on January 17th, he brought down ridicule. It is unlikely to trouble him. Mr Corbyn, a veteran campaigner for unilateral nuclear disarmament, is determined to end Labour’s commitment to maintaining the nuclear deterrent. Most of the new party members who elected him as leader agree. His problem is that a large part of his shadow cabinet, possibly most Labour MPs and two of the most powerful trade unions on which Labour depends for its funding, strenuously do not. Yet Mr Corbyn seems likely to get his way. The answer he gave to the BBC’s Andrew Marr was aimed at trying to win over the unions, who are mainly concerned about the impact on their members’ jobs if the £31 billion ($44 billion) programme to build replacements for the existing four Vanguard-class submarines is scrapped. Mr Corbyn said his priority was to protect jobs; to that end, the submarines might still be built, but they could go on patrol without nuclear missiles aboard. This, he said, was one of the proposals being looked at in a review of defence policy conducted by his impeccably unilateralist new shadow defence secretary, Emily Thornberry. Ms Thornberry, who is likely to produce an interim report by June, says she is interested in what she calls “the Japanese option”, by which she appears to mean that Britain would keep its nuclear expertise, but develop a nuclear weapon only if and when circumstances made it necessary. This may sufficiently placate the unions to secure for Mr Corbyn the votes he needs to overturn existing Labour policy at the party conference in September. But it will do nothing to win over MPs and shadow cabinet members who believe that keeping Trident is essential to Britain’s national security. The government is planning a Commons vote on Trident renewal this year, possibly within weeks. Without an agreed policy on the nuclear deterrent, it seems likely that Mr Corbyn will have to give his MPs a free vote. But with Ms Thornberry at the dispatch box he will at least avoid the embarrassment of the vote on Syrian air strikes in December, when Labour’s front bench was conspicuously split. What is curious is what Mr Corbyn has not suggested: scrapping the Vanguard replacements and building in their place more Astute-class nuclear-powered attack submarines and additional frigates and destroyers that the navy actually needs. This would not win over those fundamentally opposed to unilateral nuclear disarmament; but nor would it sound as ludicrous as sending expensive ballistic-missile submarines to sea without their ballistic missiles.MARLON BRANDO rode one, as did James Dean. Steve McQueen famously jumped across the wire on a Triumph in the prisoner-of-war epic “The Great Escape”. Together, they helped to make the British-built motorbike the coolest on the road in the 1960s, by which time it was a bestseller in its range (over 500cc) in America as well as in Britain. But success bred complacency, and by the mid-1970s the company, together with most of the rest of Britain’s motorcycle industry, was on its knees, unable to compete with more reliable, technically more advanced and often cheaper Japanese imports. After several disastrous mergers and bail-outs, Triumph was moribund, no longer cool but more of a byword for oil leaks and trade-union militancy. This, unfortunately, is the story of much of British manufacturing. Entire sectors failed to keep up with the competition, and collapsed in the 1970s and 1980s. The steel industry has staggered on, a shadow of its former self, but it seems set on a relentlessly downward trajectory: this week saw over a thousand new job losses. Despite lots of investment, steel has never managed adequately to reinvent itself. Triumph, however, has. Indeed, it announced recently that it sold a record 55,000 bikes in 2015. It is thus a rare example of a successful industrial salvage operation. And there are useful lessons in its story for the rest of Britain’s “makers”, as George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer, likes to call them. Triumph was saved from the scrap-heap in 1983 by a property developer, John Bloor. He bought the rights to the marque for £150,000 ($240,000). Instead of trying to plough on with the old ways, he took several years out to study the Japanese production lines that had humbled the British. “We learned a lot,” says Nick Bloor, the developer’s son, who is now boss of Triumph. When the first new model was launched in 1990, it combined the styling that made Triumph’s name with better engineering and reliability, partly the result of using Japanese machinery. A new factory was built at Hinckley, in Leicestershire, and a couple more in Thailand, where most components are made as well as some complete models. The company has stuck to its core market of making bigger and touring bikes, and has accordingly carved out a global niche. America is, once again, its biggest customer, helped by the enthusiasm of a new generation of Hollywood stars such as Tom Cruise. About 90% of the 114,000 bikes sold in Britain each year are still imported, but Triumph has built up a 16% share of the more valuable big-bike market. Steve Kenward, head of the Motorcycle Industry Association, argues that Triumph has used its name cleverly. Classic photos of Brando and McQueen adorn the walls of its Hinckley factory. For a younger generation, the mud-spattered bike that David Beckham used to slither through the Brazilian jungle in 2014 stands in reception. Similarly, “styling cues” on the bikes, such as the distinctive shape of their exhaust pipes, are a reminder of Triumph’s heritage. Yet the company has also responded to new trends and markets, says Mr Kenward, epitomised by the new “adventure-tourism” of Mr Beckham. Others are trying a similar trick. Ariel, founded by the man who invented the modern spoked wheel in 1874, was another best-selling motorcycle firm in the 1950s before virtually disappearing. Simon Saunders bought the name in 1999, and today produces about 70 bikes a year, mainly to order, allying the lustre of the brand to high-performance engines. His market is “niche of niche”, he jokes. But, like Triumph, at least he’s still in business.ONE primary school has bought a double-decker bus on eBay, an online marketplace, to use as a classroom. Others have built playgrounds on their roofs to increase space for school buildings. Many have made more mundane adaptations, including restricting use of communal areas, staggering play times or using Portakabins as temporary classrooms. All face a common problem: growing numbers of pupils. Despite a 10% increase in primary-school pupils since 2010, the number of classes has risen by only 7%. Consequently British primary-school classes, already the sixth-biggest in the OECD club of mostly rich countries, have grown even larger. The average class size is now 27.4, up from 26.7 in 2010. And, since the government relaxed restrictions in 2012, more pupils are now being taught in “super-size” classes of more than 30. This, argues Lucy Powell, Labour’s shadow education secretary, shows that “the current system of planning new places is essentially broken”. Many teachers share her disquiet. Teaching large classes can be difficult and frustrating, says Sally Bates, head of Wadsworth Fields primary in Nottingham. Teachers and schools can adapt, she adds, but young children need individual attention to learn how to get on with others, to listen and to be polite. Yet the evidence on the effect of class size on academic performance is not so clear. A 2003 study carried out by the Institute of Education at the University of London suggested that smaller classes boost the literacy and numeracy of pupils, especially those from poor backgrounds, in the early years of education, but found no evidence of any correlation between academic performance and class size beyond the age of seven. “Slightly older children are used to the nature of school, of conforming to what’s expected of them and they’re still enthusiastic…they’re not yet know-it-all teenagers,” says Ms Bates. Low pupil-teacher ratios are no guarantee of success in international comparisons: Japan, one of the OECD’s best performers, has far more pupils per teacher than Spain, one of the stragglers (see chart). Crowded classrooms may not be a good idea. Stressed teachers are a poor advertisement for a profession already struggling to attract recruits. Parents prefer children to be taught in small groups. And head teachers need more help in planning for varying numbers. But the limited benefits from reducing class size come at a cost; there are many cheaper and more effective ways to improve educational performance.IN 2002 senior Conservatives met to stroke their beards after a second defeat to Tony Blair’s mighty electoral machine. Somebody suggested a “Save The Pound day” to spotlight the prime minister’s sneaky plan to adopt the euro. The Tories had held precisely such an event before the election, but Iain Duncan Smith, their new leader, reckoned it worth another shot. Dominic Cummings, his head of strategy, clutched his head in despair. “Just about the only thing less popular than the euro is the Tory party,” he later observed, in the typically direct manner that infuriates right-wing Conservatives. After eight months in the job he quit, pronounced Mr Duncan Smith “incompetent…a worse prime minister than Tony Blair” and retired to an underground bunker in Durham to study Russian literature and Thucydides. Today Mr Cummings—hair a chaotic thatch, speech brisk with a hint of the north-east—is again at the heart of politics. His focus is the EU, or rather getting Britain out of it. From a humming, glass-walled complex overlooking the Palace of Westminster he leads the campaigning efforts of Vote Leave, the largest of the outfits vying to be designated the official Out campaign in the impending referendum. Together with Matthew Elliot, its chief executive and a fellow libertarian veteran of anti-euro wars, he wants to create the biggest political upset in decades. Mr Cummings was never a typical politico. He is “someone for whom the phrase ‘doesn’t suffer fools gladly’ was invented”, observes Tim Bale, a historian of the Conservative Party. He sees politics less on a Labour-Tory spectrum and more as part of a Herculean struggle between brilliance and mediocrity (how he and the pooterish Mr Duncan Smith ever thought they would get on is unclear). Unequivocally idealistic and about as silky-smooth as sandpaper, he found his calling as chief of staff to Michael Gove, first in opposition and then, despite efforts by Downing Street to block him, at the education department. There he bluntly informed civil servants of their shortcomings, fired off hectoring e-mails written in capitals, took a bulldozer to Mr Gove’s softly-softly Liberal Democrat coalition partners and agitated to prise the state’s fingers off schools, inject the exam system with new rigour and boost the teaching of science and maths. If he demonstrated verve, it was because for him the Gove reforms were the method; the object was to change the soul. How? By transforming Britain into a meritocratic technopolis. That much Mr Cummings outlined in a 240-page essay in 2013, shortly before he left the education department. Between detours through nanotechnology, robotics and military strategy, he adumbrated a resilient society of “Odyssean” citizens capable of working across the sciences and arts and adapting to complex technology. Britain’s post-imperial role should be as the world’s “leading country for education and science”. In this scheme Brussels, like corporatist Lib Dems and education bureaucrats, is a barrier to be knocked down. “Dom’s Euroscepticism is an expression of his Nietzschean world view,” says a former colleague. The audacity of nope Yet for Mr Cummings, the EU is not just another obstruction. Leaving it is nothing less than the key to a bold new Britain. Sitting down with Bagehot, he starts by comparing post-renaissance China with post-renaissance Europe; the first mandated harmonisation and declined, the second accommodated competitive differences and advanced. The EU, he posits, is making the old Chinese mistakes by regulating things like drug trials and olive-oil containers. This predilection, combined with a lack of democratic scrutiny, makes it “extraordinarily opaque, extraordinarily slow, extraordinarily bureaucratic” and utterly ill-suited to a fast world of “gene drives, lethal autonomous robotics, you name it”. So Britain should leave, paving the way for a more dynamic, supple state; freeing British entrepreneurs from stultifying rules cooked up with the help of monopolistic conglomerates; and releasing cash that could seed a British version of DARPA, the American government’s emergent-technology arm. His problem is that many Outers prefer a more nostalgic vision of a post-EU Britain, one involving cream teas, birching and church on Sundays. Indeed, Mr Cummings finds himself on the front line of a battle between Vote Leave and Leave.eu, its main rival (backed by the UK Independence Party), which pushes a more socially conservative brand of Euroscepticism. On January 18th Arron Banks, the boss of Leave.eu, wrote to Mr Elliott describing Mr Cummings as “a liability and a danger” and “the only person apparently standing in the way of a formal merger” of the groups. Vote Leave rebuffed the flirtation, but Mr Cummings undoubtedly carries risks. His liberal idealism (he is pretty unfussed about immigration, for example) does not chime with the small-c conservative voters on whom Out relies. He will struggle to work harmoniously with whichever cabinet ministers come out against the EU (Mr Duncan Smith is one). And he can be impractical. He once set up an airline linking Samara, in south-west Russia, with Vienna; it had one passenger, whom it somehow left behind when its first and only flight took off. And yet. Mr Cummings inspires intense loyalty among those with whom he works closely. He had the political nose to advocate Tory modernisation years before David Cameron and George Osborne made it trendy. He is appealingly imaginative and original. In a profession in which shoehorning a reference to Uber into a speech passes for serious analysis, it is refreshing to come across somebody who thinks hard before he speaks. And he is genuinely optimistic—about human potential, democratic government and the power of science. Bagehot hopes he loses the battle over Britain’s EU membership. But he wishes Mr Cummings well in his bigger war. Full interview online: www.economist.com/blogs/bagehot   Economist.com/blogs/bagehotTEJU HASSAN has come far, and so have most of his flock. Born near Lagos 50 years ago, he converted to Christianity as a young man and now ministers in the far north of Ireland to a multinational congregation. Like many a “reverse missionary” from the devout developing world to the secular north, he sees his task as repaying the lands that exported Christianity. “The Gospel was brought to Africa by English and Irish priests. White people also did bitter things, but we are still grateful for the faith and we are bringing it back.” His 100 followers are an outpost of Christendom’s fastest-growing segment: people who seek an ecstatic experience described as “baptism in the Holy Spirit” and insist that biblical feats, from healing to exorcism to speaking in tongues, should be part of present-day worship. They are sometimes described as “charismatic” or “renewalist”. Within this category are Pentecostal churches that stem from a revival begun in America over a century ago; subgroups within established churches, which after 1960 began worshipping in a similar way; and newer churches that use Pentecostal style and language, with a fresh stress on prosperity. This can mean offering business tips, involving the faithful in ventures or telling them that God will enrich them if they donate money. Todd Johnson of America’s Centre for the Study of Global Christianity reckons that as of 2010, these charismatic worshippers amounted to a quarter of the world’s 2.3 billion Christians; by 2025 he expects their number to reach 800m (see chart). It is often noted by religion-watchers that Christianity globally is becoming more southern and exuberant. But the success of Pentecostalism and its imitators also highlights a more subtle point: the need for a kind of religion that is flexible enough to suit people in transit, whether between the southern hemisphere and the northern, between the countryside and the city, or between poverty and wealth. Speaking in tongues For uprooted peasants, too, coping with the anonymity of a megacity slum, charismatic churches provide a paradoxical blend of social support, discipline and emotional release. As Don Miller of the University of Southern California puts it: “Pentecostal worship is joyous, ecstatic and offers a sense of self-transcendence that fills a void in the lives of migrants—and exorcising demons, literally or metaphorically, can be a way of gaining control over individual or family problems.” Migrants travelling between countries need the same balance of solidarity and catharsis, and are well served by the loose structure of charismatic churches, which can spring up quickly wherever the need arises. Pastor Teju’s is a typical tale. His chance to migrate came when the multinational firm he worked for as an accountant sent him from Lagos to England for training. Hearing that Ireland’s economy was booming (in 2000), he got a job there. As his career progressed, so did his spare-time role as a pastor with another successful multinational concern, the Redeemed Christian Church of God (RCCG), a Nigeria-based organisation that ministers to the country’s diaspora and all other comers. His flock includes people from across Africa, and a few Irish looking for an alternative to Catholicism. His church claims to have thousands of communities worldwide. Though a prolonged slump means the pool of recruits in Ireland’s northwestern tip may be drying up, globally it seems on track. In Nigeria its Redemption Camp attracts millions to its annual meetings. A 10,000-seat stadium in Texas acts as a hub in America and last year David Cameron paid a pre-election visit to its London gathering, where the faithful cheered the prime minister as he lauded the family, the Bible and self-improvement. “Our people are very practical,” says Pastor Teju. So too is his brand of religion. Like migrants in search of safety and prosperity, charismatic Christianity has proved adaptable, almost chameleonic. To people whose lives are in flux, it offers a mix of ecstasy, discipline and professional and personal support. In Brazil an initially sober kind of Pentecostalism has been replaced by a brasher kind (see article). In South Korea (see article), a style of worship that suited a poorish, insecure country has been replaced by one that flaunts success. Whatever their style, Pentecostal pastors are culturally closer to their flock than are the learned clerics of the Catholic or Lutheran churches; and they are numerous. A study in 2007 found that in Brazil Pentecostal churches had 18 times more clerics per believer than the majority Catholics. As Mr Miller points out, older churches move slowly because they are lumbered with hierarchies and rules; the Pentecostal world is one of quick startups, low barriers to entry and instant reaction to change. At worst, this flexibility shades into opportunism. In every country where Pentecostalism has thrived, its leading practitioners have faced investigations of their finances. In 2011 Forbes magazine estimated the combined worth of five Nigerian pastors as at least $200m. In Brazil the faithful seem tolerant of pastors who are light-fingered with their tithes; many see giving as a virtuous act, regardless of the money’s ultimate destination. Estevam Hernandes, one of Brazil’s best-known preachers, cheerfully resumed his career after returning, in 2009, from five months in an American jail for smuggling undeclared cash. Some, though, have emerged unscathed. Last year Britain’s Charity Commission gave a clean bill of health to the British branch of one of Nigeria’s richest churches, the Winners’ Chapel. Or take Sunday Adelaja, a Nigerian-born cleric who is a player in the affairs of Ukraine. His Embassy of God church claims 25,000 followers (almost all white) in Kiev and outposts in over 20 countries. In 2009 he was questioned over the collapse of an investment firm which had touted for business in his church; he satisfied the police that he was not responsible. In the past migrating religious groups either merged into their host societies or else pickled the culture of the old country in aspic. Thanks to technology, today’s roaming worshippers have no such dilemma; a Nigerian or Brazilian in transit can adapt while maintaining contact with home. Globally dispersed Pentecostal churches meet both those needs. An outlying branch of the RCCG can offer job advice and a way to keep links with home. Global charismatic movements act as transmission belts along which ideas and worship styles can travel quickly. “A hymn can be composed in one continent and sung in another a few days later,” says Allan Anderson of Birmingham University. Like water, charismatic religion takes the path of least resistance. Philip Jenkins, a scholar of global Christianity, cites several little-noticed examples. Dubai is now a bastion of Pentecostal-style worship, among migrants; the Muslim authorities do not mind as long as local Emiratis are not proselytised. Thanks to a shared language, Brazilian neo-Pentecostal churches do well in Angola and Mozambique. And though Filipino Christianity is almost entirely Catholic, the export variety, adapted to the diaspora’s needs, is intensely charismatic, offering a combination of mysticism and practical advice. One movement, El Shaddai, claims 8m members across the world. Worshippers at its Manila base wave their passports in the air as they pray for successful travels. Politically, too, Pentecostal churches tend to be pragmatic rather than consistently conservative. Brazil’s globally successful Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (UCKG) initially resisted the rise of the centre-left Workers’ Party, but went on to back its presidential candidates, including Dilma Rousseff, the incumbent. In Ukraine Mr Adelaja was close to the 2004 Orange revolution but also wooed the pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych. Peru’s right-wing authoritarian leader, Alberto Fujimori, enjoyed Pentecostal support, but in El Salvador, Pentecostal preachers strike a leftist tone. In America Latino Protestants (mostly charismatic) are contested electoral terrain. Almost all Pentecostal churches are anti-abortion and anti-gay, but the UCKG has made statements that are pro-choice and comparatively gay-friendly. Predicting the future of such a volatile phenomenon is difficult. But wherever people are on the move, and are culturally receptive to Christianity in some form, charismatic religion will surely follow. BRÁS, a dowdy part of central São Paulo, has welcomed many newcomers. A century ago labourers came from Italy; from the 1950s to the 1980s migrants turned up from poor drought-prone parts of north-east Brazil, seeking work. Bolivians and Haitians are the latest arrivals. This churning mix has created the compost for charismatic worship, sprouting churches which have grown from a single congregation to embrace millions. Today Brás is a showcase of Brazilian faith, including several old and new kinds of Pentecostalism. Data about religion in Brazil are inexact. According to the census, between 1980 and 2010 the number of Pentecostals rose from 3.9m to 25.4m. As a share of the population, it rose from 3.2% to 13.3%. But many of the 8% calling themselves “without religion” flit between Pentecostal churches. Meanwhile, the Catholic share has dropped from 89% to 65%. Pentecostals are poorer, blacker, less educated and younger than the average Brazilian, in contrast with traditional Protestant sects like Lutheranism. But they are generous. One study found that in 2002-03, when they made up 13% of Brazilians, they gave 44% of tithes collected by churches in Brazil; Catholics, then 74% of the population, paid less than a third. The seeds of this charismatic expansion were sown just over a century ago when two movements were started in Brazil, both by Europeans coming from Chicago where Pentecostal fire was crackling. The better known is the main Brazilian branch of the Assemblies of God, which counts nearly 70m followers around the world. The other, the Christian Congregation of Brazil, was founded in this part of São Paulo in 1910 by Luigi Francescon, a migrant originally from Italy. Though it has not spread beyond Brazil’s borders, it now boasts 2.8m followers. As Pentecostals go, it is discreet. It refrains from proselytising; Francescon believed that God would lead people to church. Members dress conservatively; women eschew masculine or revealing clothes. Its services are orderly, and it shuns politics. All that is in contrast to Brazil’s most famous home-grown Pentecostal group, the newish but ultra-confident Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (UCKG). The church was started in 1977 by Edir Macedo, an ex-lottery official, coinciding with a wave of urbanisation and the spread of new communications technology. Mr Macedo shuns the asceticism of early Pentecostals: Forbes magazine estimates that his assets exceed $1 billion, and he owns 16 broadcasting stations. In 1992 he was jailed for 12 days on charges of embezzlement and charlatanism, all later dropped. The church’s grandest building, the Temple of Solomon, stands in Brás and is modelled on the original, in ancient Jerusalem. Opened in 2014, it houses 10,000 worshippers and oozes confidence, rising 50 metres above low-rise houses and cheap hotels. Flags flutter for 200 countries where UCKG claims a presence. One recent Saturday, before a women-only service, its stadium-sized forecourt swarmed with sleek ushers. Keeping order were members of Uniforça, the church’s youth wing, in yellow-and-black polo shirts. Hostesses in white gowns and golden sashes welcomed the worshippers. A few hours earlier worship began at another UCKG church; the slightly smaller Brás Cathedral. Thousands of believers have been praying for “impossible” causes. “Make your wishes now!” their black pastor, with a boxer’s build but a sweet tenor, intones. “God is listening!” Reinaldo, a 50-year-old labourer, sighs that his list of requests is long; he commends the Monday job-seekers’ service to your needy-looking correspondent. Not everybody in Brás is Pentecostal. The modest Catholic church of Saint John the Baptist sits in the Temple of Solomon’s shadow. By comparison it is shabby; its ethos reflects altruism, not pomp. Billboards offer help with beating alcohol or avoiding dengue fever. “We feed 50 homeless each week,” says Hevilaine Pereira da Silva, the parish secretary. Playing down the outflow to rival churches, she insists: “Those who left were never the true faithful.” But they are very numerous. Read more on Pentecostalism around the world and Pentecostalism in South Korea.Happy, clapping in Yoido TO UNDERSTAND Pentecostalism’s changing face in a country where it is thriving, take two snapshots of religious practice in Seoul. The first shows a once-common form of prayer that is now in decline, the second a style of worship that has grown hugely in popularity. Start one night by joining a reverent band of 30 worshippers in the freezing darkness of a mountainside south of Seoul. These hardy faithful come to Mount Cheonggye once a week, arriving around 9pm and staying until midnight. Prayers, they say, work better in the dark, though points of light appear as some follow lyrics on phones. Each sits alone on the damp forest floor, praying loudly or singing softly, occasionally exclaiming. The practice of praying on high ground began in the 1950s, after the division of the peninsula and a war which sent Pyongyang’s once-lively Protestant community fleeing south. Back in the 1980s, says the group’s leader, Kim Hyon-min, up to 30,000 people would pray, often for the country, on Samgak mountain north of Seoul. But this sort of service has lost its appeal, as some Koreans have switched to glitzier Pentecostal churches and others have fallen away altogether. This is one of the few mountainsides still open to late-night prayer near Seoul, says Mr Kim. Sometimes a few hundred come on a Friday, but that hardly matches the old days when “this mountainside was packed, [and] it was difficult to find a spot”. People are not as hungry as before, financially or materially, says Mr Kim. “We are blessed by God but…we have moved away from God. When the first Christians came down from Pyongyang they had nothing and experienced God’s blessing. Now we have it all.” Only the toughest continue to worship in high places: “We follow what Jesus did, he prayed…on the mountain. So we do, too.” Next, visit the Yoido Full Gospel Church, which has come a long way since 1958, when it was started by David Yonggi Cho in his mother-in-law’s living room. It claims over 700,000 members, including daughter churches and online followers. Its main building holds 12,000—enough to make a big noise. Members seem untroubled by the founder’s suspended three-year jail sentence 2014 for a scam in which church officials were urged to buy overpriced shares from his son. Even on a weekday morning, the basement lobby is nicely full for an hour-long act of prayer. Elderly men hand service sheets to worshippers, mostly middle-aged women. A minister and some worshippers speak in strange tongues, raising their arms to the sky, some crying. Then crooners with microphones lead the congregation in song. Lyrics appear on screens flanking a colossal wooden cross. Most hymns laud the Holy Spirit; cameras swerve to the strongest singers. An elder, Chang Ing-won, prays for the country’s president and protection from North Korea’s nuclear arms. Other dangers to be averted include Islamist terrorists—and homosexuals. Another pastor explains his country’s prosperity and North Korea’s poverty with reference to the story in Genesis of how Joseph helped Egypt avert famine. Then he recalls Jeong Jae-hoon, an emigrant to America who became boss of an aerospace company, and used divine help to solve engineering problems. The service is translated into English, Japanese and Chinese; at weekends, 17 languages are available. For an aspiring urban community, this style of worship allows people to bring their yearnings and celebrate their achievements. In the wealthy Seoul suburb of Gangnam, there are megachurches for higher earners; Yoido represents an intermediate step on the ladder of success. In one respect, the two congregations, one on a deserted mountain, the other in a crowded church, are similar. Among the people they dislike are shamans, practitioners of folk religion. Some see a paradox there; shamanism and Korean Pentecostalism both invoke invisible forces and believe in clairvoyance; Korean shamanists also practise night prayer on shelter-less peaks. But Mr Kim, the night-vigil leader, says commonality does not imply friendship: “They have their own mountains.” Some sociologists see things differently. As Kim Sung-gun of Seowon University puts it, Korean Pentecostalism has managed to appeal to both the middle class and the poor: the former with its happy mix of Christianity with modernity and the latter with its resemblance to shamanism. If he is right, this was clearly a winning recipe. Read more on Pentecostalism around the world, and Pentecostalism in Brazil.
