THE past two decades have seen astronomers’ catalogue of planets expand over two-hundredfold, as new techniques and better telescopes have found more than 2,000 of them orbiting stars other than the sun. But in the solar system itself, the list of planets has actually shrunk—Pluto having been downgraded from that status in 2006. The number of the sun’s planetary companions has thus fallen from nine to eight. Now, a pair of astronomers from the California Institute of Technology think they have evidence that will restore the sun’s tally to its previous value. Their analysis of objects orbiting in the Kuiper Belt, a ring of frozen asteroids that circle beyond the orbit of Neptune (and of which Pluto is now regarded as the largest member), suggests to them that something about ten times as massive as Earth has distorted those orbits. If you knew where to look, this planet-sized object would be visible through a suitable telescope. And Konstanin Batygin and Michael Brown believe they do know. As they write in the Astronomical Journal, they have analysed the orbits of Kuiper-Belt objects and found six that behave in a peculiar way. As the diagram shows, the points of closest approach of these objects to the sun, known as their perihelia, almost coincide. Moreover, these perihelia all lie near the ecliptic—the plane of Earth’s orbit and also, approximately, that of the other planets—while the objects’ orbits are all angled at 30° below the ecliptic. The chance of all this being a coincidence, the two researchers estimate, is about seven in 100,000. If it is not a coincidence, it suggests the six objects have been shepherded into their orbits by the gravitational intervention of something much larger. A computer analysis Dr Batygin and Dr Brown performed suggests this something is a planet weighing 5-15 times as much as Earth, whose perihelion is on the opposite side of the sun from the cluster, and which thus orbits mainly on the other side of the solar system from the objects its orbit has affected. This planet’s perihelion would be 200 times farther from the sun than Earth’s, and the far end of its orbit might be as much as six times that distance away. This gives a search zone, and Dr Batygin and Dr Brown are using Subaru, a Japanese telescope, to perform that search. Given other demands on Subaru’s time, it might take five years for this search to find (or not find) the hypothetical planet. But looking at some existing data from the Widefield Infrared Survey Explorer, a satellite, might also show it, if it is there to be seen. Ironically, it was Dr Brown as much as anyone who was responsible for Pluto’s downgrading, for he discovered Eris, an object almost as big as Pluto, in 2005. That discovery did much to damage Pluto’s planetary credentials. By his own admission, he was sceptical that the anomalies he and Dr Batygin have investigated actually would point to the existence of a replacement ninth planet. He is a sceptic no longer. Whether he is actually right may soon become apparent.We invite applications for the 2016 Richard Casement internship. We are looking for a would-be journalist to spend three months of the summer working on the newspaper in London, writing about science and technology. Applicants should write a letter introducing themselves and an original article of about 600 words that they think would be suitable for publication in the Science and Technology section. They should be prepared to come for an interview in London or Washington, DC, at their own expense. A stipend of £2,000 a month will be paid to the successful candidate. Applications must reach us by January 29th. These should be sent to: [email protected]MASSIVE, chaotic, endless and, despite it all, also charming, Jakarta can seem less a city than some sort of organic life form inexorably consuming north-western Java. More people live in greater Jakarta than in Australia; its residents send out more tweets than those in any other city. Yet millions of Jakartans also live in slums with pirated electricity and no running water. Traffic clogs the streets from dawn until well after nightfall—kita tua di jalan (“We grow old in the streets”), complain the city’s eternally harried drivers—and people from every corner of Indonesia cram into every available corner of the city. Eka Kurniawan, a young novelist, lives on the outskirts with his wife and daughter. When he sits down for a meeting at one of central Jakarta’s many shopping malls at 4.30pm, he says traffic will make it impossible for him to get back home before 10. Mr Eka may well be glad of the chance to sit still for a while. In the past few months he has appeared at book festivals in Melbourne, Brisbane, Brooklyn and Frankfurt—where Indonesia was the national guest of honour. Last year his American publisher, New Directions, whisked him around the country on a six-city book tour. Benedict Anderson of Cornell University, a luminary of South-East Asian studies who has recently died, called him “Indonesia’s most original living writer of novels and short stories”, and proclaimed him a successor to Pramoedya Ananta Toer, author of the social-realist “Buru Quartet”, and the man many consider to be Indonesia’s greatest-ever novelist. Now 40, Mr Eka has published four books of short stories and three novels, only two of which have so far been translated into English: “Beauty is a Wound” (New Directions), which is being published in 27 languages and was included in eight international lists of best books of 2015, and “Man Tiger” (Verso), which has been nominated for the 2016 Man Booker International prize. The English-language rights to his third novel, “Love and Vengeance”, have recently been acquired by New Directions and Pushkin Press; publication is set for 2017. If Mr Eka feels burdened by other people’s expectations, he does not show it. Small, slight and bespectacled, with a thoughtful elfin manner and a ready grin, he looks perhaps half his age, and chats freely and easily, without any apparent writerly agony. Mr Eka is Sundanese, and grew up in a small town in West Java which he used in “Beauty” as a model for Halimunda, the fictional setting that acts, as in William Faulkner’s novels, as a prism that filters and refracts Indonesia’s history. For a time he ran a souvenir shop, like Kliwon, the determined, sweet, relentlessly level-headed rebel in “Beauty”. When not working on novels Mr Eka blogs and writes for television—“soap operas, and whatever else they order from me”. Like many writers, he says, “I always think about doing something else. But in the end I sit down and write again.” And again and again: he has a book called “O”—a fable, he says, modelled on George Orwell’s “Animal Farm”—coming out later this year in Indonesian. The two books available in English are strikingly different. “Beauty is a Wound” is a sprawling work—seen through the eyes of Halimunda’s gangsters, rebels, prostitutes and gravediggers—that obliquely covers the history of Indonesia from the late colonial period onwards, through the 31-year rule of Indonesia’s second president, Suharto. Its opening line is hard to match: “One afternoon on a weekend in March, Dewi Ayu rose from her grave after being dead for 21 years.” The author said he spent much of his youth reading sastra picisan—pulp fiction filled with sex and violence, and his work has plenty of both. Mr Eka bristles at the suggestion that “Beauty” is fictionalised history: “I tried to make it a joke about a historical novel,” he says, “and the joke is that you can’t have a historical novel.” “Beauty” is not about Indonesian history; it is about characters buffeted by that history. In its scope and seamless weaving of the fantastical and the quotidian, it owes a hefty debt to Gabriel García Márquez, though Mr Eka’s magical realism is much earthier and less lyrical than his Latin American predecessor’s (in a nifty bit of irony, the only character able consistently to use magic to his advantage is Kliwon, a communist who disavows religion and superstition). The second book, “Man Tiger”, is slimmer and a quicker read—a murder mystery of sorts, though the first sentence reveals both murderer and victim. Even the motive is no mystery. Yet it is a testament to Mr Eka’s gift as a storyteller, particularly his skill at ratcheting up and tactically releasing tension, that he keeps readers enthralled nonetheless. Margio, the protagonist, is a sort of Javanese Raskolnikov (Dostoyevsky’s protagonist in “Crime and Punishment”), though technically it is not he, but a white tiger living inside him, that does the killing. Mr Eka calls this his most personal book: “There is a parallelism between me and Margio…In Indonesia we keep our anger, we repress our anger, but in the end…the tiger comes out, and we don’t know how to handle this tiger.” Such concern for the personal rather than the political, and his rejection of conventional realism in “Beauty”, exorcises the ghost of Pramoedya’s socialist-realism. Writing towards the end of colonialism, Pramoedya wanted most of all to give Indonesians an identity. If he was the nation’s Zola, Mr Eka is shaping up to be its Murakami: approaching social concerns at an angle rather than head-on, with hefty doses of surrealism and wry humour. What Belongs to You. By Garth Greenwell. Farrar, Straus & Giroux; 194 pages; $23. To be published in Britain by Picador in April. A YOUNG American teacher working in post-Soviet Bulgaria encounters a seductive hustler in the men’s room of the National Palace of Culture. Mitko is slender and beautiful, utterly at ease yet achingly remote. What follows is the poignant story of the two men’s unequal dance of need and longing. “What Belongs to You”, a first novel by Garth Greenwell, an American writer with a growing reputation, is a sensitive, almost nostalgic, meditation on desire. The strength of this slim book is the vibrant, heartbreaking character Mr Greenwell creates in Mitko: object of the unnamed narrator’s desire, fear, obsession and, ultimately, pity. He is a sweet, increasingly desperate product of a broken country, a child of the East who sells sex to survive. Mitko’s attractiveness stems as much from “a kind of bodily sureness or ease that suggested freedom from doubts and self-gnawing” as from his brazen sexuality. Throughout their brief relationship, the narrator minutely observes both Mitko and his country, as well as his own past. Yet he remains opaque, as estranged from the reader as he is from himself. This alienation, the narrator reveals, is rooted in early experiences of rejection for his awakening homosexuality. In the novel’s remarkable central section, told in one unbroken rush of past impressed upon the present, he recalls watching a boy he loved receive fellatio from a girl. “I’ve sought it ever since,” he thinks; “the combination of exclusion and desire I felt in his room.” The central theme of gay identity has led some to liken “What Belongs to You” to powerful coming-out narratives by such writers as James Baldwin and André Aciman. Edmund White, a writer and critic whose novel “A Boy’s Own Story” (1982) is a classic of the genre, has called it a “masterpiece”. (Indeed, Mr Greenwell’s novella, “Mitko”, the seed for this novel, won a novella prize and was nominated for a Lambda award for gay writing.) Yet the book is less about gay experience, in all its interpersonal and social dimensions, than it is a study of obsession and the self. Intense introspection makes it feel like a book from another age. Mr Greenwell, a poet, writes in the elaborate, melancholic voice of the mid-century novel of Mitteleuropa. Events are related in long, winding sentences punctuated by asides, filtered through the narrator’s gaze; attention is lavished on landscape, often pregnant with meaning. The tone may be apt for a post-communist world caught in aspic; it can also feel mannered. Still, his language is often beautiful: “How helpless desire is outside its little theatre of heat.” The narrator’s “humiliating need…has always, even in my moments of apparent pride, run alongside my life like a snapping dog”. All this self-scrutiny can leave the reader hungry for deeper exploration of the questions raised by the novel’s setting. The theme of the innocent abroad is not new, yet the complex dynamics of Mitko’s precarious existence and the ethics of their transaction are barely addressed. Ultimately, this is a story about chances and the unequal possibilities for escape for those emerging from different forms of wreckage. The Westerner feels regret, but shows startlingly little awareness of his privilege; Mitko is simply the canvas on which he projects his need. A bigger, deeper novel might have remedied this shortcoming, elevating this to a major novel of gay life. As it is, Mr Greenwell offers a tender portrait of the longing for connection and acceptance that inhabits us all, gay or straight.God Is Watching You: How the Fear of God Makes Us Human. By Dominic Johnson. Oxford University Press; 286 pages; $27.95 and £18.99. MANY people think that religious belief is inherent to human psychology. This does not mean that specific beliefs are wired, but that the brain is predisposed to believe in supernatural agents. Some proponents of this idea argue that supernatural beliefs have hijacked innocent or otherwise useful features of the mind. But Dominic Johnson argues in “God Is Watching You”, belief in God—specifically, in supernatural forces that can punish—is a useful evolutionary adaptation. Mr Johnson has doctorates both in evolutionary biology, where most of the research in the belief instinct has been done, and political science. He assembles well-known features of the mind in a tidy case. Human brains have a “hyperactive agency-detector device”, seeing agents (spirits, gods and the like) in natural phenomena and random happenings. This is useful. There is little harm if you overreact to something that turns out not to exist. But underestimating a rustling in the undergrowth, which might conceal a predator, could be fatal, leading to evolutionary selection of a tendency to see agents everywhere. The instinct is easily triggered, even in atheists. Even pictures can set it off: in one experiment, an office honour-system to pay for shared coffee got more contributions when someone taped a picture of a pair of eyes on the collecting tin. Another component in the belief instinct is a belief in justice, the idea that most people get what they deserve. (This may be one reason why even 30% of those Americans unaffiliated with any church nonetheless believe in punishment in hell.) A third factor is the tendency in most people to put greater emphasis on punishment than on reward: losing $100 is far more painful than winning the same amount is pleasing. Why would belief in an angry god be any use? When humans developed language, they could spread word of cheating, freeriding and the like. Raping your neighbour’s mate might once have made evolutionary sense—spreading your own genes at little cost—but “in a clever and gossiping species, knowledge of selfish actions could spread and come back to haunt us” in the form of a furious husband or a village mob. Since cheating is now costlier, belief in an invisible monitor helps people avoid those costs, and so survive with their reputations intact, and pass on their genes. So much for the evolutionary biology. Mr Johnson brings his political science into the picture by arguing that societies which punish cheaters are more likely to survive and grow. He quotes John Locke, a 17th-century English philosopher: “Those who deny the existence of the Deity are not to be tolerated at all. Promises, covenants and oaths, which are the bonds of human society, can have no hold upon or sanctity for an atheist.” Those bonds and covenants allow societies to co-ordinate action and plan for the future. Mr Johnson’s own research into 186 preindustrial cultures found that moralising religious beliefs were more prevalent in larger and more complex societies; these were more likely to be policed, use money and pay taxes. Others have noticed that religious kibbutzim in Israel are thriving, whereas secular socialist ones are in decline. The fact that moralising religious beliefs are more prevalent in more complex societies does not prove that one caused the other. But the striking number and variety of examples add credence to Mr Johnson’s theory. This book is not a detailed account of religious belief. Nor does Mr Johnson bother grappling with modern theologians’ subtle and abstract ideas of God and hell. His subject is the mind, not the deity, and he finishes by musing how resilient religious thinking has proved to be in the face of science: “Learning religion is part of human nature. Learning science is a battle against human nature.” Mr Johnson does not seem a pious man himself. But unlike atheists such as Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris, he is not out to embarrass religious belief and chase its subscribers from the public square. The religious instinct is too deep-seated, he thinks. Instead, critics of superstition are best advised to work with the grain of human psychology rather than against it, finding more benevolent ways to satisfy human yearning for something “out there”. What form such an atheist religion should take, though, God only knows.THE past seven years have been an extraordinary period for central bankers. Not only have they cut interest rates to zero (and even below) in the developed world; for the first time in their history central banks have greatly expanded their balance sheets, buying government bonds and other assets. Most economists agree that vigorous action was needed in the wake of the financial crisis in 2007-08 in order to head off a repeat of the Great Depression. Nevertheless, the sheer scale and protracted nature of such monetary stimulus is now a cause for concern among some commentators; have the banks permanently distorted the economy? In December the Federal Reserve made the first, tentative step towards normality, with a quarter-point rate increase. Mohamed El-Erian, a former IMF economist and executive at the Pimco fund management group, is the latest to sound the alarm. While central banks “averted tremendous human suffering”, he argues that they have failed to generate what the Western world really needs—“the combination of high, durable and inclusive growth together with genuine financial stability”. Worse still, politicians have come to rely on central bankers to provide the main source of economic stimulus. As a result, Mr El-Erian asserts, they have failed to force through reforms that were badly needed. The long period of easy monetary policy has pushed up asset prices and thus wealth inequality. It has also meant that the appetite for financial risks (market speculation, in other words) is greater than the willingness of businesses to take economic risks by increasing investment. Other problems include high long-term unemployment, a loss of trust in authority and the failure to co-ordinate economic policy. The global economy is rapidly approaching a T-junction, he argues, where the road heads in two diametrically opposite directions. One will lead to higher growth, reduced financial risk and a lessening of inequality; the other will see all those measures head in the wrong direction. Mr El-Erian does a good job of describing the problems. But the book falters when he tries to set out his plan for taking the right path away from the T-junction. He cites a number of necessary measures, including revamping the education system, strengthening infrastructure, improving labour competitiveness and flexibility, while simultaneously closing tax loopholes and increasing marginal tax rates on the wealthy in order to reduce inequality. But he only touches on these issues; a lot more detail is needed. Improving education may be a good idea, but it will be a decade or so before today’s schoolchildren have any impact on labour productivity. How will growth be improved in the meantime? Instead of answering such questions, he launches into a meandering section about the need for new thinking to deal with “bimodal distributions” (his T-junction metaphor). Just when readers want to get into the meat of the debate on economic policy, they are served a chapter called “Translating Awareness into Optionality, Resilience and Agility”. Mr El-Erian is right that employers need to embrace diversity in hiring, but that subject does not belong in a book on central banking. In a sense, however, the disappointing ending symbolises the state of economic debate. Central banks have provided all the help they can, and the burden of improving long-term growth ought to fall on politicians. But no one can agree on precisely what needs to be done. The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability and Avoiding the Next Collapse. By Mohamed El-Erian. Random House; 296 pages; $28.So hard to capture him The Vanishing Man: In Pursuit of Velázquez. By Laura Cumming. Chatto & Windus; 304 pages; £18.99. To be published in America by Scribner in April. EDOUARD MANET, a French Impressionist artist, considered him “the greatest painter that ever was”. To Laura Cumming, art critic of the Observer, a British Sunday paper, Diego Velázquez, whose precocious talent propelled him to the position of sole portrait painter to Philip IV of Spain at just 24, is something more. Shattered by the death of her father when she was in her late 20s, Ms Cumming retreated to Madrid. It was there she first saw Velázquez’s late masterpiece, “Las Meninas”, an enigmatic group portrait of the long-faced Spanish Habsburgs. She was transfixed. The princess, the dwarf and the artist himself looked out at her, as she looked at them, and in that moment they were alive again. Somehow the painting held back death: “He gave me the consolation to return to my own life.” This spiritual experience prompted Ms Cumming to look for historical records of other personal encounters with art. One she found concerned John Snare. In October 1845 Snare, a bookseller, peered closely at the painting he had come 30 miles (48km) to see sold at auction, a supposed Anthony Van Dyck of the young King Charles I. Licking a finger, he rubbed at the grimy varnish: “I never can forget the impression as the tones came alive like magic.” He was sure this was no Van Dyck, but the famous “lost Velázquez” painted while the English prince was in Spain courting the infanta. Snare’s quest to prove this conviction would consume his whole life, leading him from provincial prosperity in Reading to ruin and isolation in a cold-water tenement on Broadway. Ms Cumming’s book is thus a double biography, alternating between the life and endeavours of Velázquez and those of this humble man who loved him, framed in a fragment of memoir by a woman who loves them both. Like Snare, Ms Cumming is an evangelist for Velázquez, this book her case for more conversions. Through explorations of his work, she illuminates the innovations with which he would transform painting. His subjects do not inhabit a specific place, but rather a moment in time, which the painting shares with the viewer. From Velázquez’s former slave to the king himself, each is portrayed with respect as he or she fixes the viewer with that unsurpassed intensity of gaze. With almost no preparatory studies, he translated his subjects onto the canvas in a flurry of expressive colour. Up close, they dissolve into what Kenneth Clark, a British historian and one-time director of the National Gallery, once called “a salad of beautiful brushstrokes”; yet step back, and the colours resolve into likenesses of remarkable realism. Among the delights in this book are the many vignettes and miniature histories that punctuate the narrative—the socioeconomic significance of the stiff white golilla collar in Philip IV’s bankrupt court, the establishment of the Stuyvesant Institute in New York and the circumstances of the first world boxing title. As compelling and entertaining as a detective novel, this is an engaging book, comparable to C. Lewis Hind’s “Days with Velázquez” from 1906. Written in the fluid prose that characterised her first book, on self-portraits, “A Face to the World”, it is a labour of love even if her enthusiasm can be overwhelming; repetitions and occasional hyperbole temper the enjoyment. The densely researched web of pictures and catalogues, receipts, translations and letters, court proceedings and handbills, painters, courtiers and players is at times confusing. Ms Cumming, nonetheless, paints a beguiling picture of lives lived for art. When Sir Lawrence Gowing, a British artist and writer, reviewed Jonathan Brown’s seminal biography, “Velázquez: Painter and Courtier”, for the New York Times in 1986, he reflected that “No painting is harder to write about than that of Velázquez, and we must still, I think, await the words that will convey the compassionate integration of vision and paint with human subject that makes [his painting] so noble.” In “The Vanishing Man”, Laura Cumming succeeds in coming close.City of Thorns: Nine Lives in the World’s Largest Refugee Camp. By Ben Rawlence. Picador; 384 pages; $26. Portobello; £14.99. POLICEMEN clutching battered AK-47s stifle yawns in the hot sun outside the Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi. On the road leading up to the entrance cameras flash every few seconds, recording the number plate of each passing car. A city that once was fairly relaxed now feels as if it is under siege, its slumber ended by an attack on the mall in 2013 that left 67 people dead and as many as 175 wounded. The Shabaab, a Somali jihadist group, claimed responsibility. Kenyan politicians quickly blamed Dadaab, the world’s biggest refugee camp, demanding that it should be closed. No connection was found between the attackers and the camp, yet the same demand is made every time Kenya suffers another outrage. The sprawling camp was set up in 1992 to provide short-term shelter for refugees fleeing Somalia’s civil war and famine. It kept growing. Today Dadaab is home to about 500,000 people, dwarfing the main towns in the north-east of Kenya. Its economy, including its role as a way-station for a vast sugar-smuggling operation that is worth as much as $400m a year, powers that of the immediate region. Yet Dadaab is a refugee camp that has been largely forgotten by the world. A generation of young people have been born and educated in it; now they scrabble to earn a living there. Many are starting families in its confines. Trapped in limbo, they wait for resettlement abroad, too afraid to return to Somalia. Their lives, chronicled in detail by Ben Rawlence in “City of Thorns”, are a constant struggle for dignity and agency in a place that seems determined to deny them both.  The stories he tells are gripping. A Somali mother takes her five children, a pot, a kettle, a cup and a plate and sets out to walk for more than two weeks to the camp across the Kenyan border. She chivvies the youngest by telling him that a lion is pacing right behind. These tales do not come together in a neat ending, as they might in a novel. Instead the reader is left with a sense of loss and limbo—and the scent of dry wind, brush and sand. Lingering over it all is a strong feeling of lives being wasted by a world compassionate enough only to prevent people starving or being slaughtered in civil war, but not caring enough to resettle its many children and young adults—and make their lives worth living. 
