THE slightly leaning point of the Aiguille de la République, in the Mont Blanc range, is just large enough for a nerveless climber to sit and admire the view: 2,300 metres of empty air between his perch and the glacier below. But on September 4th 2014 Tancrède Melet was not sitting on it. He was pirouetting in his wingsuit to display the underarm webbing that would make him swoop down like a bird, and blowing kisses to the camera with which he was filming himself. A moment later, he jumped. It made sense. To go back to his partner and supper in Chamonix the way he had come, by train, hike, 650 metres of rock-climbing and a brief bivouac in the snow, would consume ten hours. It would take three minutes, if he flew. Every void and drop seemed to beckon him to throw himself into it, with only a parachute to save him. He couldn’t see a cliff or a building without wanting to jump off: sometimes in his wingsuit, sometimes half-naked, somersaulting or cartwheeling over the edge. Once he was fired from a giant catapult, howling with joy at the speed with which the mountain walls shot past. If clouds or rainbows filled the void, so much the better, because he or others would usually be filming his performance, and the beauty of it—l’esthétique of his body curving and cavorting in space—was almost the most important thing. Foremost, though, was the extraordinary clearing and freeing of his mind. He could seldom hide his slight vexation when the parachute checked his fall. Jumping was one route into emptiness. The other was to walk out into it along a thin nylon slackwire, to see if he could get across from safety to safety and what might happen if he failed. He walked across the gorges of the Dourbie in southern France, and between the Tours Mercuriales in Paris; in Kjerag in Norway, in winter, he crossed on a wire between ice-walls 450 metres above a fjord. He walked the line, almost invisibly high, that joined two hot-air balloons. On many highlines he had a leash to save him. On some, he did not. He would step slowly, often barefoot for better grip, arms out, as the wire swayed. If he slipped—and he did slip—he had to grab the wire, with hands or curling feet, and hang limply over the far blue view until he could lever himself back. Sometimes he crossed with an open, but quite useless, umbrella in one hand. Wasn’t he scared? Occasionally. Yet he was no closer to death, he thought, than a man who drove too fast on the motorway—or anyone else in this “community of mortals”. With base-jumping, he was mostly just curious to find out what surprises lay in store for his body or his mind if he flew through limits unbreached before; or through the life/death limit everyone crossed, if it came to that. “Who”, his publicity ran, “will be the first to venture into the unknown and reach for the stars?” With highlining, he felt more cautious. A slackwire between two trees was a doddle; on a somewhat higher wire, it was still possible to centre himself and focus calmly across the distance. But great heights, with their choppy winds and the loss of visual landmarks, racked both his nerves and his balance. He had to “beat himself up” to do the walk at all—or remember how on his first highline, too scared to go more than three steps, he had felt such an “explosion of sensations” that he was hooked for life. The devil’s whisper Thin, dark and shy, he did not look like an extreme sportsman and disliked being called one. Nor was he a daredevil; he was more thoughtful than that. There was a dash of the devilish, though: a whisper in his ear that said, “Why don’t you just try…?”, to which, after communing with his laptop and maps for a while, he would grin back, “That should work!” His summer climbing gear was Bermuda shorts, a white straw hat and a “Think Different” T-shirt. Point made: he seemed to think like no one else. Essentially he saw himself as an artist of the void, weaving together base-jumping, acrobatics and highlining to make hair-raising theatre among the peaks. Love of wild mélanges had been encouraged by his parents, who took him out of school when he was bullied for a stammer and, instead, let him range over drawing, music, gymnastics and the circus. Though for four years he slaved as a software engineer, he dreamed of recovering that freedom. “One beautiful day” he threw up the job, bought a van, and took to the roads of France to climb and walk the slackwire. In the Verdon gorges of the Basses-Alpes he fell in with a fellow enthusiast, Julien Millot, an engineer of the sort who could fix firm anchors among snow-covered rocks for lines that spanned crevasses; with him he formed a 20-strong team, the Flying Frenchies, composed of climbers, cooks, musicians, technicians and clowns. These kindred spirits gave him confidence to push ever farther out into empty space. Many thought him crazy. That was unfair. He respected the rules of physics, and made sure his gear was safe. When he died, by holding on too long to the rope of a hot-air balloon that shot up too fast, he had been on the firm, dull ground, getting ready. It looked like another devil-prompted connerie to push the limits of free flight, but this time there was no design in it. He was just taken completely by surprise, as he had hoped he might be all along. Sanctions on Iran were lifted after the regime was found to be in compliance with its obligations to dismantle parts of its nuclear programme. Yet America almost immediately imposed a new set of sanctions on companies and people linked to Iran’s ballistic-missile programme. Iran also freed four Iranian-Americans it had held prisoner, including a reporter from the Washington Post, in exchange for seven Iranians held in America. See article.  The UN said that Islamic State has enslaved as many as 3,500 people in Iraq. Most of these are women and children from the minority Yazidi community. Speaking in Paris, America’s defence secretary, Ashton Carter, said America and six other countries were stepping up their military campaign against IS in Iraq and Syria. Members of the two main factions in Libya’s civil war formed a unity government as part of a peace process brokered by the UN. But several militias in control of different parts of the country, including some in the two main factions, rejected the deal. In Burkina Faso jihadists attacked a hotel in the capital, Ouagadougou, killing at least 30 people. The attack, an echo of one last year in neighbouring Mali, was the first by Islamists in the country. The letter of the law Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency, downgraded Poland’s credit rating from A- to BBB+ over concerns about the rule of law in the country. The agency said changes to Poland’s media law and to the composition of its constitutional court, made by the new right-wing government of the Law and Justice party, implied that institutional checks and balances could be threatened. Poland has been placed under review in a European Commission rule-of-law procedure. In Britain a public inquiry into the murder in 2006 of Alexander Litvinenko, a KGB defector, found that Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, had “probably” approved the killing following a feud. Litvinenko was poisoned by tea laced with radioactive polonium-210 at a restaurant in London. Two Russian men accused of the murder deny any involvement. François Hollande unveiled a plan to boost job creation in France, which provides subsidies to small firms if they hire young or unemployed workers and more vocational training. Economists are sceptical of the plan. The French president has promised to bring France’s unemployment rate down before running for a second term in 2017. Firsts all round Taiwan elected Tsai Ing-wen as president, the first female one in the Chinese-speaking world. Ms Tsai’s Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) also won its first majority in the island’s legislature. The DPP favours Taiwan’s formal independence from China, but Ms Tsai says she wants to maintain the status quo. She is likely to be more cautious than was her predecessor, Ma Ying-jeou of the Kuomintang, in pursuing free-trade and other agreements with China. See here and here.  Gunmen killed 22 people and left 17 others injured in an attack on Bacha Khan University in north-west Pakistan. Four assailants were killed by security forces. It is not yet clear whether they were linked with militants who have carried out other deadly attacks in recent months. See article.  A Swedish human-rights activist, Peter Dahlin, was shown on Chinese television apparently confessing to crimes. State media said Mr Dahlin, who works for a Beijing-based human-rights group, had “sponsored activities jeopardising China’s national security”. Earlier a publisher from Hong Kong, Gui Minhai, who had gone missing in Thailand, was also shown on Chinese TV saying he had turned himself in to the authorities in relation to a drink- driving conviction 12 years ago. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, began his first trip as president to the Middle East. He travelled to Saudi Arabia and Egypt, and is also due to go to Iran. More than half of China’s imports of crude oil come from the Middle East. See article.  North Korea’s official media said scientists in the country had invented an alcoholic drink that does not cause hangovers. It is said to be made of a type of ginseng and glutinous rice. Implausible claims are a North Korean staple. Economic mismanagement Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, declared a state of economic emergency and asked parliament for powers to reform the economy by decree for 60 days. After withholding the release of economic indicators for more than a year, the Central Bank reported that inflation in the 12 months to September 2015 was 141.5% and that GDP shrank by 7.1% over the same period. See article.  Colombia’s government and the FARC guerrilla army asked the UN to send an unarmed mission to monitor a ceasefire between them after a peace agreement is signed. The joint request is an indication that negotiators in Havana are close to reaching a final agreement to end a conflict that has lasted for more than 50 years. See article.  Jude Célestin, who came second in the first round of Haiti’s presidential election in October, said he will boycott the run-off on January 24th because of alleged fraud. The leader after the first round was Jovenel Moïse, who has the backing of the current president, Michel Martelly. Overstepping his authority? America’s Supreme Court took up a case that challenges orders issued by Barack Obama in November 2014 to lift the threat of deportation from up to 5m illegal immigrants and allow them to work. The orders were blocked when 26 states, led by Texas, filed suit in lower courts against the Obama administration. Scientists at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration confirmed that 2015 was the hottest year on record. The average global temperature was 0.9{+o}C (1.62{+o}F) above the long-term average for the 20th century. Cold comfort for those living in the northern hemisphere as various cold snaps start to bite. In an unusually stilted performance, Sarah Palin, John McCain’s running-mate in 2008, endorsed Donald Trump for president. A day earlier Mr Trump was the hot topic in Britain when Parliament debated a voter petition to ban him from the country for making Islamophobic statements. The government said it couldn’t comment on individual immigration cases. Global markets had another rocky week, as rapidly falling oil prices reignited concerns about the health of the world economy. With oil stockpiles rising, partly because mild winter weather has reduced the demand for fuel, Brent crude dropped to below $28 a barrel. Now that sanctions hindering Iran’s oil sales have been lifted, the International Energy Agency has warned that oil markets “could drown in oversupply” if the forecast surplus of 1.5m barrels a day is not cut.  Oil spillover Declining oil prices were the main factor behind a fall in annual profit at Shell; it thinks it made up to $10.7 billion last year compared with $19 billion in 2014. Total said its profit would be 20% lower. In Azerbaijan, where the economy is dependent on oil, the government imposed stiff capital controls amid an economic crisis. It recently abandoned a peg to the dollar. Markets were also perturbed by news that China’s economy grew at its slowest pace since 1990 last year. GDP increased by 6.9%, compared with 7.3% in 2014. Underscoring the official economic rebalancing that is under way, services accounted for more than half of output for the first time, while manufacturing’s share dropped to 40.5%. Steel production contracted for the first time in 25 years. The slowing Chinese economy is not stopping Chinese firms from launching foreign takeovers. In the latest sizeable deal Haier, China’s biggest maker of large electrical appliances, agreed to buy General Electric’s white-goods business for $5.4 billion. GE had tried to sell the division to Electrolux, but the deal fell apart over antitrust concerns. Foxconn, a Taiwanese assembler of gadgets for Apple, was reported to have offered around $5 billion to buy Sharp, a struggling Japanese electronics firm. A fund backed by Japan’s government was also said to be considering a bid for Sharp. Hold on, hold on Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, suggested that the central bank was not contemplating raising interest rates soon, because the British economy faces repercussions from turbulence in the world economy. This week more cuts were announced in the British steel industry, which has shed 5,000 jobs. The markets now do not expect rates to rise until 2017, but Mr Carney reiterated that any decision would “depend on economic prospects, not the calendar”. The pound sank to its lowest level against the dollar since 2009. America’s big banks started reporting their earnings for the final three months of 2015. A legal charge to settle allegations that it mis-sold mortgage securities before the financial crisis reduced net profit at Goldman Sachs to $765m. Morgan Stanley’s profit came in at $908m, despite an ailing debt-trading business. A solid quarter at Bank of America helped boost annual profit to $15.9 billion, its most since 2006. JPMorgan Chase’s profit for 2015 was $24.4 billion, its best year ever. Deutsche Bank warned that legal and restructuring charges it has incurred will contribute to a loss for the fourth quarter. Revenue will come in below expectations because of “challenging market conditions”. Its share price, already under pressure amid uncertainty about the bank’s strategy, plunged. Separate allegations of wrongdoing at Renault and Fiat Chrysler hurt their share prices (prompting a brief suspension of trading in Fiat’s shares on the Milan exchange). Renault said it would recall 15,000 cars, and offered to fix hundreds of thousands more, because tests showed they exceeded emissions limits. The company’s offices have been searched recently by French authorities investigating the issue. Fiat Chrysler’s shares fell after two car dealerships in Chicago accused it of manipulating sales figures. The carmaker said that the allegations were “baseless” and had been made by “disgruntled” dealers. Walmart announced that it would close 269 underperforming stores in the United States and Latin America. These include all its Walmart Express stores in America. It had opened these primarily in urban areas to compete with discount grocers. Spanish Onion Univision, the largest Spanish-language broadcaster in the United States, bought a 40% stake in the Onion. The company’s digital officer said he expected the satirical news site “to play a key part in the 2016 presidential-election process”. He wasn’t joking. At the other end of the media spectrum, WHSmith, a British retailer that used to dominate high-street sales of books and stationery but is now less storied, had its best Christmas in years because of the craze for colour therapy to reduce stress (colouring books and pencils for adults).More KAL's cartoonsALONG with bank runs and market crashes, oil shocks have rare power to set monsters loose. Starting with the Arab oil embargo of 1973, people have learnt that sudden surges in the price of oil cause economic havoc. Conversely, when the price slumps because of a glut, as in 1986, it has done the world a power of good. The rule of thumb is that a 10% fall in oil prices boosts growth by 0.1-0.5 percentage points. In the past 18 months the price has fallen by 75%, from $110 a barrel to below $27. Yet this time the benefits are less certain. Although consumers have gained, producers are suffering grievously. The effects are spilling into financial markets, and could yet depress consumer confidence. Perhaps the benefits of such ultra-cheap oil still outweigh the costs, but markets have fallen so far so fast that even this is no longer clear. The new economics of oil The world is drowning in oil. Saudi Arabia is pumping at almost full tilt. It is widely thought that the Saudis want to drive out higher-cost producers from the industry, including some of the fracking firms that have boosted oil output in the United States from 5m barrels a day (b/d) in 2008 to over 9m b/d now. Saudi Arabia will also be prepared to suffer a lot of pain to thwart Iran, its bitter rival, which this week was poised to rejoin oil markets as nuclear sanctions were lifted, with potential output of 3m-4m b/d. Despite the Saudis’ efforts, however, producers have proved resilient. Many frackers have eked out efficiencies. They hate the idea of plugging their wells only for the wildcatter on the next block to reap the reward when prices rebound. They will not pack up so long as prices cover day-to-day costs, in some cases as low as $15 a barrel (see article). Meanwhile oil stocks in the mostly rich-country OECD in October stood at 267 days’ net imports, almost 50% higher than five years earlier. They will continue to grow, especially if demand slows by more than expected in China and the rest of Asia. Forecasting the oil price is a mug’s game (as the newspaper that once speculated about $5 oil, we speak from experience), but few expect it to start rising before 2017. Today’s price could mark the bottom of the barrel. Some are predicting a trough of as low as $10. The lower the better, you might say. Look at how cheap oil has boosted importers, from Europe to South Asia. The euro area’s oil-import bill has fallen by 2% of GDP since mid-2014. India has become the world’s fastest-growing large economy. Yet the latest lurch down is also a source of anxiety. Collapsing revenues could bring political instability to fragile parts of the world, such as Venezuela and the Gulf, and fuel rivalries in the Middle East. Cheap oil has a green lining, as it drags down the global price of natural gas, which crowds out coal, a dirtier fuel. But in the long run, cheap fossil fuels reduce the incentive to act on climate change. Most worrying of all is the corrosive new economics of oil. In the past cheap oil has buoyed the world economy because consumers spend much more out of one extra dollar in their pocket than producers do. Today that reckoning is less straightforward than it was. American consumers may have been saving more than was expected. Oil producers are tightening their belts, having spent extravagantly when prices were high. After the latest drop in crude prices, Russia announced a 10% cut in public spending (see article). Even Saudi Arabia is slashing its budget to deal with its deficit of 15% of GDP. Cheap oil also hurts demand in more important ways. When crude was over $100 a barrel it made sense to spend on exploration in out-of-the-way provinces, such as the Arctic, west Africa and deep below the saline rock off the coast of Brazil. As prices have tumbled, so has investment. Projects worth $380 billion have been put on hold. In America spending on fixed assets in the oil industry has fallen by half from its peak. The poison has spread: the purchasing managers’ index for December, of 48.2, registered an accelerating contraction across the whole of American manufacturing. In Brazil the harm to Petrobras, the national oil company, from the oil price has been exacerbated by a corruption scandal that has paralysed the highest echelons of government. INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability The fall in investment and asset prices is all the more harmful because it is so rapid. As oil collapses against the backdrop of a fragile world economy, it could trigger defaults. The possible financial spillovers are hard to assess. Much of the $650 billion rise in emerging-market corporate debt since 2007 has been in oil and commodity industries. Oil plays a central role in a clutch of emerging markets prone to trouble. With GDP in Russia falling, the government could well face a budgetary crisis within months. Venezuela, where inflation is above 140%, has declared an economic state of emergency. Other oil producers are prone to a similar, if milder, cycle of weaker growth, a falling currency, imported inflation and tighter monetary policy. Central banks in Colombia and Mexico raised interest rates in December. Nigeria is rationing dollars in a desperate (probably doomed) effort to boost its currency. There are strains in rich countries, too. Yields on corporate high-yield bonds have jumped from about 6.5% in mid-2015 to 9.7% today. Investors’ aversion spread quickly from energy firms to all borrowers. With bears stalking equity markets, global indices are plumbing 30-month lows (see article). Central bankers in rich countries worry that persistent low inflation will feed expectations of static or falling prices—in effect, raising real interest rates. Policymakers’ ability to respond is constrained because rates, close to zero, cannot be cut much more. Make the best of it The oil-price drop creates vast numbers of winners in India and China. It gives oil-dependent economies like Saudi Arabia and Venezuela an urgent reason to embrace reform. It offers oil importers, like South Korea, a chance to tear up wasteful energy subsidies—or boost inflation and curb deficits by raising taxes. But this oil shock comes as the world economy is still coping with the aftermath of the financial crash. You might think that there could be no better time for a boost. In fact, the world could yet be laid low by an oil monster on the prowl. FOR many years Turkey’s recipe for combating Kurdish nationalism was to pretend that Kurds did not exist. Even as Turkish troops battled the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), government propaganda maintained that Kurds were a subgroup of Turks and that their language, banned from official use, was a dialect of Turkish. To his credit, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, has never indulged in such fantasies. His Justice and Development (AK) party pursued peace negotiations with Abdullah Ocalan, the founder of the PKK, and moderate Kurds. Alas, in recent months, as the world has focused on the tragedy taking place in Iraq and Syria, Mr Erdogan has thrown those achievements away, relaunching Turkey’s war on Kurdish militants with a deadly new ferocity. Hundreds are dead, many of them civilians. About 200,000 people have been displaced, adding to Turkey’s burden of millions of Syrian refugees (see article). Districts across the south-east are under curfew. The army is using tanks and artillery against PKK-aligned youth militias dug in behind barricades filled with explosives. Parts of Diyarbakir, the biggest Kurdish-populated town in south-eastern Turkey, resemble the rubble-strewn wastelands of Syrian cities like Aleppo. The PKK bears much of the blame. Last summer it began killing Turkish troops and police, supposedly in retaliation for Turkish collusion with Islamic State (IS). The jihadists had sought to annihilate Kobane, a Kurdish enclave in Syria, in full sight of Turkish troops who stood by; and they carried out a suicide-bomb attack against Kurdish activists in the Turkish town of Suruc. By breaking the ceasefire, the PKK has stirred suspicions that it wants to carry the Kurds’ successful fight against IS in Syria back into Turkey. Grid of grievances: Enemies, alliances and animosity in the Middle East Whether the PKK’s action was a rush of emotion or premeditated, Mr Erdogan exploited it to end peace talks with the Kurds and launch a full-scale military campaign. By playing on Turkish nationalism, he propelled his troubled AK party back to victory in the election in November. But the repercussions are dire for Turkey as a whole. Its democracy is under attack. Anyone criticising the war, including moderate Kurdish politicians, is persecuted. What remains of the independent media is being silenced. Turkey, a bastion of stability, is being sucked into the Middle East’s ever-expanding war zone. Mr Erdogan may never have peddled the myth that the Kurds do not exist, but he has succumbed to a different fantasy: that he can end Kurdish nationalism by force. Turkey has already wasted decades trying to do so. Returning to suppression is futile, since Kurds form a large minority and control havens in Syria and northern Iraq. Instead Mr Erdogan will be drawn into a familiar vicious cycle, as the attempt to crush insurgents alienates moderate Kurds and creates recruits. The PKK, too, is indulging in fantasies. Turkey will never allow the Kurdish chunk of the country to secede or let its fighters take over militarily as they tried to do in the 1990s. Nor will America, however much it may look to the Kurds as the most reliable force against IS in Syria and Iraq, offer them any succour in destabilising Turkey, a vital NATO ally. If anything, America and Europe need Turkey more than ever to help them stop refugee flows and bring peace to Syria. Point the guns the other way A return to peace talks, on the basis of greater autonomy for Kurds within Turkey, which Mr Ocalan has already accepted, offers the only solution. The West must urge both Turks and the Kurds to see that they should be fighting IS, not each other. It will be impossible to end the civil war in Syria if Mr Erdogan insists on waging a war of his own in Turkey.FEW balances are harder to strike than those involved in running a spy agency. After a terrorist attack, voters demand action and politicians respond by granting their spies greater powers to bug and snoop, as with America’s Patriot Act in 2001 and the wide-ranging surveillance law passed after the attacks in France last year. Yet these very powers can, if abused, distort the political system, chill freedom of expression and tilt the scales of justice. When the full extent of clandestine activities come to light, as with Edward Snowden’s revelations about America’s National Security Agency, many feel queasy and demand that the spooks are reined in again. The better part of valour So a lot is riding on Britain’s attempt to update the law governing the domestic activities of its spy agencies (see article). The draft bill will make explicit how the electronic-intelligence agency, GCHQ, may (with a warrant) plant bugs on computers and other devices, collect and analyse bulk information (such as mobile-phone activity and web-browsing records) and read private messages. Get the details right, and Britain can provide a model of how to balance security and freedom; get them wrong, and centuries of freedom might shrivel. The bill’s biggest success is its self-restraint. It does not require firms to weaken the encryption they sell to customers, as politicians in several countries, including Britain, would like. If people want security on the internet, they have no alternative to strong encryption. The agencies have other means of collecting data, including bugging phones and computers. The draft bill is also right to require companies to retain, at least for a time, data about mobile-phone and internet activity that may, subject to a warrant, be of use to future investigations. Intelligence agencies need to be able to look back at the history of a suspected terrorist’s contacts and movements. Elsewhere, however, the bill could be better. It rightly strengthens GCHQ’s powers to pursue terrorists, gangsters and foreign spies. And it offers extra safeguards: new judicial commissioners will review warrants which, as now, will be issued by the home secretary. Politicians should have ultimate responsibility; if things go wrong, they carry the can. But the bill will work best if it is backed by a consensus. For that reason it needs to reassure those who fear that politicians may abuse their powers. Instead of holding their posts at the prime minister’s behest, the commissioners should be appointed as judges are and their dismissal should require a vote in Parliament. To avoid “capture”, they should serve a single fixed term. In addition, the proposed system merely requires the commissioners to check that a warrant has been issued lawfully and reasonably—broadly the same standard applicable to judicial review of other government decisions. But the extra secrecy with which intelligence agencies operate means that is not enough. The commissioners need a reserve power to weigh warrants on their merits. Also missing is explicit protection for lawyers’ communications with their clients. Just as important as the nuts and bolts of the new law is its implementation. GCHQ’s demands may be legal, but if they are too costly or intrusive, companies dealing with technology and data will simply move abroad. For all these reasons, other countries should watch Britain closely.  IN THE world of “The Hunger Games” youngsters are forced to fight to the death for the amusement of their white-haired rulers. Today’s teen fiction is relentlessly dystopian, but the gap between fantasy and reality is often narrower than you might think. The older generation may not resort to outright murder but, as our special report this week on millennials describes (see article), in important ways they hold their juniors down. Roughly a quarter of the world’s people—some 1.8 billion—have turned 15 but not yet reached 30. In many ways, they are the luckiest group of young adults ever to have existed. They are richer than any previous generation, and live in a world without smallpox or Mao Zedong. They are the best-educated generation ever—Haitians today spend longer in school than Italians did in 1960. Thanks to all that extra learning and to better nutrition, they are also more intelligent than their elders. If they are female or gay, they enjoy greater freedom in more countries than their predecessors would have thought possible. And they can look forward to improvements in technology that will, say, enable many of them to live well past 100. So what, exactly, are they complaining about? These children that you spit on Plenty. Just as, for the first time in history, the world’s youngsters form a common culture, so they also share the same youthful grievances. Around the world, young people gripe that it is too hard to find a job and a place to live, and that the path to adulthood has grown longer and more complicated. Many of their woes can be blamed on policies favouring the old over the young. Consider employment. In many countries, labour laws require firms to offer copious benefits and make it hard to lay workers off. That suits those with jobs, who tend to be older, but it makes firms reluctant to hire new staff. The losers are the young. In most regions they are at least twice as likely as their elders to be unemployed. The early years of any career are the worst time to be idle, because these are when the work habits of a lifetime become ingrained. Those unemployed in their 20s typically still feel the “scarring” effects of lower income, as well as unhappiness, in their 50s. Housing, too, is often rigged against the young. Homeowners dominate the bodies that decide whether new houses may be built. They often say no, so as not to spoil the view and reduce the value of their own property. Over-regulation has doubled the cost of a typical home in Britain. Its effects are even worse in many of the big cities around the world where young people most want to live. Rents and home prices in such places have far outpaced incomes. The youngsters of Kuala Lumpur are known as the “homeless generation”. Young American women are more likely to live with their parents or other relatives than at any time since the second world war. Young people are often footloose. With the whole world to explore and nothing to tie them down, they move around more often than their elders. This makes them more productive, especially if they migrate from a poor country to a rich one. By one estimate, global GDP would double if people could move about freely. That is politically impossible—indeed, the mood in rich countries is turning against immigration. But it is striking that so many governments discourage not only cross-border migration but also the domestic sort. China’s hukou system treats rural folk who move to cities as second-class citizens. India makes it hard for those who move from one state to another to obtain public services. A UN study found that 80% of countries had policies to reduce rural-urban migration, although much of human progress has come from people putting down their hoes and finding better jobs in the big smoke. All these barriers to free movement especially harm the young, because they most want to move. The old have always subsidised their juniors. Within families, they still do. But many governments favour the old: an ever greater share of public spending goes on pensions and health care for them. This is partly the natural result of societies ageing, but it is also because the elderly ensure that policies work in their favour. By one calculation, the net flow of resources (public plus private) is now from young to old in at least five countries, including Germany and Hungary. This is unprecedented and unjust—the old are much richer. The young could do more to stand up for themselves. In America just over a fifth of 18- to 34-year-olds turned out to vote in the latest general election; three-fifths of over 65s did. It is the same in Indonesia and only slightly better in Japan. It is not enough for the young to sign online petitions. If they want governments to listen, they should vote. However, the old have a part to play, too. The young are an oppressed minority—albeit an unusual one—in the straightforward sense that governments are systematically preventing them from reaching their potential. That is a cruel waste of talent. Today’s under-30s will one day dominate the labour force. If their skills are not developed, they will be less productive than they could be. Countries such as India that are counting on a demographic dividend from their large populations of young adults will find that it fails to materialise. Rich, ageing societies will find that, unless the youth of today can get a foot on the career ladder, tomorrow’s pensioners will struggle. What is more, oppressing youngsters is dangerous. Countries with lots of jobless, disaffected young men tend to be more violent and unstable, as millions of refugees from the Middle East and Africa can attest. They’re quite aware of what they’re going through The remedy is easy to prescribe—and hard to enact. Governments should unleash the young by cutting the red tape that keeps them out of jobs, and curbing the power of property-owners to stop homes from being built. They should scrap restrictions on domestic migration and allow more cross-border movement. They should make education a priority. It is a lot to expect from political leaders who often seem unequal to the task of even modest reform. But every parent and grandparent has a stake in this, too. If they put their shoulders to the wheel, who knows what they might accomplish.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Saudi Arabia’s problem Your briefing on the Saudi regime’s blueprint for survival undervalued the comparative dimension (“Young prince in a hurry”, January 9th). In a globalising world where transnational economic ties, information technologies, migration, awareness of what is going on in different parts of the world and the chipping away of borders affect ever greater parts of societies, authoritarian or “strongman” regimes are vulnerable to rapidly shifting pressures. It may appear that such regimes can bring stability to unevenly fragmenting countries, but they become even more dependent on rents, especially from resources (the “resource curse”) and on cheap exports, cheap labour and the like. Maintaining these comparative advantages often requires repression and austerity. They therefore have to deal with vicious cycles of disillusionment, resentment and ethnic divisions that spill across borders. When these bottom-up pressures mesh with uneven international trends, of which the falling oil price is but one, these regimes improvise, often making things worse in the medium- to long-term. We have seen this across the world at different speeds and with different ramifications, from Nicolás Maduro’s Venezuela to Vladimir Putin’s Russia to Africa and now China. The developed world is at a loss how to react. International interventionism just seems to exacerbate the process. Saudi Arabia is one such regime, caught between the inside and the outside. Democratisation would obviously be the preferred alternative, but democratic regimes historically have usually grown out of long phases of civil war, authoritarianism and breakdown. We are likely to have to go through such a neomedieval phase before the restructuring process can begin. PHILIP CERNY Reading your fascinating piece on Saudi Arabia I couldn’t help but recall a passage from Alexis de Tocqueville’s “The Ancien Régime and the Revolution”: “Experience teaches us that, generally speaking, the most perilous moment for a bad government is one when it seeks to mend its ways.” Tocqueville recognised the statecraft that is needed in order to avoid disaster when embarking on radical reform. MICHAEL WILLIAMS Although the House of Saud has suffered two catastrophic setbacks during its long dominance, it has managed rebirth in both cases. This is the third Saud dynasty that we are witnessing, the third flower on a vine that is rooted as far into the past as the creation of Britain, that is to say, some 300 years. Characterising the kingdom as a “post-colonial Arab state”, as if its basis is the Sykes-Picot agreement, is not helpful. Given its repeated incarnations, the House of Saud’s foundation appears more likely to be a special resonance with something in the soul of the Arab peninsula. From that more-encompassing perspective, the challenges of reform, regional influence, population, economic diversity and even oil wealth itself cast far less compelling shadows. CRAIG MCLANE RateMyPolice The teenagers building an app to rate service from the police have a great idea (“Revenge of the nerds”, January 2nd). The police need not be worried and should get ahead of the game by doing this themselves. There is already well-developed IT on crime reporting to achieve crime prevention, but most police agencies in America have no system at all to understand the reactions of citizens to their efforts. Only a few survey the community regularly. Like websites where students rate professors, ad hoc ratings of police will be fraught with problems. But systematic, scientific and regular measures of police services could be subject to review and oversight. The police would benefit from having this information. CYNTHIA LUM American tax * “Republican tax plans are articles of faith” is how you conclude your analysis of GOP presidential hopefuls’ tax plans (“Indecent disclosure”, January 2nd). While the tax proposals from 2016 candidates have varying degrees of merit and some have problems, others do not, such as Ted Cruz’s call for a European-style VAT and Jeb Bush’s tax hike on investment income: they commendably move toward lower income tax rates. Republican candidates’ belief that reducing individual and corporate income tax rates, as well as lowering the overall tax burden, will promote economic growth is not an article of faith. In fact, it’s supported by social science. John Hood, chairman of the John Locke Foundation, a conservative think tank based in North Carolina, analysed 681 peer-reviewed academic journal articles dating back to 1990. Most of the studies found that lower levels of taxes and spending correlate with stronger economic performance. When Tax Foundation chief economist William McBride reviewed academic literature going back three decades, he found “the results consistently point to significant negative effects of taxes on economic growth even after controlling for various other factors such as government spending, business cycle conditions and monetary policy”. With a steeply progressive income tax code, the world’s highest corporate tax rate and an uncompetitive worldwide corporate tax regime, America is desperately in need of rate-lowering, complexity-reducing tax reform. Unfortunately, only one of the two major political parties is proposing such. PATRICK GLEASON A musical child I was grateful for the insight and sensitivity in your obituary of David Bowie (January 16th). But it is not true that he “grew up as David Jones, a sharp-toothed kid from dull suburban Bromley whose parents held no aspirations for him”. David’s parents, especially his father, “John” Jones, encouraged him from the time he was a toddler. His mother, Peggy, spoke often of our deceased grandfather, who was a bandmaster in the army and played many wind instruments. David’s first instruments, a plastic saxophone, a tin guitar and a xylophone, were given to him before he was an adolescent. He also owned a record player when few children had one. When he was 11 we danced like possessed elves to the records of Bill Haley, Fats Domino and Elvis Presley. David’s father took him to meet singers and other performers preparing for the Royal Variety Performance. I remember one afternoon in the late 1950s when David was introduced to Dave King, Alma Cogan and Tommy Steele. “My son is going to be an entertainer, too” he said. “Aren’t you, David?” “Yes, Daddy,” David squeaked in his childish high-pitched voice, his face flushed and beaming with pride. Although Uncle John never lived to see David’s huge success, he was convinced it would become a reality. My beloved David fulfilled and exceeded all his father’s dreams. KRISTINA AMADEUS Investing in people Free exchange (January 2nd) lamented the lack of attractive options for investing in physical capital. But imagine if investment in human capital was considered on an equal footing. The Brookings Institution has developed the Social Genome Project to examine such options. For instance, it estimates that investing in well-evaluated programmes for poor children will increase their expected income by roughly ten times the costs of the projects and improve their chances of reaching the middle class. American companies could return some of the $2 trillion they hold in profits overseas to invest in “human-resource bonds”. Now that’s an attractive option. ARNOLD PACKER Liberal Merkel * Your piece on the mass groping of women in Cologne (“New year, new fear”, January 9th) did not adequately reflect the disturbing connection with Angela Merkel’s open-door policy for migrants. By suspending the Dublin procedures on refugees this summer, trying to solve a humanitarian situation, Mrs Merkel has unleashed a dynamic that she can no longer control. Mrs Merkel has used her time as Germany’s leader to remove potential political rivals, which has has allowed her to take swift decisions, such as in the “Energiewende” energy policy, without being challenged by a robust opposition. The consequences of 2015 will be disastrous for long years. I have often read your coverage of German politics with a nod of approval. But I cannot but wonder about the hagiographic touch in your reporting on Mrs Merkel lately. She has become the dominating figure in the EU, which is a bad thing. FLORIAN MAURICE Taking a wrong Torun As a native of Torun I was glad to see my home town earning a mention in The Economist, if for the wrong reasons (“Courting disaster”, January 2nd). Throughout the years, I got used to Torun being mocked as a home of religious zealots and backwardness rather than the birthplace of Nicolaus Copernicus and gingerbread. A popular bumper-sticker stating that Torun apologises for Radio Maryja is here to stay. MICHAL KLOS * Letters appear online only
