OIL traders are paying unusual attention to Kharg, a small island 25km (16 miles) off the coast of Iran. On its lee side, identifiable to orbiting satellites by the transponders on their decks, are half a dozen or so huge oil tankers that have been anchored there for months. Farther down Iran’s Persian Gulf coast is another flotilla of similarly vast vessels. They contain up to 50m barrels of Iranian crude—just what a world awash with oil could do without. The lifting of nuclear-related sanctions against Iran on January 16th puts those barrels at the forefront of the country’s quest to recapture a share of international oil markets that it has been shut out of for much of the past decade. The prospect of Iran swiftly dispatching its supertankers to European and Asian refineries to undercut supplies from Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Russia helped push the world’s main benchmarks, Brent and West Texas Intermediate (WTI), to their lowest levels since 2003 on January 20th; WTI tumbled by 6.7% to under $27 a barrel, its biggest one-day fall since September (see chart 1). The slide marks the latest act in a dramatic reversal of fortunes for the oil industry that is, in turn, roiling the global economy. Less than a decade ago the world scrambled for oil, largely to fuel China’s commodity-hungry growth spurt, pushing prices to over $140 a barrel in 2008. State-owned oil giants such as Saudi Aramco had access to the cheapest reserves, forcing private oil firms to search farther afield—in the Arctic, Brazil’s pre-salt fields and deep waters off Angola—for resources deemed ever scarcer. Investors, concerned that the oil majors could run out of growth opportunities, encouraged the search for pricey oil, rewarding potential future growth in production as much as profitability. Now the fear for producers is of an excess of oil, rather than a shortage. The addition to global supply over the past five years of 4.2m barrels a day (b/d) from America’s shale producers, although only 5% of global production, has had an outsized impact on the market by raising the prospects of recovering vast amounts of resources formerly considered too hard to extract. On January 19th the International Energy Agency (IEA), a prominent energy forecaster, issued a stark warning: “The oil market could drown in oversupply.” Last year the world produced 96.3m b/d of oil, of which it consumed only 94.5m b/d. So each day about 1.8m barrels went into storage tanks—which are filling up fast. Though new storage is being built, too much oil would cause the tanks to overflow. The only place to put the spare barrels would be in tankers out to sea, like the Iranian oil sitting off Kharg, waiting for demand to recover. For oil producers that is an alarming prospect, yet for the most part warnings such as those of the IEA have gone unheeded. This poses two puzzles. When, in November 2014, Saudi Arabia forced OPEC to keep the taps open despite plummeting prices, it hoped quickly to drive higher-cost producers in America and elsewhere out of business. Analysts expected a snappy rebound in prices. Though oil firms have since collectively suspended investment in $380 billion of new projects, as yet there is no sign of a bottom. Projections for a meaningful recovery in the oil price have been pushed back until at least 2017. The economic impact of the oversupply is another enigma. Cheaper fuel should stimulate global economic growth. Industries that use oil as an input are more profitable. The benefits to consuming nations typically outweigh the costs to producing ones. But so far in 2016 a 28% lurch downwards in oil prices has coincided with turmoil in global stockmarkets. It is as if the markets are challenging long-held assumptions about the economic benefits of low energy prices, or asserting that global economic growth is so anaemic that an oil glut will do little to help. Iran is the most immediate cause of the bearishness. It promises an immediate boost to production of 500,000 b/d, just when other members of OPEC such as Saudi Arabia and Iraq are pumping at record levels. Even if its target is over-optimistic, seething rivalry between the rulers in Tehran and Riyadh make it hard to imagine that the three producers could agree to the sort of production discipline that OPEC has used to attempt to rescue prices in the past. Even if OPEC tried to reassert its influence, the producers’ cartel would probably fail because the oil industry has changed in several ways. Shale-oil producers, using technology that is both cheaper and quicker to deploy than conventional oil rigs, have made the industry more entrepreneurial. Big depreciations against the dollar have helped beleaguered economies such as Russia, Brazil and Venezuela to maintain output, by increasing local-currency revenues relative to costs. And growing fears about action on climate change, coupled with the emergence of alternative-energy technologies, suggests to some producers that it is best to pump as hard as they can, while they can. INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability This is not the first time OPEC has overestimated the effectiveness of what, during the era of John Rockefeller’s Standard Oil, used to be called “a good sweating”: attempting to flood the market with cut-price oil to drive competitors out of business. In the mid-1980s the cartel sought to use low prices to undercut producers in the North Sea, but failed. They enacted a policy to recoup market share from their non-OPEC rivals, but ended up trying to defeat each other, further weakening prices. It took several years for oil prices to recover. It’s a time-worn miscalculation. In his book “The Prize”, Daniel Yergin quotes an American academic writing as far back as 1926 about the “spectacle” of massive overproduction. “Oil producers were committing ‘hara-kiri’ by producing so much oil,” the scholar wrote. “All saw the remedy but would not adopt it. The remedy was, of course, a reduction in the production.” Yet there is also a reason for keeping the pumps working that is not as suicidal as it sounds. One of the remarkable features of last year’s oil market was the resilience of American shale producers in the face of falling prices. Since mid-2015 shale firms have cut more than 400,000 b/d from output in response to lower prices. Nevertheless, America still increased oil production more than any other country in the year as a whole, producing an additional 900,000 b/d, according to the IEA. During the year the number of drilling rigs used in America fell by over 60%. Normally that would be considered a strong indicator of lower output. Yet it is one thing to drill wells, another to conduct the hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) that gets the shale oil flowing out. Rystad Energy, a Norwegian consultancy, noted late last year that the “frack-count”, ie, the number of wells fracked, was still rising, explaining the resilience of oil production. The roughnecks used other innovations to keep the oil gushing, such as injecting more sand into their wells to improve flow, using better data-gathering techniques and employing a skeleton staff to keep costs down. The money is no longer flowing in. America’s once-rowdy oil towns, where three years ago strippers could make hundreds of dollars a night from itinerant oilmen, are now full of abandoned trailer parks and boarded-up businesses. But the oil is still flowing out. Even some of the oldest shale fields, such as the Bakken in North Dakota, were still producing at the same level in November as more than a year before. The shale industry also benefited from financial engineering. Last year at least half of the firms involved had hedged the oil price to protect revenues. Some went bankrupt, but most have managed to sweet-talk bankers into keeping the credit flowing—at least until the latest crisis. It is not just the shale industry that managed to keep its head above water longer than expected. Those extracting in more expensive places, such as Canada’s oil sands and Brazilian pre-salt, have too. Canada, whose low-quality benchmark oil, West Canada Select, is trading below $15 a barrel, giving it the ignominious title of the world’s lowest-value crude, is one of the non-OPEC countries expected to add most to global supply this year. So is Brazil, despite debt and corruption at its state oil company, Petrobras. Meanwhile, the oil majors have said they will slash tens of thousands of jobs and billions of dollars in investment, but they too are reluctant to abandon projects that may add to future production. Shell, an Anglo-Dutch company, took the rare decision to abandon exploration in the Arctic and a heavy-oil project in Canada but its current output of 2.9m b/d in 2015 was only just shy of the previous year’s 3.1m b/d. In the industry at large, the incentive is to keep producing “as flat out as you can”, once investment costs have been sunk into the ground, says Simon Henry, Shell’s chief financial officer. He says it is sometimes more expensive to stop production than to keep pumping at low prices, because of the high cost of mothballing wells. Simon Flowers of Wood Mackenzie, an industry consultancy, says that even at $30 a barrel, only 6% of global production fails to cover its operating costs. It may be uneconomic to drill new deepwater wells at prices under $60 a barrel, he says, but once they are built it may still make economic sense to keep them running at prices well below that (see chart 2). Such resilience is used by some to justify why they expect prices to remain “lower for longer”. In theory a long period of low oil prices should benefit the global economy. The world is both a producer and a consumer: what producers lose and consumers gain from a drop in prices sums to zero. Conventionally, extra spending by oil importers exceeds cuts in spending by exporters, boosting global aggregate demand. The economies that have enjoyed the strongest GDP growth in the past year have indeed been oil importers: India, Pakistan and countries in east Africa. It is hard to explain the consumer-led recovery in the euro area without assuming a positive impact from lower oil prices. In the IMF’s latest forecast, published on January 19th, the handful of big economies that were spared downgrades to GDP growth—China, India, Germany, Britain, Spain and Italy—were all net oil importers. Where are the windfalls? There are doubts that this holds true everywhere. America is both a large producer and consumer of oil. At the start of 2015, JPMorgan, a bank, reckoned that cheap oil would boost GDP by around 0.7%—a boost to consumers’ purchasing power equivalent to 1% of GDP, offset by a smaller drag from weaker oil-industry investment. It now reckons the outcome was between a contraction of 0.3% and a boost of a measly 0.1%. Consumers may have saved more of the windfall than had seemed likely and the share of oil-related capital spending in total business investment in America, which had steadily risen for years, has fallen by half (see chart 3). Add in the indirect effects of the downturn in the oil industry and the net impact of cheap oil may even have been a bigger decline than JPMorgan’s most pessimistic estimate. That has been the experience of the MSC Industrial Supply Company, an American retailer of hinges, brackets, power tools and maintenance equipment to manufacturers. It does not rely directly on orders from oil companies, yet this month its boss, Erik David Gershwind, said that fallout from the oil shock had had a noticeable impact on sales. “The indirect exposure is, I think, what’s taken everybody by surprise, not only at MSC but in the broader economy, and it’s ugly.” Unsurprisingly some of the biggest splashes of red ink in the IMF’s latest forecast revisions were reserved for countries where oil exploration and production has played a significant role in the economy: Brazil, Saudi Arabia, Russia (and some of its oil-producing neighbours) and Nigeria. Weaker demand in this group owes much to strains on their public finances. Russia has said it will cut public spending by a further 10% in response to the latest drop in crude prices (see article). The oil industry accounts for 70% of tax revenue in Nigeria. When the oil price plunged in 2008-09, it was able to draw on savings it had salted away in an oil-stabilisation fund. But in June the country’s president, Muhammadu Buhari, said the treasury was “virtually empty”. Saudi Arabia has deeper pockets but, with a budget deficit that reached 15% of GDP last year, even it has been forced to cut public spending. The old calculus that such countries were able to smooth spending through the oil-price cycle has become less reliable. To a larger degree than in the past, oil producers have spent windfall revenues, and now have been forced to cut back. This compounds the effect on aggregate demand of falling investment in the oil industry. Perhaps more worrying is the way the oil-price drop is compounding the effect of financial fragility worldwide. Low interest rates in America and Europe after 2009 drew rich-world investors into emerging markets, creating a lending boom. Corporate debt in emerging markets rose from 50% of GDP in 2008 to 75% in 2014. The lesson of recent history is that a rapid build-up in debt leads to trouble. Along with construction, the oil and gas industry saw a big increase in corporate debt, according to the IMF’s latest Global Financial Stability Report. Lower oil revenues make it harder to service this burden. When the oil price slumped in 2008-09 oil-producing countries were able to cut interest rates and borrow abroad to prop up demand. Now investors are charier of risk. The end of the Federal Reserve’s programme of bond buying (“quantitative easing”) in 2014 and the recent increase in interest rates has drawn money back to America, boosting the dollar and tightening global monetary conditions. Oil producers, notably in Latin America, are having to tighten domestic monetary policy to tackle inflation, in part caused by big falls in their currencies. Brazil’s central bank has kept interest rates high, even though its economy is deep in recession. Central banks in Colombia and Mexico raised rates in December. The same strains are evident in oil-rich Nigeria and Angola, the largest and third-largest economies in sub-Saharan Africa. The easier financial conditions in the years after 2009 gave policymakers in Africa a false sense of their own resilience, says Stuart Culverhouse of Exotix, a broker. Ready for a shock Investors appear to be rethinking how risky assets should be priced in rich countries, too. This is as much a response to concerns about the strength of China’s economy as to the damage a sharp fall in oil prices might wreak. Worries about delinquent borrowers in the oil industry triggered a sharp rise in their yields in America’s junk-bond market at the end of last year. The yields on junk bonds issued by other sorts of borrowers rose in apparent sympathy. Even yields on investment-grade bonds are edging up. Stockmarket bears are quick to point out that higher real interest rates on corporate bonds make it harder to justify elevated share prices. Central bankers in rich countries say they worry that a long period of near-zero inflation is entrenching beliefs that prices will remain endlessly flat. The real rate of interest rises when expectations of inflation fall and it is hard for policymakers to respond to this as rates are already close to zero. Since the start of the year, the supply shock from Iran has also been accompanied by fears of a demand one from China. The bungled handling of China’s stockmarket and currency has raised fears about the economy, which has spilled over into the oil market. As global financial markets have descended into turmoil, there are mounting worries about the resilience of the global economy, too. That, in turn, raises anxiety about future oil demand. Macroeconomic concerns are paramount, but there are also microeconomic ones. Lower fuel subsidies in some oil-producing countries, aimed at plugging budget deficits, are encouraging car owners to drive less miles. China has said that it will not allow petrol prices to fall in line with oil below $40 a barrel, which will have the same effect. Even in the United States, the link between cheap petrol and gas-guzzling is less strong than it was. Part of the reason, analysts say, is that vehicles are more fuel-efficient. Green and black After the Paris summit on climate change in December some pundits reckon that the latest oil crisis reflects a structural change in oil consumption because of environmental concerns—what some call “peak demand”. It is true that as climate consciousness grows, oil companies are developing more gas than oil, hoping to deploy it as an energy substitute for coal. But it may be too early to assume that the era of the petrol engine is coming to an end. More likely, the oil price will eventually find a bottom and, if this cycle is like previous ones, shoot sharply higher because of the level of underinvestment in reserves and natural depletion of existing wells. Yet the consequences will be different. Antoine Halff of Columbia University’s Centre on Global Energy Policy told American senators on January 19th that the shale-oil industry, with its unique cost structure and short business cycle, may undermine longer-term investment in high-cost traditional oilfields. The shalemen, rather than the Saudis, could well become the world’s swing producers, adding to volatility, perhaps, but within a relatively narrow range. Big oil firms would then face some existential questions. In the future, should they carry on as before, splurging on expensive vanity projects in hard-to-reach places, at the risk of having “unburnable” reserves as environmental concerns mount? Should they reinvest their profits in shale or in greener technologies? Or should they return profits to shareholders, as some tobacco companies have done, marking the beginning of the end of the fossil-fuel era? Whatever they do, the era of oil shocks is far from over.TWENTY-FIVE years ago, television viewers around the world were introduced to America’s cruise-missile technology. As journalists stood filing their reports from the roof of the Al Rashid hotel in Baghdad, Tomahawk missiles were caught on camera sweeping through the city’s streets on their way to targets struck with uncanny accuracy. Designed at the height of the cold war as a nuclear missile, subsequently armed with a conventional warhead, the Tomahawk has been in the vanguard of most American air campaigns since the first Gulf war. Yet plans to develop a successor, the long-range stand-off missile (LRSO), before the old ones are retired in 2030—part of the Obama administration’s plan to overhaul America’s nuclear deterrent over the next 30 years at a cost of $1 trillion—are now under attack. William Perry (defence secretary from 1994 to 1997, in charge of developing the air-launched cruise missile at the Pentagon during the late 1970s) and Andy Weber (the assistant secretary of defence responsible for nuclear programmes for five years, to 2014) caused a stir in October by calling for the cancellation of plans to build a fleet of 1,000 air-launched, nuclear-armed missiles. This would save $25 billion. Their argument is that nuclear-armed cruise missiles are a “uniquely destabilising type of weapon”, because potential foes cannot tell whether they are being attacked with a missile carrying a conventional warhead or a nuclear one. Scrapping the LRSO, they say, “would not diminish the formidable US nuclear deterrent in the least”. Arms-control experts fear that the justifications from the Pentagon for the new missile, and for a highly accurate new nuclear bomb, suggest that cold-war doctrines, controversial at the time, such as escalation control and limited nuclear-war-fighting, are being dusted off. Hillary Clinton, who is generally thought to be more hawkish than Barack Obama, was asked while campaigning in Iowa for her take on the “trillion-dollar” nuclear programme. She replied: “Yeah, I’ve heard about that. I’m going to look into that. It doesn’t make sense to me.” Mrs Clinton’s remark betrays the pressure she is under from her left-wing rival, Bernie Sanders. But many Democrats feel a sense of acute disappointment that Mr Obama has not, in their eyes, lived up to the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons, one he described in the speech in Prague in 2009 that helped to win him his somewhat premature Nobel peace prize. Some of the most expensive parts of the nuclear programme are not disputed, even by liberal Democrats. Few argue against the replacement of the 14 Ohio-class ballistic-missile submarines which will begin to wear out in the late 2020s. The bill for that is likely to be around $140 billion for 12 new boats. More questionable is the air force’s bid last year to replace the 440-strong Minuteman III land-based missile force at a cost of $62 billion. A study in 2014 by the RAND Corporation judged that incremental modernisation might cost only a third as much, and could sustain the missile system for several more decades. Some, like Gordon Adams of the Stimson Centre, a think-tank, argue that land-based missiles are no longer necessary to maintain nuclear deterrence. They are the minority. The counter-argument is that as long as Russia builds all the 700 deployed missiles and bombers it is allowed under the New START treaty, America’s land-based force will still be needed—if only as a “sink” providing targets to absorb a nuclear strike. The arguments are therefore focused on the new cruise missile and a $10 billion new version of the free-fall nuclear bomb called the B61-12, which will replace four older variants. The venerable B-52 bomber will be adapted to take the missile and will soldier on until 2040. The stealthy B-2 bomber, which entered service in 1997, will be able to carry both weapons. A nuclear-capable version of the much-delayed F-35 Joint Strike Fighter will be fitted to take the bomb. In addition a new aircraft, the Long Range Strike Bomber, (LRS-B) will be built as the principal carrier for the two weapons. In October the air force awarded Northrop Grumman the $55 billion contract to develop and build around 100 of these bombers, which should enter service in 2025 as the B-3. With such an advanced bomber flying into view, the argument for a new long-range missile is now weaker. Besides, the new bombs the B-3 will carry are much more sophisticated than their predecessors. With computerised guidance, manoeuvrable tailfins and a warhead whose explosive power can be dialled up and down from 50 to 0.3 kilotons (from three times the yield of the Hiroshima bomb to 2% of it) to reduce collateral damage, they will be accurate to within 30 metres. Yet in nuclear deterrence such technological advantages bring their own problems. Precisely because it is so accurate and its yield can be made so small, the new bomb could make crossing the nuclear threshold a lot easier and therefore more tempting for commanders. Critics see it as encouraging a return to something like “flexible response”, a cold-war concept which many at the time thought risky, because it unsettled the apocalyptic logic of deterrence. But advocates of both weapons reckon that it is their detractors who are stuck in the past. Clark Murdock of the Centre for Strategic and International Studies led three other think-tank teams in “Project Atom”, a report on America’s nuclear future published last June. Mr Murdock concluded that if the extended deterrence America offers close allies is to remain credible, it will need smaller, more discriminating weapons as part of its nuclear arsenal. That is because, despite the Iran deal, more rogue states may acquire nuclear capability. Russia, too, is placing a greater emphasis on low-yield nuclear weapons as a way of offsetting America’s still-overwhelming conventional military superiority. Mr Murdock and Pentagon strategists fear that if America only has hugely powerful ballistic missiles at its disposal, it will be, in effect, “self-deterred” from responding to limited nuclear attacks (or threats of them) from opponents. Other factors, too, suggest that new nuclear weapons will survive the campaign against them. Franklin Miller, a veteran nuclear strategist now at the Scowcroft Group, points out that Mr Obama would never have persuaded the Senate to ratify the New START treaty in 2010 had he not pledged to renew America’s nuclear weapons on land, sea and in the air. That agreement allows for what is known as the “bomber discount”, which counts an aircraft carrying several bombs as a single warhead. The LRS-B will be able to carry internally a payload of cruise missiles, the new B61-12 bombs or a smaller stand-off missile with a conventional warhead. It is improbable that any president would forgo that option while Russia retains it. Nor is cost destined to loom as large as some expect. Kori Schake of the Hoover Institution says that with sequestration budgets caps now more or less abandoned, future defence budgets will be under less strain. The Centre for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments estimates that even at its peak in 2027, the complete modernisation plan will claim only 5% of the Pentagon’s budget. Nuclear deterrence follows its own logic. So does paying for it. IF AMERICA had laws making voting compulsory, as Australia and Brazil do, then a new report recording the size of the Hispanic electorate would have Democrats dancing jarabes of joy. The report, based on census numbers crunched by the Pew Research Centre, a non-partisan think-tank, predicts that a record 27.3m Hispanics will be eligible to vote in the elections of 2016. That is good news for the left. Even before Donald Trump decided to build his Republican presidential campaign on a foundation of ugly nativism, accusing Mexico of sending rapists and other criminals to flood America and vowing to build a wall on the southern border, Hispanic voters have strongly favoured Democrats in recent presidential elections. They handed Barack Obama more than 70% of their votes in 2012, in part after the Republican candidate, Mitt Romney, vowed to make life so wretched for illegal migrants that they would “self-deport”. On paper at least, the Pew report offers a second reason for celebration on the left. The Hispanic electorate will not just be larger than ever in 2016, it will be astonishingly young. Almost half of all Latinos eligible to vote this year will be “millennials”, or young adults aged 18-35. For comparison, just over a quarter of whites eligible to vote will be millennials. Nationwide, young people are another bulwark of Democratic voting, with three-fifths handing their votes to Mr Obama in 2012. Unfortunately for Democrats, America does not have compulsory voting. That fact has an outsize impact among ethnic, racial and socio-economic blocs with low rates of turnout. As the Pew report notes, with each recent election the number of Latinos who can vote hits a new high. But at the same time, the number of Latinos who do not vote also hits a new high. Hispanic America: Tu casa es mi casa America is home to about 57m Hispanics, out of a total population of around 321m. But more than half of them are not citizens or are too young to vote. Add on low rates of turnout, and only just over 11m Latinos voted in 2012. This is something of a chicken-and-egg puzzle. Because Hispanics have influenced few elections, many see no merit in voting, and political parties have often only paid lip-service to wooing them. Though immigration was often in the headlines in 2012, less than half of the 23m Hispanics eligible to vote in that presidential election turned out. The apathy of young Hispanics was striking: in 2012 just 37.8% of Latino millennials who could have voted did so. Half said they were not even registered to vote. The causes are many. Youth is a big one, made worse by relatively low levels of education (though Hispanic numbers are improving). Geography is a big piece of the puzzle. Just over half of all Hispanic eligible voters in 2016 will live in California, Texas and New York, and “those aren’t battleground states” says Mark Hugo Lopez, director of Hispanic research at Pew. Hispanics are not without clout, though. They live in impressive numbers in three swing states, Florida, Nevada and Colorado. Watch Florida with special care. More than one presidential election was arguably swung by Cuban-Americans, who are traditionally more conservative than other Hispanics and mostly live in Florida. But younger Cuban-Americans are less conservative (though Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a 44-year-old contender for the presidency, whose parents moved from Cuba, is a flinty Republican). Roughly a million Puerto Ricans now live in Florida, many after fleeing economic misery on their home island. Puerto Ricans are American citizens and can vote as soon they reach the mainland. In Miami, Tampa and Orlando at least, politics this year will have a distinct Hispanic accent.THOUGH the most abundant supply of fresh water in the world is on their doorstep, the residents of Flint, Michigan cannot drink what flows from their taps. Facing demands for both his resignation and even a criminal prosecution for his part in the poisoning of Flint, Rick Snyder, the Republican governor of Michigan, sounded contrite in his state-of-the-state address on January 19th. “I am sorry, and I will fix it,” Mr Snyder said. “You deserve better.” He pledged to release all his e-mails from 2014 and 2015, so that the public can see how he has handled the crisis. He said he would ask the legislature for $28.5m for Flint’s immediate needs, such as the bottled water and water filters that National Guard troops are distributing to residents. Mr Snyder declared a state of emergency in Flint on January 5th. The federal government followed suit on January 16th. The trouble began far earlier, in April 2014. On the watch of a manager, Darnell Earley, who had been appointed by the state to manage the near-bankrupt city, Flint began to draw its water from the Flint river instead of Lake Huron to save money. The gritty rustbelt metropolis, where General Motors (GM) was founded in 1908, has been run by a series of emergency managers since 2011. It has lost half its population since the 1960s, as GM cut its local workforce from 80,000 to around 5,000; fewer than 100,000 people now live there. More than 40% of the city’s mostly black population live below the poverty line. Crime and unemployment rates are sky-high. Around 15% of Flint’s houses are abandoned, making it one of the few towns where college students can buy detached houses. “Our children have every imaginable obstacle to leading a successful life, and now they also have lead poisoning,” says Mona Hanna-Attisha, a paediatrician who was one of the first to uncover what was happening in Flint. Dr Hanna-Attisha explains that the water from the Flint river is unusually corrosive, but was not treated to stop it from eating away at the lining of the city’s water pipes, as prescribed by federal guidelines. When pumped through the ageing network it exposed the lead tubes beneath, allowing the metal to leach into drinking water. Treating the water for corrosion would have cost $100 a day—peanuts compared with what Michigan is now spending on mitigating the disaster. Residents of Flint complained immediately after the switch to river water that the stuff coming out of their taps had a brownish colour and a strange smell. Their worries were dismissed. The then-mayor of Flint, Dayne Walling, made a point of drinking Flint water on television. Officials stonewalled when a team of researchers, led by Marc Edwards of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, came to Flint in August last year and found elevated lead levels in the water samples they tested. Towards the end of September Dr Hanna-Attisha warned that, after checking hundreds of samples from Flint’s toddlers, she found that the lead levels in their blood had doubled or even tripled since the switch from Lake Huron water. State regulators insisted the water was safe. The turning point came at the start of October, when state officials changed their minds and accepted Dr Hanna-Attisha’s findings. For the first time Mr Snyder admitted that lead was a problem. In mid-October Flint’s water supply was switched back to Lake Huron. Yet Flint’s tap water is still not safe: the damage done to the pipes cannot readily be undone, which means lead can still find its way into the water. At this stage it is hard to determine how many children under six have been poisoned, but doctors say that all 9,000 children that age in the area must be considered at risk. (The youngest are the most vulnerable to lead poisoning.) “No level of lead is safe,” says Eden Wells, the chief medical executive of Michigan’s Department of Health and Human Services. Lead poisoning can lead to aggressive behaviour, learning disorders, Attention Deficit Disorder, hearing loss, anaemia, kidney damage and lowered IQ. According to Mr Edwards of Virginia Tech, relief workers say they are ignored by some of the residents they have been sent to help because they come from the government, which people in Flint no longer trust. “Some people have not taken a bath since October,” he adds. John Austin of the Michigan Economic Centre, a think-tank, believes the debacle is making the state look third-world. Mr Snyder is unlikely to resign, but the lead now lodged in the tissue and organs of Flint’s children will overshadow the rest of his term and calls into question the competence of the Environmental Protection Agency.JOSEPH SCHUMPETER knew that innovation brings some costs. The bank-teller makes way for the cash machine; e-mails push the postal service into decline. Technological advance benefits the economy as a whole by raising incomes and boosting productivity, but it harms the unfortunate few who have built careers in the destroyed industry. On January 16th President Barack Obama unveiled a proposal which seeks to even things out. Mr Obama wants the government to provide workers with wage insurance. If a worker blamelessly loses her job and takes a new one which pays less—and less than $50,000 the government would make up half the shortfall for two years, up to a total of $10,000. An estimate from 2007 suggests this would cost $3 billion-4 billion a year. That means it could be financed with a tax, which supporters would describe as an insurance premium, of around $25 per year, per worker. The proposal is likely to remain theoretical for the foreseeable future; it has few takers among Republicans, who control Congress and therefore the budget. Yet as an example of how the American left is thinking about how to respond to globalisation and automation it is worth examining, not least because whomever the Democrats nominate as a presidential candidate in July is likely to borrow it. The government already offers the same terms to workers over 50 who lose their jobs as a result of foreign competition. The logic of this proposal is the same: trade benefits all consumers by filling shops with cheap imports, but harms those whose jobs disappear overseas. Why, ask advocates of wage insurance, should this apply only to trade-related job losses? Is a factory worker replaced by a robot any less deserving than one who is displaced by foreign goods? The costs of having to switch careers can be severe, because employees lose seniority and firm-specific skills, such as how to use particular tools or software. From 2011 to 2013, 4.3m workers were displaced from jobs they had held for at least three years. Three in five found a job by January 2014; of those, over 20% lost more than a fifth of their income. Transport and utilities workers were hardest hit; 40% of those who found jobs faced losing a big chunk of their income. If the wage loss persists over a career, it can total hundreds of thousands of dollars. But whereas Americans can insure themselves against other catastrophes, like a fire or a burglary, they cannot do so against a robot taking their job. That is probably the result of adverse selection: workers in industries where machines are on the march will be especially keen to buy insurance, while those who feel safe will steer clear, leaving insurers with only bad risks. Some firms offer top-ups to state-provided unemployment insurance, which is paid during episodes of joblessness. But whereas the government can offer a flat rate, by requiring everyone to participate, premiums in the private market vary with risk. According to IncomeAssure.com, insuring 50% of a $50,000 income sets back a government administrator in Texas less than $2 per month; the same coverage costs a construction worker in Mississippi $76 a month. It does not help that unemployment insurance varies wildly across states—something else Mr Obama would like to change. The White House claims that wage insurance would encourage workers to find new jobs quickly, because the insurance payments are limited to two years, and kick in only once the person finds a new job; every month they are out of work is a month they miss out on both wages and wage insurance. A pilot programme in Canada in the 1990s, a rare example of a similar policy in another country, found that insurance increased the proportion of displaced workers finding jobs within six months by four percentage points. Average earnings fell by 5%, though—presumably because insured workers were less likely to hold out for a higher-paying job. As a response to worries about robots, apps and immigrants competing away middle-class jobs, wage insurance makes more sense than, say, trade barriers or a steeply higher minimum wage. One benefit of the policy is that once suitably insured, workers might be less inclined to oppose economic liberalisation.STUDENTS may be reluctant to speak up in class, but they are more than happy to express their views of their teachers anonymously online. That provides a potentially useful pool of data. With assistance from Enrico Bertini and Cristian Felix of New York University, The Economist has analysed 1,289,407 reviews of 1,066 professors and lecturers in New York state. Most of the commentary is innocuous: professors are praised for their brilliance and generosity, and admonished for being boring or tough graders: “This prof makes u work your butt off but u still won’t get an A”. But the outliers are startling. One student complained of a professor who resembled “one of those worm guys who is always drinkin coffee” from the film “Men in Black”. More flatteringly, an adoring student termed her teacher “a philosophy love-God”, and remarked that her life’s goal was to “become the mother of his million intellectual babies”. Students assign grades based on three criteria: “helpfulness”, “clarity” and “easiness” (the diligence and brainpower of the teachers apparently count as less relevant). Professors tend to receive good marks in the first two categories, averaging 3.7 out of 5 for both categories, but slightly lower marks for “easiness”. This is in part because the perceived difficulty of courses varies so much by discipline: in general, academics teaching quantitative subjects tended to receive lower ratings for ease. Sociologists earned an average easiness rating of 3.4 out of 5, notably higher than the 2.9 earned by physicists. Philosophy is boring, but (or therefore) its teachers count as brilliant. Teachers could also benefit from a bit more of the scrupulous attention paid on modern campuses to sexual equality. Earlier analysis by Ben Schmidt of Northeastern University showed that the language used to describe professors was heavily gender-dependent. Men were more likely than women to be described as “intelligent” or “funny”, but less likely to be described as “nice” or “mean”. Even dire ratings aren’t necessarily condemnations of teaching ability: one study from 2007 found that professors’ overall ratings were significantly correlated with both how easy their courses were and how attractive they were perceived to be, while another study from last year found that mathematics professors with Asian surnames tended to receive poorer reviews because students had difficulty with their accents. Professorial brilliance is too intangible to distil into a single score. Not that anyone would do that to students.  Justifying the ways of God to men IN THE anteroom of Roy Moore’s office hangs a large photograph of the granite slab that once cost him his job. The picture is one of the room’s three depictions of the Ten Commandments, which also include a pair of wooden tablets carved by Mr Moore himself. Those caused a kerfuffle when he was a circuit-court judge in the 1990s—a warm-up for the row in which a federal court ruled that the monument in the photo violated the constitution, Mr Moore refused to remove it from the rotunda of Alabama’s judicial building, and, in 2003, was ousted as the state’s chief justice. The religious memorabilia are now more discreet, but Mr Moore, reinstated in 2012, is not. He has picked a fight over an issue that has assumed apocalyptic proportions for many devout Americans: gay marriage. On January 6th he instructed Alabama’s probate judges, responsible for issuing marriage licences, not to grant them to same-sex couples. He argues that a prohibition of the Alabama Supreme Court last year remains in effect—despite the subsequent judgment of the federal Supreme Court, in a case technically involving four other states but universally seen as definitive, and indeed an order of a federal district court regarding Alabama itself. Under a principle of state autonomy Mr Moore calls “parallelism”, he says only a further decision of the Alabama Supreme Court, over which he presides, or a judgment of the national one directly pertaining to Alabama, can reverse the previous ruling. Naturally, Mr Moore—who sports miniature crucifixes on his lapel and signet ring—cannot speculate about his court’s eventual response. In the past, though, he has described homosexuality as an “inherent evil”; referring to a 19th-century judge, he reiterates his view that gay marriage means the “destruction of the foundation of our country”. He will vouchsafe that sometimes—as in the case of Dred Scott, a slave whose petition for freedom it denied—America’s Supreme Court mistakenly deviates from the constitution. Although most of Alabama’s probate judges ignored his manoeuvre, it “caused a great deal of confusion”, says one. For Richard Cohen of the Southern Poverty Law Centre, an advocacy group, this was another fireable offence. Mr Cohen—who coined Mr Moore’s sobriquet, the Ayatollah of Alabama—reckons that, whereas over the monument Mr Moore merely defied a federal court himself, now he has suborned others to do so as well. His reasoning, says Mr Cohen, is “completely deceptive and legally bogus”. “When you stand up for the truth these days,” comments Mr Moore, “you are going to be attacked.” Perhaps he will be defenestrated again. But the real question about Mr Moore is not whether he will get the boot; nor if, morally or legally, he is right about gay marriage, or can stave it off. It is whether, in modern America, he is quite the outlandish gargoyle that his critics suggest. O Captain! My Captain! The son of an itinerant construction worker, he grew up in poverty but made it to West Point, the elite military academy: he insists the portrait of Jefferson Davis, and busts of Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson, which also decorate his office are tributes to fellow West Pointers rather than to the Confederacy. As a disciplinarian military policeman in Vietnam, he was known as “Captain America” and feared a fragging (ie, being killed by his compatriots). Later he had stints on an Australian cattle station and as a professional kickboxer. Military service, self-improvement, faith: Mr Moore’s is an all-American résumé. He is representative in a more literal way, too. He has twice run unsuccessfully in the Republican primary for Alabama’s governor; he is uncharacteristically coy about whether he might try again (“Who knows what I will do in the future?”). In the past he dabbled with a presidential bid, but, he says, didn’t have the money to compete. Nevertheless, he has twice been elected as chief justice, on the second occasion after being forcibly ejected. And while he insists that his opinions are based on law, not popular approval, they undeniably reflect many Alabamians’ views. In a state referendum in 2006, 81% voted to preserve the heterosexual definition of marriage. It isn’t just Alabama: Mr Moore’s preoccupations have increasingly become the nation’s, as a glance at the Republican presidential contest attests. His principle of “parallelism”, flimsy as it sounds, is an extreme version of the concern for states’ rights, and claims of overreach by federal authorities, to which many candidates subscribe. They in turn reflect the tensions of an ever more fissiparous nation, including over another of his bugbears: government’s proper relationship with God. America, he contends, was founded on “the God of the holy scriptures”. The theocratic implication is that non-Christians live and worship there on sufferance; indeed, Mr Moore has questioned whether Muslims should serve in Congress, since the constitutional protection of freedom of worship “conflicts with Islamic doctrine”. Again, that doubt has been echoed by leading Republicans. Lots of ordinary Americans agree that social change, such as recognition of gay marriage, “is not to be dictated by a court”, and that judges have sometimes “usurped the role of the legislature”. Many agree, too, that the religious freedom of Christians is imperilled—a liberty, Mr Moore says, invoking Thomas Jefferson, granted by God, not government. The writings of the Founding Fathers are among those Mr Moore likes to recite, by heart and at length. He celebrates—and mourns—the virtues and values of George Washington and his peers in the poetry he has composed, too: “I’m glad they’re not here with us to see the mess we’re in/ How we’ve given up our righteousness for a life of indulgent sin.” Those lines capture his underlying lament: for America’s moral decline. When pressed, he concedes that the abolition of slavery was a wrinkle in this narrative, but maintains that people can instead be slaves to poverty or tyranny. That is a remarkable stance for an official whose building in Montgomery is across the road from a church once led by Martin Luther King. But such nostalgia is hardly unusual. More Americans may yearn for the 1950s than for the 1770s, but the belief that the country’s precepts have been forsaken, and its greatness lost, is widespread, powerful and poisonous. A gargoyle he may be, but Mr Moore is made up of recognisable parts.FOR the moment at least, this is not the most frightening election that America’s pro-business establishment has faced. “The Triumph of William McKinley”, a new book by Karl Rove, the campaign strategist who helped George W. Bush to victory in two presidential elections, makes a good case that for captains of industry, Wall Street bosses and Republican leaders, the contest of 1896 felt more perilous. The country was in grim shape then, deep in an economic slump. Hundreds of banks had failed. Armies of jobless men roamed the land. Business owners slept in their shops, guns in hand. Farmers faced ruinous debts. Amid such misery arose a populist Democrat of prodigious talents: William Jennings Bryan. This young Nebraskan, who had served two terms in Congress, loathed the bankers of Wall Street, calling “agitation” the “only means” to change the “vicious system of finance”—a system that he vowed to “destroy”. In 1896 a speech to the Democratic National Convention propelled him to the presidential nomination. A blast at tycoons who “corner the money of the world”, Bryan’s address ended with a call to issue dollars unbacked by gold—understood by his audience as a cry to let the dollar depreciate, slashing the real value of debts that, in his words, pressed a “crown of thorns” on workers’ brows. Bryan thundered in closing: “You shall not crucify mankind on a cross of gold.” The response in the hall, Mr Rove records, was a roaring, weeping, hat-throwing frenzy. What followed was the first presidential contest of the modern era. Railways allowed Bryan to travel the equivalent of three-quarters of the way round the world, giving hundreds of speeches to impassioned crowds. By election day he had been seen by between 2m and 3m people—in a country in which just 13.6m cast votes for a president. Yet Bryan lost to his Republican opponent—a former soldier and governor of Ohio, William McKinley, who stood for thrift, industry and “sound money”. Business backers gave McKinley the means to distribute 250m pieces of election literature. Special trains brought supporters to hear McKinley speak from the front porch of his house in Canton, Ohio. By the campaign’s end 750,000 people had visited his home town and trampled his flowerbeds to see him, 150,000 of them in a single weekend. McKinley, a Republican, had more than rich donors and impressive campaign organisation. He grasped the need to pursue a politics of “addition” that contrasted with Bryan’s divisive rhetoric, which fired up his base but did little to enlarge it. As governor of Ohio, McKinley had defended Catholics from bigoted attacks, earning praise from church leaders. He addressed black Republicans in Georgia. His presidential campaign organised supporters’ clubs for ethnic Germans, Scandinavians and other hyphenated Americans (aides even formed a “Wheelmen” club for daredevil fans of a modern novelty, the bicycle). McKinley thus broadened the electoral battlefield, forcing Democrats to expend resources defending states they had previously taken for granted. Mounting McKinley He also had credibility with working-class voters, a key voting bloc feeling “jolted by depression and technological change”. He earned that credibility with unblushing economic nationalism, and specifically his support for protectionist tariffs to curb foreign competition. Finally, McKinley accepted that the election would be a fight about whether to have a tight or loose money supply, after a fumbling start in which he attempted to straddle the issue. This was in effect a proxy for class war, pitting—in Bryan’s sweeping words—the “idle holders of idle capital” against “the struggling masses”. In the nick of time McKinley found the language to mount a populist counter-attack, presenting “sound money” as a way to ensure that workers earned dollars of enduring value. Jump to 2016, and establishment Republicans long to repeat McKinley’s feat: finding the right populist phrases to sell a broadly conventional, business-friendly policy platform, albeit one fortified with a dose of economic nationalism. Mr Rove is himself a past master at this. But this is not the past. Today’s Republican grandees are grappling with a candidate, Donald Trump, offering something altogether more potent: demagogic language to sell a demagogue’s programme. Mr Rove draws shrewd lessons from McKinley’s win for Republicans fighting the next general election. Should an establishment-friendly, enlarge-the-tent Republican—a Senator Marco Rubio, say—win the presidential nomination, he could do worse than study McKinley, and his successful arguments against bank-bashing, soak-the-rich Democratic populism (if a Bryan can be beaten back, a Bernie Sanders surely can). But such a Republican first has to survive the presidential primary season. For all his experience, Mr Rove seems short of ideas about how his party gets from here to there. In an interview, Mr Rove describes a 2016 Republican platform that amounts to the same policies as ever, sold with a bit more nationalist vim and even more scorn for President Barack Obama. He does not share McKinley’s taste for protectionism, instead suggesting that free trade with Pacific nations can be sold as a nationalistic win, by arguing that Asian countries are “scared to death of China” and “want to do a deal with us”. He pushes back at those prominent Republicans wondering whether to join nativists in calling for curbs on all immigration, legal and illegal, in a bid to woo blue-collar voters. “I think most people don’t understand” the difference between 500,000 or 250,000 skilled migrants arriving on work visas, Mr Rove suggests. What really concerns them is a sense of a changing country, so that “you walk in some place and the notices are in English and Spanish.” He thinks Republicans can constructively harness voter anger with Mr Obama and his “seeming unwillingness” to listen to such concerns, without sounding “antagonistic” to immigrants. In short, he hopes that McKinley’s heirs still have time to take their party back. That is true, but may not remain so for much longer.VENEZUELA’S opposition-controlled parliament, the first in nearly 16 years, has been sitting for less than a month. It has been an eventful period. The opposition gained and lost its two-thirds majority; the country’s Supreme Court declared that all its acts would be null and void, then relented. Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, overhauled his government and seeks new powers to tackle an “economic emergency”. The Central Bank published vital economic indicators for the first time in more than a year. What is not clear is whether all this is leading the country away from an economic and political crash or more rapidly towards one. Some signs are encouraging. The confrontation between the National Assembly and the Supreme Court ended after three opposition deputies, who had taken their seats in defiance of a ruling by the court, agreed to step aside while an investigation takes place into charges of electoral fraud in their state. This denied the opposition a two-thirds majority, but allowed the regime to recognise parliament’s legitimacy. On January 15th Mr Maduro, a former bus driver, delivered his state of the union speech before a hostile legislature for the first time. The mocking rebuttal by Henry Ramos Allup, parliament’s new president, was broadcast live—another first. In graphics: A political and economic guide to Venezuela Some of Mr Maduro’s recent decisions suggest openness to dialogue. One is the appointment of Aristóbulo Istúriz, a former mayor of Caracas, to be the country’s vice-president. He replaces Jorge Arreaza, the son-in-law of the late Hugo Chávez, the founder of Venezuela’s failing “Bolivarian revolution”. Unlike Mr Arreaza, the new vice-president is respected both by the opposition and within chavismo. Mr Ramos has spoken to Mr Istúriz at least twice. Their conversations helped end the standoff between parliament and the Supreme Court. Mr Ramos expects Mr Istúriz to be a “facilitator” of communication. Whether talking will lead to useful action is uncertain. On January 15th the Central Bank partly owned up to the dire state of the economy. It said that in the 12 months to September inflation was 141.5% while GDP shrank by 7.1% over the same period. Even those numbers probably understate the awfulness. The IMF reckons the economy shrank by 10% last year and that inflation is now over 200%. Why inflation is a conspiracy There is little sign that president and parliament agree on why things are so bad—apart from the collapse in the price of oil, virtually the only export—or what to do about it. In his three-hour speech Mr Maduro once again blamed shortages, inflation and a weak currency on an “economic war” waged by speculators and foreigners. Mr Ramos retorted, with more accuracy, that “the economic model is wrong.” Mr Maduro’s economic emergency decree would give him sweeping powers over the economy for 60 days. That could be dangerous. In shaking up his cabinet Mr Maduro gave the job of economic tsar to Luis Salas, a sociologist who comes from the far-left fringes of chavismo. He regards inflation as a capitalist conspiracy against consumers and denies that the Central Bank helps cause it by printing money to finance the budget deficit. Other members of the new economic team, including Rodolfo Medina, the finance minister, and Miguel Pérez Abad, who brings a business background to the industry ministry, are more moderate. But it is not clear how much influence they will have. Mr Maduro admitted that “the time has come” to raise the price of petrol, which is virtually given away. That is a big reason for the government deficit, which was 24% of GDP last year. Beyond that, it is not clear how he would use the new powers he is asking parliament to grant him. The proposals drawn up by Mr Salas urge businesses to increase production, but without lifting price controls or suggesting a way to raise imports of supplies. There will be no cuts to social spending. Some in the opposition suspect the government is laying a trap. If the assembly rejects Mr Maduro’s plan, it risks being accused of denying protection to popular social programmes. If it accepts, it will renounce its power to intervene in the economy. Parliament had still not decided when The Economist went to press. Other issues could yet refreeze relations between the legislature and the government. The opposition plans to pass an amnesty law to free scores of political prisoners, which Mr Maduro has already vowed to reject. Mr Ramos has not retreated from his promise to remove the president by constitutional means within six months. A crack-up will be hard to avoid.  Correction: The former vice-president of Venezuela is Jorge Arreaza (not, as we originally wrote, Jorge Areazza)Anti-church lady SUMMONED to the prosecutor’s office on December 17th for questioning in an investigation of “damaging public property”, María Galindo was unapologetic. She turned up wearing headgear that mashed up Lady Liberty’s crown with traditional indigenous dress that was itself scrawled with the graffiti that landed her in trouble: “fiscalia rima con porqueria”, or roughly “prosecutor rhymes with crap”. The insult was provoked by prosecutors’ inept handling of investigations into the murders last year of several women in La Paz. Now the prosecutors are going after Ms Galindo and her fellow protesters. With her partly shaved pate and theatrical eye shadow, Bolivia’s most prominent feminist stands out in a crowd. Mujeres Creando (Women Creating), the group she founded in 1992, has been daubing walls with graffiti, staging performances and engaging in acts of civil disobedience ever since to protest homophobia and maltreatment of women. Tradition-minded Bolivians call her an anarchist and revile her lesbianism. She describes herself as a rebel. Her rebelliousness has not lessened even though Bolivia for the past decade has been governed by leftists who see themselves as champions of the oppressed. Evo Morales is the first Bolivian president to hail from the country’s indigenous majority. A new constitution, enacted in 2009, repeatedly affirms the principle of equality of the sexes. To little purpose, argues Ms Galindo, who is polite and soft-spoken despite the fierceness of her views. “The government’s position is utterly incoherent,” she contends. Mr Morales’s party, the Movement To Socialism (MAS), is an “agglutination of caudillos’ interests and does not represent progressive ideas at all”. The underlying problem, she thinks, is Christianity, especially the evangelical sort that has taken root in indigenous communities. No doubt there is some truth in this claim. It also allows activists such as Ms Galindo to blame bigotry and violence on European influences rather than native ones. “Homophobia is not an indigenous idea,” she asserts. “It was introduced by the church.” The influence of Catholicism has ebbed but that of newer churches, such as Pentecostalism and Mormonism, has risen (see article). In a survey conducted in 2013 17% of Bolivians described themselves as evangelicals. The MAS has increasingly aligned itself with these churches, says Pedro Portugal, a writer on indigenous affairs. Early results from a survey of attitudes toward homosexuals among lawmakers in parliament show that many are influenced by fundamentalist Christianity. Bolivia’s constitution allows indigenous groups to manage their affairs in such matters as justice and land use in accordance with their “customs and practices”. The norms are Christian, not traditional, feminists charge. “Allowing indigenous groups to decide how and whether they apply the law is simply an abdication of the state’s responsibilities,” says Sonia Montaño, a former head of gender affairs at the Economic Comission for Latin America and the Caribbean. She wants ordinary civil and criminal law to apply. Activists say Bolivia’s president is part of the problem. Mr Morales calls himself a “feminist who makes macho jokes.” But few activists were amused by his recent response to rumours about the health minister’s sexual orientation: “I don’t want to think that you are a lesbian.” Such attitudes make it hard to fight discrimination against homosexuals and abuse of women. Bolivia’s levels of domestic violence are the worst in South America, according to a study in 2013 by the Pan American Health Organisation. More than half of women who have been in a relationship say they have been physically or sexually abused by their partners. In politics, there is progress. Under the constitution parties must field as many female candidates as male ones in elections. Half of government ministers must be women. In district elections held in March 2015, the number of women elected surpassed that of men for the first time. Ms Galindo is unimpressed. “Many of them are simply ornaments,” she says. Her crusade against churches will continue. Last July, women from Mujeres Creando prepared for the visit of Pope Francis by gathering at the cathedral in La Paz dressed as pregnant nuns. “Every day your church crucifies women,” read a placard denouncing its opposition to abortion. Riot police hauled the demonstrators away. Ms Galindo calls the influence of the church “colonialism’s open wound.” Perhaps, but some of the attitudes she is fighting may also be home-grown.
