“EMBRACE ocean breezes and stellar views,” coos the website of a hotel at the Baha Mar resort in Nassau, the capital of the Bahamas. Sadly, although the winter tourist season is in full swing, no one will be taking up that tempting offer soon. The Baha Mar’s two 23-storey blocks and its 2,300 rooms stand empty; the Jack Nicklaus “signature” golf course is deserted; in the casino, which sprawls across two acres, the slot machines are silent. The Baha Mar missed its first ribbon-cutting in December 2014. It hired 2,000 staff and stocked its casino with $4.5m cash in preparation for a second deadline the following March. But with three days to go the resort was still not quite ready. A long-simmering quarrel between its main investor and the Chinese contractor, which had broken out early on, boiled over. The opening was put off again. It is not clear when, if ever, it will happen. Tourists who had booked their rooms vented their rage on Twitter. For the Bahamas the disaster is much bigger. The project’s $3.5 billion cost is two-fifths the size of the country’s GDP. At full strength, its workforce of 5,000 employees would represent more than one in 40 Bahamian workers. The resort was expected to generate more than a tenth of the country’s GDP. The archipelago sorely needed the lift that Baha Mar had promised to give it. Although it is the region’s second-richest economy, income from tourism, its biggest industry, has faltered for most of this century. It took a knock after the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001, and suffered further from the housing-market debacle in the United States. The number of tourists has dropped from around 1.6m in 2006 to 1.3m in 2015. The American embassy has warned its citizens about the country’s high crime rate. Bahamian hoteliers dread the day when Cuba begins to draw American tourists in large numbers. In August, with the opening of Baha Mar in doubt, Standard and Poor’s downgraded the Bahamas’ credit rating. The causes of the debacle are murky. Sarkis Izmirlian, the main shareholder, accuses the construction company, China Construction America (CCA), of poor management, missed deadlines and a failure to meet “standards of excellence”. Under the terms of loans from China’s Export-Import Bank, he could not fire the builder. CCA claims that Mr Izmirlian, whose father made a fortune selling African peanuts, drove up costs by demanding changes to the design. Mr Izmirlian’s group of Baha Mar companies filed for bankruptcy at a court in Delaware in June 2015. He was hoping for protection from creditors while he restructured the group. But a judge substantially dismissed the filing, and in September a Bahamian court appointed provisional liquidators. This puts the Chinese creditors in control, and Mr Izmirlian’s $850m investment in grave jeopardy. He can expect little support from the Bahamian government, which counts on Chinese investment. CCA owns a former Hilton hotel and has a “master plan” for redeveloping downtown Nassau. Hutchison Whampoa, a conglomerate from Hong Kong, owns a huge container terminal on the island of Grand Bahama and a big hotel, among other things. Mr Izmirlian, a Swiss citizen, has less clout. In August, the immigration and foreign affairs minister threatened to revoke his residency permit. The Bahamas’ prime minister, Perry Christie, says it may cost $600m to complete the project, though who will provide that is unclear. There has been talk of a deal involving Sol Kerzner, a South African who built the Atlantis, Nassau’s other big resort. But he is 80 years old; his son, thought to have been his heir, died in a helicopter crash. The Fosun Group, a Chinese conglomerate that owns Club Med, which has a resort in the Bahamas, is said to be interested. Mr Christie hopes that the Baha Mar’s convention centre will open in time to host the annual meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank in April. The stellar views will have to wait. Clarification: This article was altered on February 3rd 2016 to clarify that it was the Baha Mar-related corporate entities that filed for bankruptcy in Delaware, not Mr Izmirlian personally, and that their case was substantially but not wholly dismissed.IT IS rare nowadays to find an American foreign policy that is a clear success. Yet that applies to Plan Colombia. When it was devised in 1999 by the administrations of Bill Clinton and Andrés Pastrana, then Colombia’s president, the country was on the brink of becoming a failed state, with much of its territory at the mercy of guerrillas, paramilitaries and drug traffickers. The plan, under which the United States has provided Colombia with almost $10 billion in mainly military aid, had plenty of critics. Too skewed towards trying to win the unwinnable war on drugs by spraying coca fields from the air, and too compromised by giving money to an army stained by human-rights abuses, they said. The critics missed the point. Plan Colombia was sold politically in the United States as a crackdown on drugs, but in reality it was always first and foremost a counter-insurgency strategy. For Colombia to be a viable democracy, it needed a stronger state able to provide security to its citizens and to tame the illegal armies, which were financed by the world’s cocaine habit. It worked. Colombians backed the strategy—American aid was more than matched by increased domestic spending on security. Under Álvaro Uribe, who followed Mr Pastrana as president, the paramilitaries demobilised and the FARC guerrillas were battered so hard that they agreed, in 2012, to start peace talks with the government of Juan Manuel Santos, Mr Uribe’s successor (and his former defence minister). All being well, the talks will culminate in an agreement by March 23rd, and the FARC’s demobilisation. So it is appropriate that Barack Obama has invited Messrs Santos, Uribe and Pastrana to Washington on February 4th to commemorate “15 years of bipartisan co-operation through Plan Colombia”, along with George W. Bush and Mr Clinton. Mr Pastrana, a largely forgotten figure, was quick to accept. The election campaign in the United States may make it hard for Messrs Bush and Clinton to do so. According to Semana, a newsweekly, Mr Uribe, too, may stay away, vitiating one of the meeting’s tacit aims—to shore up bipartisanship in Colombia. Mr Uribe has become a vitriolic foe of Mr Santos. He accuses the president of “handing the country over to the FARC”. That is a wild exaggeration. But there is indeed plenty to criticise in the 63-page agreement on justice finalised on December 15th. FARC leaders accused of war crimes will go before a special Peace Tribunal. Provided they confess, they will be eligible for alternative penalties that include five to eight years of “effective restriction of liberty and rights” and engaging in projects to help victims of the conflict. At their laxest, the penalties could see FARC commanders working to strengthen their own political base by, for example, helping displaced peasant farmers. And meanwhile, they will be free to take part in politics. The agreement offers “worrying levels of impunity” for serious crimes, says Iván Duque, a senator from Mr Uribe’s party. Human Rights Watch, an advocacy group, concurs. It fears that the tribunal, whose composition has yet to be agreed, may not be independent. Nevertheless, the agreement does hold the FARC to account. And after three years of hard talking, it is the most the government could extract from the much-weakened, but undefeated, guerrillas. The alternative is years of further conflict and the FARC’s disintegration into criminal bands. That is why the United States is supporting the peace process. Colombia's peace process, in charts Peace is not quite a done deal. The two sides have still to agree on means to put the FARC’s weapons beyond use (this week they agreed to ask the UN to monitor the process). Mr Santos has promised a plebiscite on the final agreement; a bill in Congress would cut the turnout required from 50% to 13% of the electorate. And then it must be implemented. Mr Santos will go to Washington with a request for a new Plan Colombia—some $500m or so a year for up to ten years for rural development, public services and justice in former conflict areas. Though there will be a “few voices of dissent” from Mr Uribe’s supporters, there will be “broad bipartisan support” in the United States Congress, according to Michael Shifter of the Inter-American Dialogue, a think-tank in Washington. But at a time of fiscal constraint, the applause may not be backed with much money. Plan Colombia thus risks becoming a victim of its own success. That would be a shame. Certainly Colombia, a middle-income country, must put up most of the money for peace. But its public finances have been clobbered by the oil crash. Having come so far, it deserves support on the home straight.SHE had led in the opinion polls for Taiwan’s presidential election for months. Yet the margin of Tsai Ing-wen’s victory surprised many. She won 56% of the votes in a three-way race, with her chief contender, Eric Chu of the Nationalist Party or Kuomintang (KMT), trailing badly (see chart). Ms Tsai will become the island’s first female leader, while Mr Chu has already resigned as party chairman. The outcome of the election to Taiwan’s parliament, the Legislative Yuan, was more striking still. Ms Tsai’s Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won 68 of the 113 seats up for grabs, compared with only 35 for the KMT, which has lost its hold on the legislature for the first time since Chiang Kai-shek set up on the island in 1949. The KMT is now in the wilderness even if Ma Ying-jeou, president since 2008, limps on until Ms Tsai’s inauguration in faraway May. Already, change is under way. An old guard of national and local figures who have dominated politics for years is shuffling off the stage. Such is the bad blood in the KMT that the prime minister, Mao Chi-kuo, rebuffed Mr Ma’s efforts to persuade him to stay on as caretaker—even leaving the president standing in the cold outside his home while refusing to meet him. Ms Tsai (pictured above with colleagues) says that her transition team will work closely with the KMT and others in the coming months. She is open to non-DPP politicians getting cabinet posts in areas where her party lacks expertise, like defence. But whether the political shock on January 16th can accommodate her promise of a consensual approach is unclear. Across the country, the enthusiastic participation of younger and more liberal voters in the election has emphasised a sense of generational change. Activists from the Sunflower Movement of 2014 that opposed Mr Ma’s policy of strengthening economic ties with China are now fresh-minted politicians, accounting for the Legislative Yuan’s third-biggest grouping, the New Power Party. One of them is a front man of a heavy-metal rock group. It would have made old lawmakers’ black-dyed hair stand on end—had the election not pushed so many of them aside. But at the crest of the wave is Ms Tsai. At 59, she is of an older generation than many of those who voted for her, and is not a natural guitarist, but she embodies a progressive spirit—supporting gay marriage, for instance. A former legal academic and trade expert, her somewhat mousy, low-key air seems to engender trust—and, no one doubts, conceals an iron will. Above all she appealed by wanting to improve livelihoods. Her refrain was a message of generational equity: promising a fairer life for younger Taiwanese who struggle to afford housing, worry about job prospects and think that they will have to pick up the tab for a looming pensions crisis. Her call to boost energy from renewables while promising to make Taiwan nuclear-free within a decade appeals to those worried about the environment being at the mercy of the big energy firms. Yet Ms Tsai, who once helped negotiate Taiwan’s entry into the WTO, is not anti-business. In the face of diplomatic pressure from China, she wants Taiwan, with its huge export machine, to strike more trade deals. She has already announced that she will negotiate a free-trade pact with Japan. Membership of the American-led Trans-Pacific Partnership is also in her sights. Elsewhere, she says that Taiwan must find better ways to encourage innovation, including by removing the barriers to new businesses, and cut its reliance on contract manufacturing, amid cheaper competition elsewhere. A measure of Taiwan’s malaise is that the economy hardly grew last year. In graphics: All change in Taiwanese politics Be careful what you wish for It will be hard to turn things around quickly. Ms Tsai’s plans for incentives to landlords to help provide 200,000 units of social housing are imaginative, and could boost growth. Restructuring industry to place more emphasis on design, marketing, logistics and services will prove much harder. Meanwhile, some of Ms Tsai’s ideas appear questionable. Promising to go after assets that the KMT purloined following the defeat in 1945 of Taiwan’s Japanese overlords may make sense from the point of view of “transitional justice”. But it will hardly help engender the cross-party collaboration she says she seeks. As for scrapping nuclear power without thinking adequately about its replacement, it seems to promise a grave electricity shortage in the future—the kind of crisis that could scupper anyone’s presidency. That kind of crisis aside, the hardest part of Ms Tsai’s time in office is likely to be managing relations with China across the Taiwan Strait. Under Mr Ma relations only improved, with 23 cross-strait economic agreements and, in November, an unexpected meeting between him and President Xi Jinping in Singapore. Yet stronger economic ties seemed to many Taiwanese not to benefit them, while the perceived secrecy of the negotiations engendered the Sunflower Movement. Ms Tsai will be cooler on China—though not chilly. Mr Xi insists that China continue to endorse the so-called “1992 consensus”, in which China’s Communists and the KMT agreed there was but one China while differing on what that meant (see article). Ms Tsai has resisted endorsing the consensus. But she has rowed her party a long way back from its desire to declare formal independence—an act that would invite a military response against the island of 23m people. In her victory speech, she appealed to China’s leaders, emphasising that both countries should search for an acceptable way to interact “based on dignity and reciprocity”. She says she wants to “set aside differences” and build on the cross-strait dialogue to date. Probably, most Taiwanese approve, as does America, Taiwan’s protector. Now Ms Tsai’s unfiery manner must persuade China, too. A sorry spectacle MILLIONS in Taiwan woke up on election day to a video of a 16-year-old pop star, Chou Tzu-yu, making an abject apology. Her sin had been to seem to back Taiwan’s independence, by flaunting its national flag on television. “There’s only one China,” she parroted in the video. It smacked of a lynching and did no harm to Tsai Ing-wen with her call for Taiwan to distance itself from China, whose hand many saw in the bullying. In fact, a more likely culprit was Ms Chou’s employer, JYP Entertainment, a South Korean talent agency. Its shares plunged after Chinese television cancelled a lucrative booking for Ms Chou’s group, Twice. With more contracts under threat, it seems likely Ms Chou was pushed in front of the camera to smooth ruffled Chinese feathers. Like the Japanese companies they mimic, South Korea’s talent agencies have a fearsome reputation for controlling their young stars. In 2014 the government set new rules to protect underage recruits. Many endure years-long boot camps, living in dormitories; many have to undergo plastic surgery. Also dragged to say sorry this week were the five, now middle-aged, members of Japan’s most popular boy band, SMAP. They scotched rumours of a split, but the terseness of their apology for “causing trouble” made it clear they were not there entirely by choice. SMAP’s agency, Johnny & Associates, has for years been dogged by accusations that it exploits its young charges, commercially and even sexually. Japanese television depends heavily on the roster of stars it and other entertainment companies provide, and so is suspected of turning a blind eye to their excesses. Many young stars are banned from dating. In 2013 Minami Minegishi, of the all-girl group AKB48, shaved her head and made a tear-stained act of contrition after being snapped emerging from a tryst at her boyfriend’s apartment. The Tokyo District Court struck a blow for her and others this week. It rejected a suit by a talent agency against one of its former stars for breaking her contract by dating a fan. The court said the contract “restricted her freedom to pursue happiness”.Jakarta’s Syrian shock FOR decades, South-East Asia has had two lucky bulwarks against militant Islam: the peaceful, tolerant form of their faith practised by most South-East Asian Muslims; and the relative incompetence of local jihadists. But South-East Asia’s tradition of syncretic Islam has been threatened by stricter forms imported from the Middle East, seen as more modern and correct. Violent jihadism seems to be following the same pattern, if the bloody violence in central Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital, on January 14th, is anything to go by. Four civilians and four terrorists died in the bombing of a Starbucks and a traffic-police post, and a long shoot-out with the police, that day. Authorities believe that an Indonesian, Bahrun Naim, planned the attack from Syria. He heads a South-East Asian unit fighting with Islamic State (IS) in Syria and Iraq. Governments in the region have long feared something like this. Indonesian police have since arrested at least 13 suspected terrorists, and killed another. In Malaysia the police arrested a man suspected of planning to blow himself up at a bar, and three other Malaysians were sent back by Turkey after allegedly trying to cross into Syria to join IS. This week Singapore said that late last year it arrested and prepared to repatriate 27 Bangladeshi construction workers suspected of plotting terrorism back home. Beyond this flurry of activity lie deeper questions about how to respond to the threat. Islamists have long been active in South-East Asia. Members of Jemaah Islamiya (JI), dedicated to establishing a South-East Asian caliphate, were behind the bombing in 2002 of a Bali nightclub that killed more than 200. They are suspected of other bombings of western targets in Indonesia and the Philippines. After the Bali bombing the Indonesian police created Detachment 88, an elite counter-terror squad financed and trained by America and Australia. It killed or captured much of JI’s leadership. The Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand also arrested JI higher-ups. The group is weakened. But the threat never entirely receded. And some now fear that IS could establish a base in South-East Asia. The region offers plenty of remote areas outside state control in which militants can hide. Both the Philippine island of Mindanao and southern Thailand have endured long-running insurgencies waged by Muslim minorities. Just as veterans who fought the Soviets in Afghanistan boosted regional jihadist capacity in the early 1990s, many worry that returning fighters from Syria will do the same today. The Soufan Group, a security consultancy, estimated in a December report that at least 600 South-East Asians had gone to fight with IS. It is unclear how many have returned. The report says 162 people (including women and children) have returned to Indonesia from IS territory. Sidney Jones, who runs the Institute for Policy Analysis and Conflict in Jakarta, believes that the number of trained fighters who have returned is much lower. Some are in custody, but Peter Chalk of the RAND Corporation, an American think-tank, says the Indonesian authorities lack “a good feel about how many have returned…and what they’re doing in terms of radicalising populations.” Of course, IS has also proved adroit at radicalising from afar. Thousands of Indonesians have publicly pledged allegiance to the group, and Mr Naim appears to have found local jihadists to carry out the attacks. At least one was said to have been radicalised, like many others, in an Indonesian prison. Ms Jones says Mr Naim used encrypted messages on social media in an effort to inspire attacks in Malaysia. Singapore’s home-affairs minister, K. Shanmugam, warned this week that “It is not a question of ‘if’, but ‘when’,” Singapore will suffer a terrorist attack. He said the government would roll out new measures “covering both the hard and soft aspects of Singapore’s security”. Counter-terrorism strategies that worked before may prove less effective against transnational entities such as IS, which inspire online self-radicalisation and lone-wolf attacks. In Indonesia supporting or joining IS is not illegal, though the government is mulling broader counter-terrorism laws with powers of preventive detention. The country’s two biggest Muslim social movements—Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama—have been trying to counter jihadist propaganda. In Malaysia, however, the government itself has thoroughly politicised Islam, leaving little room for dissent from its harshest rules. A study last year found more than 70% of Malaysia’s ethnic-Malay, Muslim, majority support hudud laws such as stoning for adultery. Another found that 11% of Malays viewed IS favourably.EVERY time India and Pakistan inch towards ending their ancient enmity, something bad seems to happen. On January 2nd it was an attack by armed infiltrators on an Indian air-force base near the border with Pakistan that left seven servicemen dead. On January 20th Pakistan suffered a crueller blow when terrorists invaded Bacha Khan University, a co-ed establishment near Peshawar. Four gunmen killed at least 20 people, most of them students, before being shot dead themselves. It was a ghastly echo of a massacre of 141 people, mainly students, at a school in the same region just over a year ago. With more imagination than evidence, Pakistani conspiracy theorists saw India behind both acts of violence on their soil. The attack on the Indian air base at Pathankot followed a surprise visit by Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, to his Pakistani counterpart, Nawaz Sharif—the first by an Indian prime minister since 2004. They promised to resume long-suspended high-level talks over such vexed questions as disputed Kashmir. When Indian intelligence tied the air-base attackers to Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM), a Pakistani group with known links to the country’s opaque and powerful security services, it seemed part of a familiar pattern. Those services have acted in the past to snuff out similar whiffs of rapprochement. A visit to Pakistan in 1999 by the then Indian prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, was swiftly followed by a brief but nasty war, provoked by Pakistan, on the “line of control” separating Indian- and Pakistani-held parts of Kashmir. Shortly after peace talks were held in Agra in 2001, the Indian parliament building came under attack by gunmen believed to be from JeM. The terror attacks launched in Mumbai in 2008 by Lashkar-e-Taiba, another group patronised by the Pakistani armed forces, punctured yet another round of peaceful overtures. But Pakistan’s security services always whisper a counter-narrative. As with the school attack, they suggest via co-operative voices in the Pakistani press that India had a hidden hand in the attack on Bacha Khan University. In fact, both attacks were claimed by Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) or the Pakistani Taliban. It has sought vengeance since the army in 2014 launched a fierce campaign against it in North Waziristan near the border with Afghanistan. “Our desi liberals would never believe that India is supporting TTP to destabilise Pakistan,” read a sneering tweet from a prominent Pakistani editor. Yet Pakistan offers no evidence of Indian involvement in attacks on its territory, whereas Indian officials have offered “actionable intelligence” linking JeM to the air-base attack, and invited Pakistan to send its own investigators. Indeed, on January 13th Pakistan announced that it had rounded up members of JeM, closed some of its offices and shut down its websites. Pakistan’s apparent response to Indian prodding sent an encouraging signal that the Pathankot incident was not simply another case of its army using militants to scupper peace efforts by a civilian government. Optimists note other hopeful signs. India responded with unusual caution to the attack, suggesting that talks with Pakistan should be postponed briefly rather than cancelled. On the Pakistani side the army chief, Raheel Sharif, associated himself personally with the crackdown on JeM—a recognition that Pakistan must bring its Frankensteins to heel. Correction: An earlier version of this article mischaracterised the colloquial Urdu/Hindi word "desi" as derogatory. It also wrongly applied it to objects; it can refer to anything South Asian. Sorry.Mr Bainimarama’s lively reform programme EARLIER this month in Fiji’s capital, Suva, a convoy of lorries, carrying 25 sealed shipping containers and under a heavy military guard, dodged the potholes along Mead Road and snaked into the Queen Elizabeth Barracks. In the containers were Russian weapons, ammunition and vehicles supposed to be destined for use by Fiji’s international peacekeepers in the Sinai desert in Egypt and along the Israel-Syria frontier on the Golan Heights. The opposition cried foul, claiming that the arms had entered the country illegally, without proper police authorisation. Some dared suggest the weapons might even be for the purpose of threatening the opposition. The opposition politicians seem not to have appreciated how firmly the police have been under the control of the army since the (South African) chief of police, Ben Groenewald, resigned in November. He left in protest, accusing the armed forces of undermining his investigation into police brutality—they had even recruited the suspects into the army’s own ranks, despite the allegations hanging over them. Mr Groenewald’s successor is a soldier with a murky human-rights record, Brigadier-General Sitiveni Qiliho. He has set about clearing out the constabulary’s senior officers. Fiji appears much more stable than it was in the troubled years after a coup in December 2006. FijiFirst, the party of the coup leader turned prime minister, Frank Bainimarama, obtained a thumping 59% majority in elections in September 2014 and holds 32 of Parliament’s 50 seats. While the opposition is in disarray, the government benefits from an economy growing at 4% a year, as hordes of Australians flock to Fiji’s magnificent beaches. A lively reform programme has won Mr Bainimarama many admirers among his country’s 890,000 citizens. It involves building roads and bridges, delivering free education and legal aid, and providing cash handouts to small businesses. Abroad, the prime minister walks taller these days, having once been widely seen as a pariah. In some places he was always welcome. In 2013 in Moscow, Mr Bainimarama brokered a deal with the Russian prime minister, Dimitry Medvedev, for the supply of equipment for Fijian peacekeepers. The next year Fiji abstained in the UN vote on Russia’s annexation of Crimea. Beneath the surface, the place looks less happy. The islands’ indigenous people, known as i-Taukei, make up three-fifths of the population and communally own most of the land. Many of them despise the FijiFirst government. That is partly because they particularly hate the 2013 constitution, which describes all the country’s citizens as “Fijians” where before only the indigenes earned that title. A third of the population are ethnic Indians. Some indigenes claim to be suffering the kind of cultural annihilation that befell Australia’s Aborigines and New Zealand’s Maoris. Others dislike Mr Bainimarama’s reliance on his attorney-general, a Muslim, who also serves as finance minister. They divine an Islamic conspiracy to control the country. Paranoia runs rife in Mr Bainimarama’s Fiji. Efforts to forge breakaway “Christian states” in the provinces of Nadroga-Navosa and Ra last year echoed indigenous fears. At the time Mr Groenewald said that the movements resembled harmless cults. Mr Bainimarama took the perceived threat more seriously, ordering an army clampdown. Though he stepped down as military commander in 2014, he keeps his grip on the armed forces. Last August Brigadier-General Mosese Tikoitoga was pushed aside as armed-forces chief. He showed too much independence by promoting his choice of officers to the senior command and by barring Mr Bainimarama’s personal bodyguards from the officer’s mess at the Queen Elizabeth Barracks. He will now be exiled to Ethiopia, as ambassador. Meanwhile, the UN remains hungry for Fiji’s blue helmets. They are a nice little earner for the government, too, but dispatching all those soldiers has repercussions back home. The first peacekeepers set off, for Lebanon, in 1978. Since then Fiji’s armed forces have overthrown the government three times: first in 1987, unleashing the coup genie; then late in May 2000; and then Mr Bainimarama’s coup. You have to give them something to do on home leave. In 2014 the Nusra Front in Syria, linked to al-Qaeda, briefly captured 45 of Fiji’s peacekeepers. The incident triggered a call for more modern military equipment—leading to the Russian weapons. Hence the worries that their arrival in Suva may only increase the odds of Fiji’s fragile democracy being overthrown again.THE first, Long March, generation of Chinese Communist leaders always seemed impatient to see Taiwan “reunified” with the mainland. This unfinished business of the Chinese civil war, which ended in 1949 with the defeated Nationalists, the Kuomintang or KMT, confined to the island as their last redoubt, was too sacred a mission to leave to their callow successors. But the last Long Marchers have died out and Taiwan is still independent in all but name, with no deadline set for its return. In 2013 Xi Jinping, the leader of the current, fifth, generation, suggested China’s patience was wearing thin, and that the issues could not be passed on for ever to the next generation. He called for political talks. Yet the results of the elections in Taiwan on January 16th suggest such talks—and unification itself—are farther away than ever. Mr Xi is much the most powerful leader in decades of a country mightier than for centuries; but it is not clear what he can do about this. China still threatens to take Taiwan by force, should it declare formal independence. No leader could abandon the aim of eventual reunification. For Mr Xi it is part of the “China dream” of fully restored national pride and prestige. But China’s approach to Taiwan has sometimes been surprisingly pragmatic. In cold-war days, China took to scheduling shelling on alternate days. In better times, the two sides have managed a thriving economic relationship with no official ties whatsoever. In recent years China’s Taiwan strategy has relied more on blandishments than bludgeoning. In particular, the eight-year administration since 2008 of President Ma Ying-jeou has seen a flurry of cross-strait agreements to foster greater economic integration. But the perceived failure of the KMT’s China-friendly policy to put fizz into Taiwan’s economy was a big factor in the sweeping election win by the Democratic Progressive Party, or DPP, whose roots are in the Taiwan independence movement. So the election result repudiates the idea that Taiwan might ever become truly “part of China”. This puts China in a bind. Its initial official reaction implies no drastic change of course. The state press pointed out that this was not a vote for the “hallucination” of independence. Indeed, the DPP’s president-elect, Tsai Ing-wen, talks of stability and the status quo. So, perversely, victory is portrayed by China as evidence of the success of its policy: even the DPP cannot afford to roll back the advances in cross-strait relations, and its rule will anyway be as transient as a “fleeting cloud”. The DPP’s previous stint in power, under Chen Shui-bian between 2000 and 2008, ended disastrously. He was jailed for corruption after Mr Ma trounced him at the polls. For several reasons, however, the apparently rosy Chinese view of the election, presumably intended in part to gloss over an embarrassing setback, may not last long. An early challenge will be finding a form of words that allows China to talk to a DPP government. It insists that the DPP must adhere to the “1992 consensus”, a semi-official agreement that there was but “one China”, albeit defined differently by the two sides. Ms Tsai will find that hard. Though a pragmatist, she is beholden to her party, which has long denied any such consensus. The stakes are raised by Mr Xi himself. In Singapore in November, when he granted Mr Ma the first meeting since 1949 between leaders of Taiwan and China, he stressed the importance of maintaining the one-China fiction. So China may feel it has to start punishing Taiwan for its recalcitrance. It has plenty of levers without having to resort to crude military menaces—as it did in 1996, when it lobbed shells across the strait. Diplomatically, for example, only 21 countries (and the Holy See) recognise Taiwan rather than the government in Beijing. Most are small and poor. Recent years have seen a truce in the war of diplomatic attrition, in which countries were induced to switch in return for aid. If China breaks the truce, a number of countries might swiftly abandon Taiwan. China will also keep an eagle eye on how its diplomatic partners adhere to “the one-China principle”. American arms sales to Taiwan, of which a package worth $1.8 billion was approved last month, may again become a big issue in relations between China and America. China will also do its best to continue to thwart Taiwan’s attempts to join multilateral organisations and sign free-trade agreements. It did allow Taiwan under Mr Ma to sign FTAs with two countries that have diplomatic relations with China, New Zealand and Singapore, but not to join multilateral talks. It has excluded Taiwan from its new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and could probably exert enough pressure to keep it out of the American-led free-trade area, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, even though China itself is not a party. It could also apply direct economic pressure. The mainland is the market for 25% of Taiwan’s exports and the destination for most of its foreign direct investment. Taiwan, on the other hand, accounts for just 4% of China’s total trade. An easy economic sanction would be to cut the quotas for mainland Chinese tourists. More than 4m visited in 2014 (up from 280,000 in 2008), about 40% of all visitors to Taiwan; but numbers fell sharply during the election campaign, perhaps because the authorities did not want people to get a taste for that sort of thing. Bully for you Yet China knows that turning from suitor to bully is likely to prove counter-productive in winning over public opinion in Taiwan. Increased contacts with the mainland seem to have only heightened a sense among ordinary Taiwanese of their distinct identity. Punishing them for this will hardly help. At least, unlike Mr Chen, Ms Tsai seems determined to try not to raise mainland hackles. So the hope is that both sides get on with improving cross-strait relations, while pretending that they do not have wholly opposed visions of where they are leading. For Mr Xi, however, with a dream to realise, pretending may not be good enough.YANG YOURONG’s wife kicks him as they walk upstairs and he falls back a few steps, then follows again at a distance up to the cramped offices of a district-government bureau handling divorces in Chongqing, a region in the south-east. After more than 20 years of marriage, Mr Yang’s wife has had several affairs; she is “quick tempered”, he says (she had slapped him earlier, he claims). At the bureau, divorce takes half an hour and costs 9 yuan ($1.40). It is administered a few steps away from where other couples get married and take celebratory photographs. Mr Yang and his wife have second thoughts, however; they return home, still arguing. Most couples hesitate less. Divorce rates are rising quickly across China. This is a remarkable transformation in a society where for centuries marriage was universal and mostly permanent (though convention permitted men to take concubines). Under Communist rule, traditional values have retained a strong influence over family relationships: during much of the Mao era, divorce was very unusual. It became more common in the 1980s, but a marriage law adopted in 1994 still required a reference from an employer or community leader. Not until 2003 were restrictions removed. The trend reflects profound economic and social change. In the past 35 years, the biggest internal migration experienced by any country in human history has been tearing families apart. Traditional values have been giving way to more liberal ones. Women are becoming better educated, and more aware of their marital rights (they now initiate over half of all divorce cases). Greater affluence has made it easier for many people to contemplate living alone—no longer is there such an incentive to stay married in order to pool resources. As long as both sides agree on terms, China is now among the easiest and cheapest places in the world to get a divorce. In many Western countries, including Britain, couples must separate for a period before dissolving a marriage; China has no such constraints. In 2014, the latest year for which such data exist, about 3.6m couples split up—more than double the number a decade earlier (they received a red certificate, pictured, to prove it). The divorce rate—the number of cases per thousand people—also doubled in that period. It now stands at 2.7, well above the rate in most of Europe and approaching that of America, the most divorce-prone Western country (see chart). Chongqing’s rate, 4.4, is higher than America’s. Helped by the huge movement of people from the countryside into cities, and the rapid spread of social media, the availability of potential mates has grown with astonishing speed, both geographically and virtually. But many migrants marry in their home villages and often live apart from their spouses for lengthy periods. This has contributed to a big increase in extramarital liaisons. Married people previously had limited opportunities to meet members of the opposite sex in social situations, according to research by Li Xiaomin of Henan University. Peng Xiaobo, a divorce lawyer in Chongqing, reckons 60-70% of his clients have had affairs. Such behaviour has led to much soul-searching. The notion that “chopsticks come in pairs” is still prevalent; propaganda posters preach Confucian-style family virtues using pictures of happy, multi-generation families. (President Xi Jinping is on his second marriage but this is rarely mentioned.) Many commentators in the official media talk of separation as a sign of moral failure; they fret that it signifies the decline of marriage, and of family as a social unit—a threat, as they see it, to social stability and even a cause of crime. The spread of “Western values” is often blamed. But marriage is not losing its lustre. In most countries, rising divorce rates coincide with more births out of wedlock and a fall in marriage rates. China bucks both these trends. Remarriage is common too. The Chinese have not fallen out of love with marriage—only with each other. It is tradition itself that is partly to blame for rising divorce rates. China’s legal marriage age for men, 22, is the highest in the world. But conservative attitudes to premarital relationships result in Chinese youths having fewer of them than their counterparts in the West (they are urged to concentrate on their studies and careers, rather than socialise or explore). Living together before marriage is still rare, although that is changing among educated youngsters. People still face social pressure to marry in their 20s. Their inexperience makes it more than usually difficult for them to select a good partner. Couples’ ageing relatives are part of the problem too. Yan Yunxiang of the University of California, Los Angeles, says “parent-driven divorce” is becoming more common. As a result of China’s one-child-per-couple policy (recently changed to a two-child one), many people have no siblings to share the burden of looking after parents and grandparents. Thus couples often find themselves living with, or being watched over by, several—often contending—elders. Mr Yan says the older ones’ interference fuels conjugal conflict. Sometimes parents urge their children to divorce their partners as a way to deal with rifts. Women are more likely to be the ones who suffer financially when this happens. Rising divorce rates reflect the spread of more tolerant, permissive values towards women, but legislation tends to favour men in divorce settlements. A legal interpretation issued in 2003 says that if a divorce is disputed, property bought for one partner by a spouse’s parents before marriage can revert to the partner alone. That usually means the husband’s family: they often try to increase their child’s ability to attract a mate by buying him a home. In 2011 the Supreme Court went further. It ruled that in contested cases (as about one-fifth of divorces are), the property would be considered that of one partner alone if that partner’s parents had bought it for him or her after the couple had got married. In addition, if one partner (rather than his or her parents) had bought a home before the couple wed, that person could be awarded sole ownership by a divorce court. This ruling has put women at a disadvantage too: by convention they are less often named on deeds. In practice, if the couple has children the person with custody often keeps the home—more often the mother. Yet the court’s interpretation sets a worrying precedent for divorced women. Their difficulties may be compounded by the two-child policy, which came into effect on January 1st. If couples have two children and both partners want custody, judges often assign parents one child each. Marriage and the family are still strong in China—but children clearly lie in a different asset class. SINCE he took over as China’s leader in 2012, Xi Jinping has been a busy globetrotter. Last year he visited more countries than Barack Obama, America’s president (14 against 11). Heedless of whether his hosts are powerful, puny or pariahs, he has flown everywhere from America to the Maldives and Zimbabwe. Mr Xi wants to project China’s rising power—and his role in promoting that—to foreign and domestic audiences. But until this week, he had not set a presidential foot in the Middle East. The trip, under way as The Economist went to press, began in Saudi Arabia (whose king, Salman bin Abdul Aziz, is pictured with Mr Xi). He then visited Egypt and was due to finish his tour in Iran. No Chinese president had toured the region since 2009. China’s leaders had worried about getting embroiled in the region’s intractable disputes. But China has a big stake in the Middle East. It is the world’s largest oil importer and gets more than half of its crude from the region (see chart). Mr Xi’s much ballyhooed “new Silk Route”, aimed at linking China and Europe with the help of Chinese-funded infrastructure, runs across the Middle East. Chinese companies are already building expressways and harbours there. The timing of Mr Xi’s tour is tricky. Tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran are particularly high after Saudi Arabia executed a Shia cleric earlier this month and angry Iranians responded by storming the Saudi embassy in Tehran. But the lifting of Western sanctions on Iran on January 16th (see article) allowed Mr Xi to display even-handedness by visiting both countries, without upsetting Western powers. Mr Xi, like his predecessors, likes to present China as a non-interfering champion of peace. (Xinhua, China’s state-run news agency, said this week that the West’s “meddling hands” were “more of a mortal poison than of a magic potion” in the Middle East.) But Mr Xi is not keen to play a central role as peacemaker. China’s first “Arab Policy Paper”, released on January 13th, is a vague, waffly document. It talks of “building a new type of international relations”, but is devoid of new ideas. Zhang Ming, a vice-foreign minister, said this week that economic development was the “ultimate way out” of conflict in the region. By expanding its trade and investment links with the Middle East, China hopes discontent and conflict there will gradually dissipate. In addition to crushing dissent, it is trying a similar approach in Xinjiang, a province in western China with a large Muslim population—so far without success. In the long run, China may find it hard to avoid taking sides. To some extent it has already done so in Syria: it talks to representatives from both the Syrian government and the opposition, but by vetoing UN resolutions on intervention it tilts, in effect, in the government’s favour. The presence of a growing number of Chinese citizens in the Middle East may challenge China’s non-interventionist approach. After a Chinese national was executed by Islamic State in November, China promised to strengthen protection of its citizens abroad. Its new rules of Middle Eastern diplomacy could end up resembling familiar Western meddling.
