THERE were no street parties. When sanctions relating to Iran’s nuclear programme were lifted on January 16th, it was instead Iranians’ deep cynicism that prevailed. “Quick, prepare the [immigration] forms,” some joked on social media, scoffing at the idea that tourists would suddenly come pouring in. Nor was Hassan Rohani, Iran’s president, able to enjoy the moment. Within days of the announcement the Guardian Council, a body of jurists and theologians, barred a majority of reformist candidates from running in parliamentary elections next month. Then on January 18th America slapped new sanctions on those involved in Iran’s missile programme. Yet the next few weeks—and the speed of the economy’s response to the lifting of sanctions—will be crucial in determining the direction that Iran takes over coming years. Next month the country also votes for members of the Assembly of Experts, a committee that will choose the next supreme leader, who outranks the president. To keep the hardliners at bay, Mr Rohani, who himself must seek re-election next year, will have to persuade them of the virtues of a more liberal, less state-run, more outward-looking economy. To do so he has to hope for a quick turn in the fortunes of the world’s 18th-largest economy (by purchasing-power parity). Yet overcoming the lingering effects of its isolation will be no easy task. “It took years to put the sanctions on, and removing them will be a process,” says Ramin Rabii, who runs Turquoise Partners, an Iranian investment firm. Foreign banks, some of which faced swingeing fines for having facilitated trade with Iran, complain about inconsistencies in official sanctions lists published by different countries and fret they may again face prosecution for violating sanctions still in place, or new ones. In graphics: The implications and consequences of Iran's nuclear deal Iran’s most immediate benefit will be the unfreezing of assets abroad worth at least $32 billion. (American officials put the figure at $55 billion; others give still higher numbers.) Iran plans to spend a chunk of this on railways, airports and aircraft; it is close to clinching a deal with Airbus to buy 114 new planes, and says it needs 400. Much of the rest of the cash, say Iranian officials, will help sort out the country’s banks, which were pushed to the brink of insolvency, if not into it, by the previous administration of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Up to a fifth of all bank loans are said to be non-performing and several banks are bust, not least because the government instructed them to lend even when they thought it imprudent. Some critics fret that the money will instead be used to fund terrorism and Shia militancy abroad. Another quick win will come from Iran’s readmission to the global banking system and payment networks such as SWIFT. This will help drive down the cost of imports since, in recent years, Iranian businessmen have not had access to letters of credit. As a result they had to pay upfront in full for imports. Ending such restrictions could add up a percentage point to annual growth, the IMF reckons. Industry should benefit within months. Over the longer run Iran should be able to attract foreign investment, which has fallen in recent years (see chart). Among Iran’s attractions are a young, well-educated and largely urban population of 80m. European delegations have flooded into Tehran in the past 18 months, but they still need convincing that the country is politically stable and friendly to business. The most attractive industries are food and drink, pharmaceuticals and other consumer goods. Many Iranians want European brands rather than the Chinese ones that dominated the market under sanctions. “We used to sell high-quality Italian washing machines, but our customers have gone elsewhere to buy Chinese imports,” says Ramin Farahi, a salesman near Tehran’s Grand Bazaar. Foreign hotel chains are also poised to invest. The biggest prize for investors may be carmaking. The automotive industry employs hundreds of thousands of workers, but output is shoddy. Some expect that production could bounce back by the end of this year to 1.6m vehicles, matching the high point achieved in 2011. Renault and Peugeot, which have a long history in Iran, are already back. The government’s priority is probably to increase production of oil—which made up 17% of GDP and 30% of the government’s income in 2014—by 500,000 barrels per day (b/d), to about 1.5m b/d. In time it hopes to get back to the 3m-4m b/d it used to pump before sanctions. But because of the slump in world prices, oil will be less of a cash cow than was once hoped and Iran will struggle to get investment from debt-laden international oil companies. Iran’s economy is far more diverse than those of other oil producers in the region, such as Saudi Arabia, its regional rival. By most estimates its GDP could grow by 5-8% a year, despite weak oil prices. Quite apart from the lifting of sanctions, Mr Rohani’s team realises that it needs to address a raft of problems in an economy that was sorely mismanaged by Mr Ahmadinejad. Corruption is rife: Transparency International, a Berlin-based watchdog, ranks Iran 136th in its corruption perceptions index. In addition, the World Bank puts Iran at a lowly 118th in its ease-of-doing-business index. Capital markets need developing. Firms need access to finance. Unemployment and underemployment are rife and labour productivity is low. Now that sanctions are being lifted, the regime will no longer be able to blame foreigners for Iran’s woes. Yet unless he can show quick progress, Mr Rohani may well be punished at the ballot box for the sins of his predecessor. FROM the military observation points overlooking the spot where Israel’s frontiers meet those of Syria and Jordan, Israelis can clearly see the positions of Liwa Shuhada al-Yarmouk—the Yarmouk Martyrs’ Brigade. It is only one of many dozens of Syrian rebel groups, yet Israeli officers half-jokingly describe the fighters, mainly Syrians from nearby villages, as “Daesh lite”. The brigade, which may have between 600 and 1,000 men, has sworn allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the “Caliph” of Islamic State (IS), also known by its Arabic acronym, Daesh. The black flag of IS forms part of its logo. So far, at least, the group has concentrated on skirmishing with the Syrian army and with rival rebel groups, and on securing its strongholds on the slopes of the Golan. But the Israelis are worried that, as IS is pushed back in other parts of Syria and Iraq, its leaders may decide to take over the Yarmouk Martyrs’ Brigade and use its bases for attacks on Israel or Jordan. IS has yet to attack Israel. Its main forces in southern Syria are about 80km (50 miles) from Israel’s borders. Last month, IS put out a recording, purporting to be the voice of Mr Baghdadi, saying that “with the help of Allah we are getting closer to you every day. The Israelis will soon see us in Palestine.” On January 18th Lieutenant-General Gadi Eizenkot, the chief of staff of Israel’s armed forces, warned that “the success against IS raises the probability we will see them turning their gun-barrels towards us and also the Jordanians”. The most direct and likely avenue of attack is across Israel’s frontier with Syria. That is because the situation there is already chaotic; IS bases and civilian villages are close to Israel; and the terrain is mountainous. “A vacuum where no one is in control will always be the most dangerous location we should be looking at,” says a senior Israeli officer. Israel has toughened its border defences on the Golan, with new fences and sensors. It now stations regular forces there instead of reservists. But IS may also choose other places from which to attack. Wilayat Sinai, which means the “Sinai province” of IS, has been operating on Israel’s western border for five years. It declared allegiance to IS in late 2014 and claimed responsibility for blowing up a Russian airliner last October, killing 224 people. But it is embroiled in a bloody insurgency against Egypt’s security forces. Israel, which is discreetly providing the Egyptians with intelligence and military help, says that IS shares routes for smuggling arms and other supplies with Hamas, the Islamist group that controls Gaza. These could be used for launching future attacks on Israel. The Israelis are also worried that radical Palestinians who are citizens of Israel may be working for IS. So far they reckon that about 50 of them have gone to Syria to join IS. “There are more Swedes than Israelis fighting with Daesh,” says an Israeli intelligence man. Others say they are confident that Israel’s security service is better than its European counterparts at monitoring IS activity in its own territory. Even so, they fret that IS could become popular among young Palestinians in Israel, and in the West Bank and Gaza, where many are disillusioned both with the Palestinian Authority and with Hamas, its rival. “IS is here and it’s no secret,” says Reuven Rivlin, Israel’s president. “I’m not talking about the borders of Israel, but about IS within. Research, arrests, witnesses, open and classified analysis all indicate clearly that IS’s popularity is growing and that even Israeli Arabs are actually joining up with it.” Vigilance along Israel’s borders may not be enough.“THEIR main objective is to create fear,” says Mohamed Lotfy of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms, a pressure group, referring to a series of arrest of activists as the government intensifies a long-running crackdown on dissent. Indeed, even as Mr Lotfy speaks, his phone rings: the police have arrested three more people. A colleague, Ahmed Abdullah, himself sought by the security services, is putting on a brave face. Sitting in a café in Cairo, Mr Abdullah is sure he will be arrested—perhaps worse, he says, implying that the police might shoot him. “It is part of the price that we should pay for freedom.” The government, on the other hand, appears nervous. In the months leading up to the fifth anniversary on January 25th of the uprising against Hosni Mubarak, the ousted dictator, the current government led by the strongman Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi has tried to dispel any danger of a repeat. Protests in 2014 and 2015 led to dozens of deaths and hundreds of arrests. Clerics, labour leaders and television hosts have been enlisted in the effort to keep people off the streets. Activists claim they have no big plans for protests this year. But the government is rounding up perceived troublemakers with unrestrained vigour, adding to the tens of thousands of political detainees already languishing in Egyptian prisons. Most are accused of associating with outlawed groups, such as the Muslim Brotherhood, or organising protests, which are banned. Journalists and administrators of several Facebook pages have also been targeted. Police have even raided a theatre and art gallery in downtown Cairo. A feature of the government’s crackdown is the secrecy surrounding many of the detentions. Mr Lotfy’s group says that between August and November more than 340 people “disappeared” into government custody. That does not count Sinai, where the government has blocked access due to an Islamist insurgency. The total is “not less than 1,000”, says Sherif Mohie Eddin of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, another pressure group. He says the secrecy is deliberate, a charge denied by the interior ministry. Most of the disappeared are liberal activists or Islamists, but the reasons for some disappearances are not at all clear. Mostafa Massouny, a young video editor, was getting food in downtown Cairo when he vanished on June 26th. Through various channels his family learned of his detention and was told he would be released. But now there is no official trace of him. “Egypt has eaten my friend,” says one of his colleagues. If there was any hope that the new parliament might act as a check on the regime’s ruthlessness, that has been dashed. Most lawmakers have pledged their support for Mr Sisi. When not mugging up for TV cameras or taking selfies, they found time to pass a terrorism law that is likely to ensnare activists. The crotchety head of the committee on human rights, Mortada Mansour, has called January 25th “the worst-ever day in Egypt’s history”. Some officials hope to reclaim the date by renewing its prior designation as a day for celebrating the police. They have certainly been working hard.IN OCTOBER 2013 the Seaman Guard Ohio, a Sierra Leone-flagged ship, was intercepted just under 11 nautical miles off the coast of India by the local coastguard. The grey-hulled vessel looked like a naval ship—bristling with antennae and radar—but was chartered by AdvanFort, a private security firm based in Washington, DC. It had 35 crew and carried 35 guns and thousands of rounds of ammunition. On January 11th this year all those aboard—among them Britons, Estonians and Ukrainians—were convicted of entering Indian waters with illegal weapons. They were sentenced to five years in prison. The case offers a glimpse into a world not often seen by landlubbers. The Seaman Guard Ohio was a “floating armoury”, a ship that loiters semi-permanently in international waters, acting as a hotel and base for private security guards hired to protect ships from Somali pirates. They are typically stationed in waters off Sudan, Sri Lanka or the United Arab Emirates, waiting for their customers—merchant ships in need of protection—to pass by. Guards hop aboard a client’s ship with their guns, then ride it through the piracy “high risk area” (HRA). Since armed guards first started protecting ships against Somali pirates about a decade ago, no ship with them aboard has been successfully hijacked. Now about 40% of ships rounding the Horn of Africa carry armed guards, according to IHS Jane’s, a research company. Once the ship has passed back into safe waters the guards disembark to another armoury. Then they fly home or jump aboard the next ship going the other way. This arrangement keeps guns out at sea, avoiding bothersome and inconsistent national laws. When they stray too close to land, as the Seaman Guard Ohio allegedly did, they can run into legal trouble. Armoury operators market their services online. Some vessels feature wi-fi, television rooms and gyms to keep guards happy, along with safes to store weapons. No official register of floating armouries exists, so it is impossible to count them reliably. But at least 15-20 lurk in and around the Indian Ocean, according to one seasoned guard. He reckons thousands of military-grade weapons are stored aboard the vessels. The British government has tried to regulate the industry. It has issued licences for “private maritime security companies” to use certain armouries that it deems safe and professionally run. Among its rules are that weapons should only be used in self defence. Tom Frankland, a director at Sovereign Global UK, a firm that runs two floating armouries (but unlike AdvanFort does not itself guard cargo ships) says his firm’s craft are regulated by the governments of Britain and Djibouti, whose government representatives control the transfer of weapons at sea.  Armouries have done brisk business since governments and marine insurers first demarked an official HRA in 2010. At the peak of Somali piracy in 2012, shipowners would pay about $45,000 per trip for armed guards. Insurers often insisted they have them, reckoning that this would reduce the risks of them having to pay out millions in ransoms if a ship were hijacked. Yet competition has driven down rates charged by security firms and standards are falling as less highly-regulated companies enter the market. A boss of one British-owned armoury worries that the use of such firms could lead to weapons entering the black market. “You used to see teams of Royal Marine Commandos and Navy Seals guarding ships,” says one naval officer involved in patrolling the waters off the Horn of Africa. “Now you get three [untrained men] sharing a rusty AK-47.” Moreover, the industry itself is facing tougher times. On December 1st the HRA was shrunk, thanks to a steep drop in the number of pirate attacks—itself the result of more guards as well as patrols by mainly western navies. That is good news for shipowners, but bad news for their guards. Adding to the uncertainty is a chance that Somali piracy will make a comeback in 2016. IHS says strife in Somalia, coupled with a forecast for months of clement weather, have put Somali pirates in its “top 10 risks” for 2016. If piracy rebounds, some old sea dogs of war may get another lease of life. CORRECTION: This article has been amended to make clear that Sovereign Global UK does not itself use weapons at sea.Beware the cliff edge DRIVE west out of Nairobi and you quickly realise how astonishing the topography around the Kenyan capital is. After an hour or so crawling in traffic past tea fields and farmers selling sheep skins and fresh vegetables, motorists suddenly find themselves on an escarpment from which the land simply drops away. On the horizon, mist clings to the top of Mount Longonot, a dormant volcano. Before it, a patchwork of tiny green farms stretches across the valley floor like a carpet. This is the central part of the Rift Valley, a vast depression that stretches thousands of miles. It is Kenya’s breadbasket and its most densely populated region. Its flower farms, tea fields and coffee plantations provide much of the country’s exports, as well as employment for thousands of workers. Its geothermal energy plants provide Nairobi with cheap electricity; its lakes provide water and its farms food. In politics, too, the Rift Valley plays a central role. It contains a key constituency that Uhuru Kenyatta, Kenya’s president, needs to win over if he is to be returned to office in an election due next year. Mr Kenyatta, who is from the Kikuyu, Kenya’s largest tribe, won in 2013 by forging an alliance with William Ruto, a politician who is popular among the Kalenjin-speaking people who are numerous in the Rift. Yet with Mr Ruto arraigned at the International Criminal Court (ICC) in The Hague on charges of instigating violence after disputed elections in 2007, and the economic boom slowing across Africa, what happens over the next year in the Rift Valley will be crucial to Kenya’s fate. Polling day is more than 18 months away, but electioneering is already under way. In Nakuru, the biggest city in the region, the office of the Kenyan electoral commission buzzes with young workers clutching application forms for jobs as officials. As many as 1.5m voters will be registered over the next few months, says Ezekiel Muiruri, the local administrator. On the shore of Lake Naivasha, the election is beginning to worry some. Here, tourist camps sit alongside acres of greenhouses from which, every day, millions of roses are flown to Europe and the Far East. The farms are flourishing: between 1995 and 2014, the annual volume of flowers exported rose from 29,000 tonnes to 137,000, drawing workers from across Kenya. Yet this influx of migrants means that the area around Naivasha is no longer so dominated by either the Kikuyu or Kalenjin. Its kaleidoscopic tribal mix has long made Kenyan politics jumpy and sometimes violent. Tribal tension is always liable to boil over during elections and the Rift Valley remains a political cauldron. For the first decade-and-a-half after independence in 1964 the Kikuyu, led by Jomo Kenyatta (the current president’s father) were on top. Then, under President Daniel arap Moi, the Kalenjin started to call a lot of the shots. In 2002 Mr Moi was succeeded by Mwai Kibaki, who reasserted Kikuyu power. But this was challenged at the polls in late 2007 by an alliance led by Raila Odinga, the head of a particularly aggrieved tribe, the Luo, alongside Mr Ruto, the Kalenjin’s main torchbearer. When the results of that election were contested places like Naivasha and Nakuru erupted in violence that shattered the country during the first part of 2008. At least 1,300 people were killed and 300,000-plus displaced. At Karagita, a slum that borders the lake, a group of men fret about the possibility of ethnic violence similar to what happened after the election in 2007. “The way politicians are speaking now makes me nervous,” says Julius, a tailor, hunched over his ageing sewing machine. He fears that politicians will once again whip up ethnic tensions. Most Kenyan analysts think Messrs Kenyatta and Ruto could easily win again if they stick together. But that is not assured. One problem is the case at the ICC: for the past two years, Mr Ruto, with the backing of the entire Kenyan government, has been seeking to have the charges thrown out. But instead proceedings have moved slowly. On January 12th, he appeared in The Hague. Many of Mr Ruto’s supporters question why he is still in the dock when charges against Mr Kenyatta have been dropped. If Mr Ruto is convicted, his alliance with Mr Kenyatta may crumble. Another problem is that although in 2013 Mr Ruto was able to deliver the crucial Rift Valley votes of the Kalenjin, he is not the only politician representing them. Gideon Moi, a senator and the son of the former president, and Isaac Ruto, a county governor (no relation to William), are two potential challengers. The government also faces two further challenges to its popularity. The first is a slowing economy. Despite the fall in oil prices and a weaker currency, flower exporters say their margins are narrowing, mainly because many of their costs are incurred in strengthening dollars. Inflation is surging. So too are interest rates as the central bank tries to stabilise a currency that has fallen sharply. Another issue is that instead of the usual pre-election splurge, the government is having to tighten its belt to deal with a fiscal deficit that reached almost 9% of GDP in 2015. Whatever happens in the run-up to elections, the Rift Valley will be at the centre of it.THE birds of Diyarbakir are doing very little perching these days. Just when they manage to settle on a satellite dish, a blast of artillery or machine-gun fire sends them dashing skyward. The humans who live here are distraught, too. “We can barely get any sleep,” says a woman walking her son to school just outside the Sur district, the city’s historic centre, where Turkish forces are battling militants aligned with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). In July the PKK, which has waged a decades-long war for Kurdish self-rule, returned to killing Turkish police and soldiers after a two-year ceasefire. The group accused Turkey of tacitly supporting Islamic State (IS). (The jihadists had tried to wipe out the Syrian Kurdish border town of Kobane as Turkish soldiers looked on, and have killed scores of Kurds in bomb attacks across Turkey.) Turkey responded with air raids on PKK camps and a crackdown in the largely Kurdish south-east. Since then, fighting in Diyarbakir and other Kurdish cities has killed at least 230 Turkish security officers, up to 240 civilians and hundreds of PKK fighters, says the International Crisis Group, a think-tank. Last week a PKK car bomb killed a police officer, three children and two other civilians. In Diyarbakir Turkish tanks, along with 2,000 police and soldiers, appear bent on burying in rubble the PKK fighters still holed up in Sur. The region’s governor, Huseyin Aksoy, has heard reports of 50 to 70 militants left in the old city. He insists that the army has trained most of its firepower on the militants’ booby-trapped ditches and barricades: “The heavy weapons are not being used against people.” Locals disagree. Residents fleeing Sur say swathes of their neighbourhood have been destroyed by artillery fire. Historical sites, including a 16th-century mosque and a newly restored Armenian church, have been damaged, says Ahmet Ozmen, deputy head of the local bar association. In November the bar’s president, Tahir Elci, was shot dead during a gun battle moments after making a televised plea for peace. The local economy, which was just emerging from decades of war, is again reeling. Metin Aslan, of the local chamber of commerce, estimates the cost to Diyarbakir alone at more than $300m; the unemployment rate threatens to climb from 16% last year to over 30%. The city’s gleaming new international airport, a reminder of the faith investors once placed in peace talks between the PKK and the government, is nearly empty. The PKK, its ambitions fanned by Western support for Kurdish victories over IS in Syria, is facing a reality check in Turkey. Its fighters may hold out for a few more weeks in Sur, Silopi and Cizre, but it stands little chance of wresting territory from a government that boasts NATO’s second-biggest army and has few qualms about using force. Yet the rebels may not care. The longer the fighting lasts, the more recruits are driven into the group’s arms, says Cengiz Candar, a Turkish analyst: “The way they see it, even if they lose militarily…they stand to gain politically.” The ruling Justice and Development (AK) party of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan also feels it has little to gain from de-escalation. After a decisive win in November’s election, brought about in part by the fighting and a surge in Turkish nationalist sentiment, Mr Erdogan believes he has a mandate to pummel the rebels. “As unfeasible as it is, Turkish voters are focused on eradicating the PKK,” says Akin Unver, an academic. “That’s the dream the government sold to the electorate.” Mr Erdogan, who for years has wanted to change the constitution to grant himself an executive presidency, may even be considering another snap poll after two ballots last year. “He thinks he can get another 5% of the vote,” says Mr Unver. That could be enough to keep the pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democracy Party (HDP) out of parliament and give AK enough votes to change the constitution. Grid of grievances: Enemies, alliances and animosity in the Middle East AK was once the party that broke taboos by acknowledging the Kurds’ past persecution. Now prosecutors have placed over 1,100 Turkish academics under investigation for writing a letter calling for an end to military operations in the south-east. The producer and host of a TV show are under investigation after a caller pleaded for compassion for bystanders. It is civilians who pay the greatest price. Of the roughly 24,000 residents caught in the fighting in Sur, at least 20,000 have fled the district. Yilcan Tas abandoned what was left of her family’s house last month. She, her husband and their six children now live in a pair of cramped rooms next to refugees from Syria. Ms Tas blames PKK militants for packing a ditch next to her house with explosives, putting her family’s lives at risk, and the army for destroying the neighbourhood. “In the end, we are the ones who are wretched,” she said. “We are the ones being ruined.” TWO decades ago a small wave of Arabs arrived in Bosnia, jihadists coming to fight on the side of the country’s Muslim Bosniaks. Today another wave of Arabs is coming—this time for skiing, saunas and condos. In 2010 Sarajevo, the capital, registered about 1,000 tourists from the six Arab oil monarchies in the Gulf combined; in the first ten months of 2015, over 19,000 came from Kuwait and Saudi Arabia alone. Arab property investment has ballooned. For a country mired in bureaucracy and political stalemate, the new investments provide a welcome bright spot. The thermal baths of the Sarajevo suburb of Ilidza have drawn tourists since Roman times, and took off as a resort under the Austro-Hungarian Empire. After the Bosnian war of 1992-95 the resort seemed doomed. But the past three years have seen an extraordinary renaissance. First came Libyan militiamen, benefitting from Bosnian expertise in therapy for wounded veterans. Other Arabs followed. Now estate agents, restaurants, hotels and dentists all advertise in Arabic. In the café of the Hotel Hollywood (where NATO forces snatched two alleged al-Qaeda members in the weeks after the September 11th attacks), Ayyad Salim Al-Ayyad, a Kuwaiti estate agent, says business is “fantastic”. A few tables over, Bosnians working for a Kuwaiti developer are doing the hard sell on their new condominium complex. Another estate agent looks askance when a Bosnian woman asks about buying into a new holiday complex in nearby Hadzici. This is not the place for you, the agent explains; it has been built by a Saudi company for Arabs. The buyer might be better off in a development in Polinje, in the hills above Sarajevo, constructed by the Saudi Al-Shiddi group but marketed to wealthy Bosnians and Arabs alike. Information on the Polinje development is available at the Sarajevo City mall—also built by the Al-Shiddi group, in 2014. In summer the mall is packed with Arab families, some of whom may be staying in the company’s alcohol-free Hotel Bristol. This investment will be dwarfed, however, by a project in nearby Trnovo where construction is set to start in April. Buroj, a developer from Dubai, plans to build at least 3,000 villas, flats, a hospital and a sports stadium. The total investment could come to €2.5bn ($2.7bn). Arab tourists “feel at home here”, says one travel agent. In mainly Muslim Sarajevo, much of the architecture and heritage is Ottoman, and halal meat is easy to find. There are few other countries where hiking and skiing are within striking distance of a mosque. The property market, meanwhile, is targeted at middle-class buyers who would like a bolt-hole far from the war and chaos enveloping the Middle East, but who cannot afford London or Geneva. In Bosnia a new three-bedroom villa can be yours for €200,000. Because Bosnian law requires foreigners to buy property through a local company, data are hard to come by, but property agents’ testimonies confirm that the market is thriving. Bosnians are both delighted and worried by all this. The investment is welcome, but locals are wary of Arab visitors bringing with them stricter interpretations of Islam, as Arab religious charities have done over the past two decades. Al-Jazeera Balkans, Qatar’s local-language television station, has been broadcasting from Sarajevo since 2011, and competes with Russian, Western and Turkish news organisations. A Qatari government “friendship fund” for Bosnian small businesses is preparing to open soon. Bosnians do not want to be caught in the middle of an international battle for hearts and minds. Even FIPA, the Bosnian foreign investment agency, is curiously reticent about Arab construction projects. Gulf countries do not rank among the top 12 investing in Bosnia, the agency protests. (In part, this may be due to Gulf investments being made through third-country holding companies.) They have “no special relationship” with the country, and invest only “because they can make a profit, and not because they love Bosnia”. One wonders whether investors would be expected to evince a disinterested love for Bosnia, if they were European.A MEGA-MOSQUE is growing on George W. Bush Street in Tirana, the Albanian capital, near the country’s parliament. When finished, it will be the largest mosque in the Balkans—one in a long string of such projects bankrolled by Turkey. By its own estimate, Turkey’s directorate of religious affairs, known as the Diyanet, has helped build over 100 mosques and schools in 25 countries. In Bosnia, Kosovo, the Philippines, and Somalia, it has restored Islamic sites damaged by war and natural disaster. In Gaza it is rebuilding mosques destroyed by Israeli military operations in 2014. Current projects alone are expected to cost $200m. All of the money comes from private donations, insists Mazhar Bilgin, a senior Diyanet official. Critics suspect Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, of deploying mihrabs and minarets to revive his country’s imperial heritage in former Ottoman lands. Secular nationalists in Albania, which was strictly atheist under communism, bristle at seeing their parliament dwarfed by a mosque, and urban planners complain about the project’s bland, “McOttoman” design. But most Albanians are sympathetic. While post-communist governments allowed Catholic and Orthodox Christians to build cathedrals in Tirana, Muslims were left out in the cold. Worshippers regularly found themselves praying outdoors, unable to squeeze into the city’s tiny 19th-century mosque. It is not clear why Albania’s government waited until 2013 to approve a new one. Turkey’s role in Albanian Islam goes beyond building mosques. Six of the country’s seven Islamic seminaries are managed by foundations linked to the Gulen community. Turkey’s development agency, TIKA, has completed 248 projects in Albania. Besides the fiscal aid, many Albanians welcome Turkish influence as a counterweight to the spread of Islamic militancy. According to Tirana’s mufti, Ylli Gurra, up to 150 Albanian nationals have joined Islamic State (IS) jihadists in Syria. He blames the zealous salafist foundations from the Gulf monarchies that poured into the region in the 1990s. (Many were expelled after the September 11th attacks.) Mr Gurra says most Albanian Muslims reject such radicalism: “They have more affinity for Turkish Islam.” In fact, Muslims in Albania are far less devout and more pro-Western than their Turkish co-religionists. Meanwhile, Turkey’s religious outreach is hobbled by an internecine conflict at home. Mr Erdogan’s ruling Justice and Development (AK) party once worked hand in glove with the Gulen movement. All that changed two years ago, when the AK launched a vendetta against the movement, accusing it of orchestrating a corruption scandal that had tarred senior government figures. Scores of Gulenist bureaucrats remain behind bars. During a 2015 visit to Albania for the groundbreaking ceremony of the new mosque, Mr Erdogan asked his hosts to shut down schools run by the Gulenists. Albanian officials turned down the request. Yet in Albania and elsewhere, Muslim communities that benefit from Turkish largesse still face pressure. “Erdogan is forcing them to take sides,” says Kerem Oktem, a Turkish studies professor at the University of Graz. The Diyanet, meanwhile, has extended its mosque programme to countries whose connection to Ottoman history is tenuous. In 2014 Mr Erdogan suggested that Cuba had been settled by Muslims long before it was spotted by Christopher Columbus, and unveiled a plan to build a new mosque there. Another mosque is under construction in Haiti. The building spree has become a vehicle for broadcasting Turkey’s religious credentials to Muslim audiences domestic and foreign. The ultimate objective is “claiming new territory,” says Mr Oktem. “It’s about the idea that Turkey should be the leader of the whole Muslim world.”Talk to the hands ITALY, a cabinet minister mused recently, was seen in the past as a country that did not make trouble. But that was in the past. Lately the left-right coalition of the prime minister, Matteo Renzi has provoked a succession of acrimonious disputes with the European Commission and Germany. This week, in the latest sign of Mr Renzi’s determination to be the bad boy of Brussels, he sacked Italy’s permanent EU representative, Stefano Sannino, a former Commission official who was seen as too accommodating. His replacement is the junior trade minister, Carlo Calenda, a member of Mr Renzi’s Democratic Party. The conflict burst into the open on January 15th, when Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the commission, accused Mr Renzi of attacking his institution at every turn. Mr Renzi replied that the days when Italy let itself be “remote-controlled” from Brussels were over. Four days later Manfred Weber, the German who leads the centre-right group in the European Parliament, said Italy’s prime minister was jeopardising the EU’s credibility. Mr Weber was referring to the sharpest of all the current disputes: Italy is blocking refugee aid funds the EU had promised Turkey as part of a deal to crack down on smuggling of migrants into Europe. Germans are especially bitter because Italy has been accused of failing to process migrants who arrive on its soil, instead hurrying them on to other EU states. Ministers in Rome say they doubt that paying the Turks to hold back Syrian refugees will work. But Mr Weber claimed Italy’s real motive is to secure concessions on other issues. Talks with the commission over the sale of Italian banks’ daunting inventory of non-performing loans are also bogged down. The urgency of the issue was underlined by a run on the shares of Monte dei Paschi di Siena, Italy’s third-biggest lender. Rome wants to guarantee minimum prices for the loans. But the commission has yet to rule on whether that would constitute state aid. Here again, an extra ingredient sours the mix: many Italian officials believe the commission applies EU rules less strictly to Germany. The bad loans reflect more than a decade of stagnation and Italy’s slower-than-expected recovery from the euro crisis. In December, parliament in Rome approved an expansionary budget aimed at speeding the recovery. But it would also slow Italy’s reduction of its budget deficit and the repayment of its public debt, which in the euro zone is second only to Greece’s as a proportion of GDP. Mr Renzi’s ministers argue they are entitled to flexibility as a reward for structural reform, notably of the labour market. But Brussels may yet ask for adjustments. The budget’s centrepiece, a €3.6 billion ($3.9 billion) cut to taxes on first homes, looks more likely to woo middle-class voters than boost GDP. The view in Berlin is that Mr Renzi’s belligerence is intended to burnish his image at home. The Italian prime minister’s personal ratings have fallen sharply since mid-2015 and in June he faces mayoral elections in several important cities. After a string of corruption scandals in Rome, there is a chance the capital could fall to the populist Five Star Movement (M5S). This is where the issues at stake in Italy’s rows with the EU become fuzzier. Seen from the Italian government’s standpoint, Mr Renzi’s electoral interests and those of the EU are identical. The alternatives to his left-leaning coalition are either the intermittently euro-sceptic M5S, or a conservative government—led this time not by Silvio Berlusconi’s centre-right Forza Italia party, but by the virulently euro-sceptic Northern League and its populist leader, Matteo Salvini. Polls show barely half the population favours the single currency any longer. In an article this week in the Guardian, a British newspaper, Mr Renzi argued that EU austerity fuels the rise of his populist rivals. According to this view, self-interest would counsel the authorities in Brussels and Berlin to do all in their power to help Mr Renzi. That was also the view of Mr Renzi’s predecessor, Mario Monti. But whereas the urbane Mr Monti, a former EU commissioner, opted mostly for quiet persuasion (sweet-talking the German chancellor, Angela Merkel), the swaggering Mr Renzi likes nothing better than a scrap.IN BERLIN they speak of “Plan B”; in Brussels the fear is of the U-turn. Whatever the term, the prediction is the same: that Angela Merkel is on the brink of reversing the generous policy towards asylum-seekers that saw more than a million of them reach Germany last year. For now, Mrs Merkel sticks to her well-worn line: Wir schaffen das (“We will handle this”). Over the past six months she has slowly assembled a hard-headed, coherent migration strategy. But each of its elements is starting to give way. First, numbers. The winter weather has dented the refugee flows to Greece from Turkey, but not as quickly as hoped. Over 1,600 a day have reached Greece this month, a higher rate than last July when the crisis was already in full swing. Border controls erected along the migratory route since then complicate the journey, but determined migrants still make it to Germany. Wrong-footed by the explosion in arrivals last autumn Mrs Merkel’s government tightened asylum rules, but few were put off. A growing number of Moroccans and Algerians, hailing from poor but peaceful countries, are coming to Germany, exploiting the trail blazed by Syrians and Afghans. Meanwhile the howls from regional officials who must house and feed the arrivals grow ever louder: last week a mayor bussed 31 Syrians to the federal chancellery in Berlin, saying his small town could no longer cope. To cut the numbers reaching Europe, Mrs Merkel has turned to realpolitik. German officials aim to strike deals with countries in the Maghreb and Asia to make it easier to return failed asylum-seekers, and are prepared to use development aid as a weapon. Their main hopes, though, lie in an “action plan” the EU cooked up with Turkey in October, which promised money and other prizes in exchange for efforts to stem the migrant flows. Mrs Merkel believes that Turkey can help by disrupting people-smuggling networks and stepping up coastal patrols. But, despite the incentives, there is little sign of Turkish action so far. Without it, the refugee numbers will start to climb again once spring arrives. To deal with the influx Mrs Merkel has backed an EU plan to register asylum-seekers arriving in Italy and Greece and to relocate them around the club, with national quotas calculated in Brussels. A million asylum-seekers should be no great burden for a union of 500m people. But the relocation scheme has flopped too: many countries want nothing to do with refugees, and refugees have no interest in most countries. So the Germans are changing tack, seeking allies willing to help them resettle hundreds of thousands of Syrians directly from Turkey. France is among the countries prepared to take in the same number of resettled refugees it agreed to take under the relocation scheme. But this will work only if the illegal flows fall dramatically, which means the Turkey deal must kick into gear. In the meantime, Germany is beginning the difficult work of integrating hundreds of thousands of newcomers. The new-year horrors of Cologne, when hundreds of women were sexually assaulted by marauding groups of men, many of them Muslim asylum-seekers, focused minds on cultural differences. But bringing refugees into the workforce, the main engine of integration, represents at least as big a challenge. The assumption that Germany’s tight labour market was tailor-made for job-hungry migrants has given way to the grim realisation that most are an ill fit for an economy mainly seeking highly skilled workers. The head of one business group reckons almost 80% of refugees have next to no skills at all. Mrs Merkel is racing against time. Her Christian Democratic Union and its coalition partners are increasingly restive. Cabinet ministers have openly challenged the chancellor’s position. The anti-immigration Alternative for Germany party is notching up double-digit polling results for the first time. Refugees languish in supposedly temporary accommodation months after arriving in Germany. Mrs Merkel continues to insist that there can be no cap on the number of refugees Germany accepts, and the constitution agrees with her. But increasingly, reality does not. Very well, alone What if nothing works? Despite the pressure Mrs Merkel is unlikely to shut Germany’s borders, because she wants to preserve the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone. But other plans are being drawn up inside the chancellery, including a sealing of the Greece-Macedonia border across which most refugees travel to reach Germany. Once refugees see that Greece has become a dead end, says one German official, they will think twice about setting sail from Turkey. Other routes will no doubt emerge, perhaps across the Black Sea. But the plan might at least buy time. Such schemes show how far Germany has travelled since its “welcome culture” lifted European liberals’ hearts last summer. Back then Mrs Merkel’s model presented an inspiring alternative to the small-minded xenophobia of leaders like Hungary’s Viktor Orban. Now, after the chaos and trauma of the past six months, Mr Orban feels vindicated and the chancellor looks increasingly isolated. Germany has tried to lead in Europe, but others will not follow. To Mrs Merkel’s immense frustration, other EU countries agree to policies like relocation and then ignore them. While German officials try to knit together the geopolitics of the crisis, from Iraq to Turkey and Russia, most other countries would prefer it simply to go away. As for the European Commission, which sometimes looks like the chancellor’s last ally, it has gamely advanced common policies but is too weak to enforce them. “The European dream is vanishing,” sighs one of its senior officials. Mrs Merkel, to her credit, is desperate to keep it alive. But time is running out. Germany has perhaps two months to hope that the jigsaw pieces fall into place before the refugee flows pick up again, and each part of the job gets harder every day. Can Germany still handle this? We will continue to make the case, says a government official. “But nobody believes it.”
