SPIES need secrecy and the public wants privacy. So finding the right legal framework in which the intelligence and security agencies can do their work, including—when necessary—intruding into people’s private lives, is inherently tricky. Britain’s laws on bugging and snooping are out of date. Written in a pre-internet era, they give sweeping powers to the home secretary to authorise the interception and collection of electronic information, and the planting of bugs (in spookspeak, “equipment interference”). Without a stronger legal basis, these powers could fall foul of European judges on human-rights and data-protection grounds. Moreover, until the revelations by Edward Snowden, a fugitive American intelligence contractor now living in Moscow, most people had no idea of the reach of Britain’s digital spy agency, the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), and how close its ties are with America’s National Security Agency. The Snowden revelations infuriated digital-privacy advocates and also alarmed the technology industry, which feels squeezed between government demands and its customers’ expectations. The draft bill on investigatory powers going through Parliament attempts to sort out this mess. It follows the failure two years ago of a previous bill, dubbed the “snoopers’ charter”, and the hurried passage of a stopgap bill that expires this summer. The bill is under scrutiny by a joint committee of peers and MPs, which will report on February 11th. Arguments rage over both form and content. Critics say the consultation is too hurried for one of the most important pieces of legislation in recent years. They object to the vagueness of some of the language (including new bits of jargon such as “internet connection records”, which could mean the complete history of somebody’s activity on the internet). The definition of these terms, and of such words as “urgent”, “necessary” and “proportionate”, will be contained in codes of practice, yet to be published. For some, the fact that GCHQ has long had the capabilities it now avows is no reason to accept them. The bulk collection of information, they say, breaches privacy. Overly zealous spooks might link databases, and trawl them looking for patterns, drawing conclusions purely on the basis of inference, with no redress for those concerned. The data could be passed to (or pinched by) other countries, notably America, which could then decide, say, to put innocent people on no-fly lists. British Muslims already complain of costly, humiliating and unexplained last-minute blocks on trips to America, apparently based on their behaviour on the internet. Warehouses of sensitive data are magnets for criminals and other malefactors. Critics of the bill also worry about a conflict of laws, under which Britain might oblige them to hand over data about their clients even when another country expressly prohibits this. Big technology companies such as Google, Facebook and Apple have written to the parliamentary committee to highlight this danger, though they declined to send their bosses to give evidence in person. Some of this is posturing. The bill does not mandate the creation of a central database of everybody’s internet history. Nor, contrary to some claims, will it force technology companies to install back doors in their encryption software to meet requests from GCHQ. Most supposedly encrypted products are already transparent to their providers: it is only by analysing its users’ e-mails and browsing activity, for example, that Google is able to sell advertisements tailored to their tastes. The law authorises GCHQ to ask for help. But when it comes across genuinely uncrackable encryption (“end-to-end”, in industry jargon), it has other options, such as planting software on the device concerned. The tech companies, say cynics, are pretending to show how fiercely they resist government requests, while remaining happy to co-operate in private. The purported conflict of laws is somewhat overblown as well. GCHQ will not force a company to break other countries’ laws (risking an embarrassing public spat). The bigger worry for the government is how to protect the agency’s intelligence capabilities from judges in Luxembourg and Strasbourg, whose view of espionage is rooted not in the British tradition of royal prerogative and empire, but in continental memories of totalitarianism. For this reason the bill introduces a new idea. The home secretary’s warrants will be reviewed by judges, who will check them for lawfulness and reasonableness. The creation of these commissioners was recommended in a report last year by David Anderson, a lawyer who is the independent scrutineer of Britain’s anti-terrorist legislation. The spooks have no objection. Their activities are already scrutinised retrospectively by commissioners. They would also like their warrants to have more legal force in foreign eyes. The committee is now debating the commissioners’ hiring, firing and remit. It is also mulling evidence from lawyers and media-freedom campaigners. Communications between lawyers and their clients enjoy almost bulletproof legal protection: spies too should be told explicitly to steer clear of them. Journalists fret that sources (especially whistle-blowers) may have insufficient protection. Another issue is a provision in the bill requiring “communication service providers” (ie, internet and telecoms firms) to store customers’ internet records. It is unclear what this will mean in practice, how intrusive it will be, what it will cost and whether, since people get on the internet in many different ways, it can even work. The biggest divide is not over the technicalities of intelligence oversight, but in attitudes to what spies do. Some believe the agencies to be overmighty, beguiling politicians with tales of derring-do and lobbying zealously for their cause in the media. Such worries are not groundless. Parliament’s intelligence and security committee was surprised and annoyed by a drooling series of articles that resulted after GCHQ gave the Times unprecedented access to its headquarters in Cheltenham. Yet nobody has evidence that GCHQ acts unlawfully or menacingly under the existing system. Most Britons—and most politicians—think the spooks do a good job and, beset by fears of terrorism, crime, child abuse and foreign spies, want a legal structure that lets them keep at it. Donald Trump has topped another ranking, this time in Britain. An e-petition started by a woman from Aberdeen, where Mr Trump owns a golf club, suggested banning the Republican candidate from Britain for hate speech. It amassed a record 576,000 signatures, far more than the 100,000 benchmark for debate in Parliament. The debate, held on January 18th, concluded that his views are not welcome. This was noted in America so may have embarrassed the government. Yet e-petitions are meant to foster political engagement. The next two most popular concern migration, one against, one for. A petition not to ban Mr Trump got only 44,000 signatures; a third, for him to address Parliament, just 100.The young and the old BEWARE politicians who say they plan to simplify something. The details will often be more complex. That is especially true of the new pensions regime starting in April. The flagship proposal is a “flat rate” pension, fixed initially at £155.65 ($220.35) a week. It will replace the confusing mix of a basic pension of £119.30, an earnings-related supplement and means-tested benefits. However, the term flat rate is a misnomer. Some retired people will get more than £155.65 because they will carry over earnings-related benefits from the old system. But others will get less. Qualifying for the full rate requires a history of 35 years of national insurance contributions (NICS), with a minimum of ten years to get anything. There will be exceptions. Those who spend time caring for children or elderly relatives can count such years for qualification, although proving what they have done may be tricky. There will be means-tested benefits to ensure that those without any other income get at least £155 a week. But the means tests apply to couples, not individuals, so married people without the right NICS record may get less than the flat rate. Many will find the new “simple” system as confusing as the old. In the first 20 years or so of the scheme, most retiring workers will be better off. But by 2040, the majority (those aged 40 or less now) will be worse off. That is because, under the old system, the earnings-related bit of their pension would have been higher than the flat-rate payment. This is another example of the older generation benefiting at the expense of the young. Nor is this the only complication. Workers in salary-linked pension schemes have “contracted out” of the earnings-related element of the state pension, so they paid lower NICS. But the new pension will stop contracting out, so employees’ NICS will rise. That will translate into a pay cut in April. Worse, employers’ NICS will go up too, and private-sector employers may try to recoup the cost by cutting pension benefits or raising employee contributions. For workers, that means a choice between cutting future or current pay. The government is also under attack over a change to equalise the state pension age. From 1940, the state pension age was set at 65 for men and 60 for women; since husbands tended to be older than wives, the idea was that couples would retire together. But the European Court of Human Rights deemed this gap discriminatory, so the government legislated to equalise the pension age at 65, with the change being phased in between 2010 and 2020. The cost of providing pensions has been rising as people have been living longer. So in 2011, the government decreed that the state pension age for both men and women should rise to 66 by 2020. For women born between 1953 and 1958, this means a big increase in retirement age, with very little warning. A group called Women Against State Pension Inequality has launched an e-petition to protest, especially against the failure to give individuals sufficient notice. Older women are less likely to be working than men and less likely to have private pensions. After getting more than 100,000 signatures, the petition will be debated in Parliament (see article), but change is unlikely. This government has treated pensioners better than other benefit recipients, notably by maintaining the “triple lock” under which pensions rise by the bigger of wage rises, price inflation or 2.5%. But in the world of pensions, any change, however simple, will make some unhappy.UNEMPLOYMENT in Britain is just 5.1%, the lowest since 2006. Economists expect that when joblessness falls, wages will rise as employers must compete more fiercely for staff. After a long slump brought on by the recession, by mid-2015 wages were growing nicely (see chart). But as unemployment has continued to decline, the economists have been left scratching their heads. In November three-monthly average growth in pay was just 1.9% year on year, far below levels in the years leading up to the 2008-09 global crisis. The shaky world economy is partly to blame. The oil-price slump is biting: wages in the oil-and-gas industry, which are about 50% above the average, have fallen by 12% in the past year. Cheaper oil also prompted a flirtation with price deflation in the middle of 2015, making workers less inclined to demand pay rises. In the year to December 2015 the pound appreciated on a trade-weighted basis by 7% as nervous investors hoarded British assets (it has since been falling back). As exporters’ competitiveness suffered, they tried to cut costs, including pay. The manufacturing sector, which is heavily export-oriented, has seen especially low earnings growth in recent months. A more pessimistic view is that wages were bound to come down to earth. In the latest figures a strong rise in August fell out of the rolling three-month average. Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, pointed out on January 19th that long-term unemployment is still 50% higher than in 2007 (though it is falling). In addition, Mr Carney noted that Britons have in recent months reduced the number of hours they work, which is also suggestive of weak demand for labour. Yet talk of labour-market “slack” is hard to reconcile with businesses’ complaints (which are growing, according to surveys by the Bank of England) about finding labour—especially the skilled sort. Firms may be sating their desire for skills without paying full whack, argues Doug Monro of Adzuna, a job-search website. Mr Monro reckons that, instead of hiring people with experience, more businesses are choosing to hire youngsters, whose wages crashed in the crisis, and train them up. Penguin Random House, a publisher, has announced that it will no longer require job applicants to have a degree. In recent months the workforce has thus become younger, pushing down average wages. However, with youth unemployment now lower than in mid-2008, firms may struggle to continue this practice for much longer. On top of this, flows of people moving from one job to another, which fell sharply during the recession as workers clung on to whatever position they could find, have picked up and are now back at pre-recession levels, says Samuel Tombs of Pantheon Macroeconomics, a consultancy. A year ago there were slightly more vacancies than jobseekers, according to data from Adzuna; now there are twice as many openings. Those workers happy to flit between jobs ought to be able to drive a harder bargain on pay. Add in the new “national living wage”, which is coming into force in April and is worth £7.20 ($10.20) an hour for workers who are 25 or older, and wage growth may pick up again in the coming months. The biggest threat to workers realising these gains, though, is home-grown. Thanks to worries over the forthcoming referendum on membership of the European Union, business investment is slowing, say economists at Barclays bank. If investment shrinks, productivity will suffer. Britons could then once again face measly pay growth, just as the economy was picking up speed.WHEN Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour Party’s hard-left leader, was asked about his policy on renewal of Britain’s Trident missiles submarines by an interviewer on January 17th, he brought down ridicule. It is unlikely to trouble him. Mr Corbyn, a veteran campaigner for unilateral nuclear disarmament, is determined to end Labour’s commitment to maintaining the nuclear deterrent. Most of the new party members who elected him as leader agree. His problem is that a large part of his shadow cabinet, possibly most Labour MPs and two of the most powerful trade unions on which Labour depends for its funding, strenuously do not. Yet Mr Corbyn seems likely to get his way. The answer he gave to the BBC’s Andrew Marr was aimed at trying to win over the unions, who are mainly concerned about the impact on their members’ jobs if the £31 billion ($44 billion) programme to build replacements for the existing four Vanguard-class submarines is scrapped. Mr Corbyn said his priority was to protect jobs; to that end, the submarines might still be built, but they could go on patrol without nuclear missiles aboard. This, he said, was one of the proposals being looked at in a review of defence policy conducted by his impeccably unilateralist new shadow defence secretary, Emily Thornberry. Ms Thornberry, who is likely to produce an interim report by June, says she is interested in what she calls “the Japanese option”, by which she appears to mean that Britain would keep its nuclear expertise, but develop a nuclear weapon only if and when circumstances made it necessary. This may sufficiently placate the unions to secure for Mr Corbyn the votes he needs to overturn existing Labour policy at the party conference in September. But it will do nothing to win over MPs and shadow cabinet members who believe that keeping Trident is essential to Britain’s national security. The government is planning a Commons vote on Trident renewal this year, possibly within weeks. Without an agreed policy on the nuclear deterrent, it seems likely that Mr Corbyn will have to give his MPs a free vote. But with Ms Thornberry at the dispatch box he will at least avoid the embarrassment of the vote on Syrian air strikes in December, when Labour’s front bench was conspicuously split. What is curious is what Mr Corbyn has not suggested: scrapping the Vanguard replacements and building in their place more Astute-class nuclear-powered attack submarines and additional frigates and destroyers that the navy actually needs. This would not win over those fundamentally opposed to unilateral nuclear disarmament; but nor would it sound as ludicrous as sending expensive ballistic-missile submarines to sea without their ballistic missiles.MARLON BRANDO rode one, as did James Dean. Steve McQueen famously jumped across the wire on a Triumph in the prisoner-of-war epic “The Great Escape”. Together, they helped to make the British-built motorbike the coolest on the road in the 1960s, by which time it was a bestseller in its range (over 500cc) in America as well as in Britain. But success bred complacency, and by the mid-1970s the company, together with most of the rest of Britain’s motorcycle industry, was on its knees, unable to compete with more reliable, technically more advanced and often cheaper Japanese imports. After several disastrous mergers and bail-outs, Triumph was moribund, no longer cool but more of a byword for oil leaks and trade-union militancy. This, unfortunately, is the story of much of British manufacturing. Entire sectors failed to keep up with the competition, and collapsed in the 1970s and 1980s. The steel industry has staggered on, a shadow of its former self, but it seems set on a relentlessly downward trajectory: this week saw over a thousand new job losses. Despite lots of investment, steel has never managed adequately to reinvent itself. Triumph, however, has. Indeed, it announced recently that it sold a record 55,000 bikes in 2015. It is thus a rare example of a successful industrial salvage operation. And there are useful lessons in its story for the rest of Britain’s “makers”, as George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer, likes to call them. Triumph was saved from the scrap-heap in 1983 by a property developer, John Bloor. He bought the rights to the marque for £150,000 ($240,000). Instead of trying to plough on with the old ways, he took several years out to study the Japanese production lines that had humbled the British. “We learned a lot,” says Nick Bloor, the developer’s son, who is now boss of Triumph. When the first new model was launched in 1990, it combined the styling that made Triumph’s name with better engineering and reliability, partly the result of using Japanese machinery. A new factory was built at Hinckley, in Leicestershire, and a couple more in Thailand, where most components are made as well as some complete models. The company has stuck to its core market of making bigger and touring bikes, and has accordingly carved out a global niche. America is, once again, its biggest customer, helped by the enthusiasm of a new generation of Hollywood stars such as Tom Cruise. About 90% of the 114,000 bikes sold in Britain each year are still imported, but Triumph has built up a 16% share of the more valuable big-bike market. Steve Kenward, head of the Motorcycle Industry Association, argues that Triumph has used its name cleverly. Classic photos of Brando and McQueen adorn the walls of its Hinckley factory. For a younger generation, the mud-spattered bike that David Beckham used to slither through the Brazilian jungle in 2014 stands in reception. Similarly, “styling cues” on the bikes, such as the distinctive shape of their exhaust pipes, are a reminder of Triumph’s heritage. Yet the company has also responded to new trends and markets, says Mr Kenward, epitomised by the new “adventure-tourism” of Mr Beckham. Others are trying a similar trick. Ariel, founded by the man who invented the modern spoked wheel in 1874, was another best-selling motorcycle firm in the 1950s before virtually disappearing. Simon Saunders bought the name in 1999, and today produces about 70 bikes a year, mainly to order, allying the lustre of the brand to high-performance engines. His market is “niche of niche”, he jokes. But, like Triumph, at least he’s still in business.ONE primary school has bought a double-decker bus on eBay, an online marketplace, to use as a classroom. Others have built playgrounds on their roofs to increase space for school buildings. Many have made more mundane adaptations, including restricting use of communal areas, staggering play times or using Portakabins as temporary classrooms. All face a common problem: growing numbers of pupils. Despite a 10% increase in primary-school pupils since 2010, the number of classes has risen by only 7%. Consequently British primary-school classes, already the sixth-biggest in the OECD club of mostly rich countries, have grown even larger. The average class size is now 27.4, up from 26.7 in 2010. And, since the government relaxed restrictions in 2012, more pupils are now being taught in “super-size” classes of more than 30. This, argues Lucy Powell, Labour’s shadow education secretary, shows that “the current system of planning new places is essentially broken”. Many teachers share her disquiet. Teaching large classes can be difficult and frustrating, says Sally Bates, head of Wadsworth Fields primary in Nottingham. Teachers and schools can adapt, she adds, but young children need individual attention to learn how to get on with others, to listen and to be polite. Yet the evidence on the effect of class size on academic performance is not so clear. A 2003 study carried out by the Institute of Education at the University of London suggested that smaller classes boost the literacy and numeracy of pupils, especially those from poor backgrounds, in the early years of education, but found no evidence of any correlation between academic performance and class size beyond the age of seven. “Slightly older children are used to the nature of school, of conforming to what’s expected of them and they’re still enthusiastic…they’re not yet know-it-all teenagers,” says Ms Bates. Low pupil-teacher ratios are no guarantee of success in international comparisons: Japan, one of the OECD’s best performers, has far more pupils per teacher than Spain, one of the stragglers (see chart). Crowded classrooms may not be a good idea. Stressed teachers are a poor advertisement for a profession already struggling to attract recruits. Parents prefer children to be taught in small groups. And head teachers need more help in planning for varying numbers. But the limited benefits from reducing class size come at a cost; there are many cheaper and more effective ways to improve educational performance.Troubled or troublesome? SITTING in her cramped council house on the edge of Manchester, Nicola, a 45-year-old mother, relates how in 2011 social services took her three children into care because of their chaotic home life and failure to attend school. She accepts that she could not cope and was grateful for the help she received from the state. Five years on, the children are at home with their parents, back in school and unlikely to be taken away again, she claims. Before then, it felt like the social services “were waiting for us to fail”, says Nicola. “Now it’s as though they are trying to help us cope.” The change is largely due to a controversial project called the troubled families programme (TFP), set up in 2012 to try to deal with difficult and vulnerable families whose lives can lead to social problems that cost the state a lot of money. Families within the programme have an average of nine serious troubles, including domestic violence and debt. TFP advocates a method called “family intervention”, whereby one key worker helps to give intensive support to such families, and to co-ordinate their interaction with different government agencies. In 2013 the government launched the second phase of the programme, expanding the number of families from 120,000 to 400,000. Greater Manchester is at the forefront of the changes, expanding its own work to deal with more families who need early help. “For too long we’ve been mopping up the floods, and not turning off the taps,” says one senior official. The Labour government began similar work on a smaller scale before 2010. But after riots in several cities in 2011, the new Tory prime minister, David Cameron, set up the TFP, claiming that “a relatively small number of families are the source of a large proportion of the problems in society”. He called them “people with a twisted moral code” and promised that the programme would deal with the 120,000 families that he said cost the state £9 billion ($14 billion) a year. The tough love rhetoric contrasted starkly with the more supportive approach adopted by key workers. Critics have rounded on the programme, saying that troubled families are a symptom of social problems not their cause. They accuse Mr Cameron of demonising the vulnerable poor. “Troubled does not mean troublesome,” says Stephen Crossley of Durham University. “Nowhere did Mr Cameron mention structural issues such as poverty, inequality or injustice that are the main causes of these families’ problems.” Indeed, a government report found that, belying the usual “neighbours from hell” image, among the families being worked with in a six-month period, 85% had no adults with a criminal offence, 97% had children with one or no offences and 84% had children who were not permanently excluded from school. Whitehall allows localities flexibility in delivering the programme. There are no specific professionals being financed. “It’s not really a programme,” says Harriet Churchill of Sheffield University. “It’s more a framework for funding and encouraging local authorities in how they monitor and invest in services.” Turning them around Payment is “by result”—an extra fee is paid for every family deemed to have been “turned around” according to the TFP referral criteria. “This risks encouraging authorities to choose families that can be helped most easily,” says Janet Boddy of Sussex University. Last year, Mr Cameron claimed that almost all the initial 120,000 families had been turned around. But, says Professor Boddy, a family might show change in one of the criteria (school attendance at 85% or better, adults back in work for six months), meaning support is stopped even if family members are still struggling with other complex problems. In the second phase, the government is also broadening the criteria for eligibility (and for the extra payment by result) to cover more cases of physical- and mental-health problems, neglected children and domestic abuse. It has also adapted the measure of success to include a “significant and sustained change” in the lives of family members. Critics point to a lack of independent data to show if the project is succeeding. Results of a recent evaluation are expected this year. Jacob Botham of the TFP in Greater Manchester claims the national programme is helping to make complex families productive again as well as preventing others getting into trouble. It is also, he says, helping to propel a broader transformation of the whole system. This has involved establishing several “early help” hubs to bring different agencies—including mental-health, police, probation and family intervention workers—together, sometimes in one room, to facilitate engagement with families, prevent duplication and save money. Their statistics show some success, with 85% of families involved in anti-social behaviour seeing improvement, an 83% reduction in total repeat calls to the police and 66% of families with domestic violence seeing it resolved. The programme has moved on, claims Mr Botham, while critics have got bogged down in the details of the first phase. A big problem will be trying to do all this even though local-authority spending per person on social care has been cut by 17% in real terms in 2010-15, including mental-health services for children and adults, substance abuse clinics and children’s centres to help with parenting. As some families are helped out of their problems, more are taking their place, says Professor Boddy, thanks partly to other welfare cuts. “It is clear that a family-centred approach is very valuable,” she says. “But one of the key things it does is help families to access other forms of assistance. Where can they go when those areas are cut?”TEJU HASSAN has come far, and so have most of his flock. Born near Lagos 50 years ago, he converted to Christianity as a young man and now ministers in the far north of Ireland to a multinational congregation. Like many a “reverse missionary” from the devout developing world to the secular north, he sees his task as repaying the lands that exported Christianity. “The Gospel was brought to Africa by English and Irish priests. White people also did bitter things, but we are still grateful for the faith and we are bringing it back.” His 100 followers are an outpost of Christendom’s fastest-growing segment: people who seek an ecstatic experience described as “baptism in the Holy Spirit” and insist that biblical feats, from healing to exorcism to speaking in tongues, should be part of present-day worship. They are sometimes described as “charismatic” or “renewalist”. Within this category are Pentecostal churches that stem from a revival begun in America over a century ago; subgroups within established churches, which after 1960 began worshipping in a similar way; and newer churches that use Pentecostal style and language, with a fresh stress on prosperity. This can mean offering business tips, involving the faithful in ventures or telling them that God will enrich them if they donate money. Todd Johnson of America’s Centre for the Study of Global Christianity reckons that as of 2010, these charismatic worshippers amounted to a quarter of the world’s 2.3 billion Christians; by 2025 he expects their number to reach 800m (see chart). It is often noted by religion-watchers that Christianity globally is becoming more southern and exuberant. But the success of Pentecostalism and its imitators also highlights a more subtle point: the need for a kind of religion that is flexible enough to suit people in transit, whether between the southern hemisphere and the northern, between the countryside and the city, or between poverty and wealth. Speaking in tongues For uprooted peasants, too, coping with the anonymity of a megacity slum, charismatic churches provide a paradoxical blend of social support, discipline and emotional release. As Don Miller of the University of Southern California puts it: “Pentecostal worship is joyous, ecstatic and offers a sense of self-transcendence that fills a void in the lives of migrants—and exorcising demons, literally or metaphorically, can be a way of gaining control over individual or family problems.” Migrants travelling between countries need the same balance of solidarity and catharsis, and are well served by the loose structure of charismatic churches, which can spring up quickly wherever the need arises. Pastor Teju’s is a typical tale. His chance to migrate came when the multinational firm he worked for as an accountant sent him from Lagos to England for training. Hearing that Ireland’s economy was booming (in 2000), he got a job there. As his career progressed, so did his spare-time role as a pastor with another successful multinational concern, the Redeemed Christian Church of God (RCCG), a Nigeria-based organisation that ministers to the country’s diaspora and all other comers. His flock includes people from across Africa, and a few Irish looking for an alternative to Catholicism. His church claims to have thousands of communities worldwide. Though a prolonged slump means the pool of recruits in Ireland’s northwestern tip may be drying up, globally it seems on track. In Nigeria its Redemption Camp attracts millions to its annual meetings. A 10,000-seat stadium in Texas acts as a hub in America and last year David Cameron paid a pre-election visit to its London gathering, where the faithful cheered the prime minister as he lauded the family, the Bible and self-improvement. “Our people are very practical,” says Pastor Teju. So too is his brand of religion. Like migrants in search of safety and prosperity, charismatic Christianity has proved adaptable, almost chameleonic. To people whose lives are in flux, it offers a mix of ecstasy, discipline and professional and personal support. In Brazil an initially sober kind of Pentecostalism has been replaced by a brasher kind (see article). In South Korea (see article), a style of worship that suited a poorish, insecure country has been replaced by one that flaunts success. Whatever their style, Pentecostal pastors are culturally closer to their flock than are the learned clerics of the Catholic or Lutheran churches; and they are numerous. A study in 2007 found that in Brazil Pentecostal churches had 18 times more clerics per believer than the majority Catholics. As Mr Miller points out, older churches move slowly because they are lumbered with hierarchies and rules; the Pentecostal world is one of quick startups, low barriers to entry and instant reaction to change. At worst, this flexibility shades into opportunism. In every country where Pentecostalism has thrived, its leading practitioners have faced investigations of their finances. In 2011 Forbes magazine estimated the combined worth of five Nigerian pastors as at least $200m. In Brazil the faithful seem tolerant of pastors who are light-fingered with their tithes; many see giving as a virtuous act, regardless of the money’s ultimate destination. Estevam Hernandes, one of Brazil’s best-known preachers, cheerfully resumed his career after returning, in 2009, from five months in an American jail for smuggling undeclared cash. Some, though, have emerged unscathed. Last year Britain’s Charity Commission gave a clean bill of health to the British branch of one of Nigeria’s richest churches, the Winners’ Chapel. Or take Sunday Adelaja, a Nigerian-born cleric who is a player in the affairs of Ukraine. His Embassy of God church claims 25,000 followers (almost all white) in Kiev and outposts in over 20 countries. In 2009 he was questioned over the collapse of an investment firm which had touted for business in his church; he satisfied the police that he was not responsible. In the past migrating religious groups either merged into their host societies or else pickled the culture of the old country in aspic. Thanks to technology, today’s roaming worshippers have no such dilemma; a Nigerian or Brazilian in transit can adapt while maintaining contact with home. Globally dispersed Pentecostal churches meet both those needs. An outlying branch of the RCCG can offer job advice and a way to keep links with home. Global charismatic movements act as transmission belts along which ideas and worship styles can travel quickly. “A hymn can be composed in one continent and sung in another a few days later,” says Allan Anderson of Birmingham University. Like water, charismatic religion takes the path of least resistance. Philip Jenkins, a scholar of global Christianity, cites several little-noticed examples. Dubai is now a bastion of Pentecostal-style worship, among migrants; the Muslim authorities do not mind as long as local Emiratis are not proselytised. Thanks to a shared language, Brazilian neo-Pentecostal churches do well in Angola and Mozambique. And though Filipino Christianity is almost entirely Catholic, the export variety, adapted to the diaspora’s needs, is intensely charismatic, offering a combination of mysticism and practical advice. One movement, El Shaddai, claims 8m members across the world. Worshippers at its Manila base wave their passports in the air as they pray for successful travels. Politically, too, Pentecostal churches tend to be pragmatic rather than consistently conservative. Brazil’s globally successful Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (UCKG) initially resisted the rise of the centre-left Workers’ Party, but went on to back its presidential candidates, including Dilma Rousseff, the incumbent. In Ukraine Mr Adelaja was close to the 2004 Orange revolution but also wooed the pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych. Peru’s right-wing authoritarian leader, Alberto Fujimori, enjoyed Pentecostal support, but in El Salvador, Pentecostal preachers strike a leftist tone. In America Latino Protestants (mostly charismatic) are contested electoral terrain. Almost all Pentecostal churches are anti-abortion and anti-gay, but the UCKG has made statements that are pro-choice and comparatively gay-friendly. Predicting the future of such a volatile phenomenon is difficult. But wherever people are on the move, and are culturally receptive to Christianity in some form, charismatic religion will surely follow. 
