BRÁS, a dowdy part of central São Paulo, has welcomed many newcomers. A century ago labourers came from Italy; from the 1950s to the 1980s migrants turned up from poor drought-prone parts of north-east Brazil, seeking work. Bolivians and Haitians are the latest arrivals. This churning mix has created the compost for charismatic worship, sprouting churches which have grown from a single congregation to embrace millions. Today Brás is a showcase of Brazilian faith, including several old and new kinds of Pentecostalism. Data about religion in Brazil are inexact. According to the census, between 1980 and 2010 the number of Pentecostals rose from 3.9m to 25.4m. As a share of the population, it rose from 3.2% to 13.3%. But many of the 8% calling themselves “without religion” flit between Pentecostal churches. Meanwhile, the Catholic share has dropped from 89% to 65%. Pentecostals are poorer, blacker, less educated and younger than the average Brazilian, in contrast with traditional Protestant sects like Lutheranism. But they are generous. One study found that in 2002-03, when they made up 13% of Brazilians, they gave 44% of tithes collected by churches in Brazil; Catholics, then 74% of the population, paid less than a third. The seeds of this charismatic expansion were sown just over a century ago when two movements were started in Brazil, both by Europeans coming from Chicago where Pentecostal fire was crackling. The better known is the main Brazilian branch of the Assemblies of God, which counts nearly 70m followers around the world. The other, the Christian Congregation of Brazil, was founded in this part of São Paulo in 1910 by Luigi Francescon, a migrant originally from Italy. Though it has not spread beyond Brazil’s borders, it now boasts 2.8m followers. As Pentecostals go, it is discreet. It refrains from proselytising; Francescon believed that God would lead people to church. Members dress conservatively; women eschew masculine or revealing clothes. Its services are orderly, and it shuns politics. All that is in contrast to Brazil’s most famous home-grown Pentecostal group, the newish but ultra-confident Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (UCKG). The church was started in 1977 by Edir Macedo, an ex-lottery official, coinciding with a wave of urbanisation and the spread of new communications technology. Mr Macedo shuns the asceticism of early Pentecostals: Forbes magazine estimates that his assets exceed $1 billion, and he owns 16 broadcasting stations. In 1992 he was jailed for 12 days on charges of embezzlement and charlatanism, all later dropped. The church’s grandest building, the Temple of Solomon, stands in Brás and is modelled on the original, in ancient Jerusalem. Opened in 2014, it houses 10,000 worshippers and oozes confidence, rising 50 metres above low-rise houses and cheap hotels. Flags flutter for 200 countries where UCKG claims a presence. One recent Saturday, before a women-only service, its stadium-sized forecourt swarmed with sleek ushers. Keeping order were members of Uniforça, the church’s youth wing, in yellow-and-black polo shirts. Hostesses in white gowns and golden sashes welcomed the worshippers. A few hours earlier worship began at another UCKG church; the slightly smaller Brás Cathedral. Thousands of believers have been praying for “impossible” causes. “Make your wishes now!” their black pastor, with a boxer’s build but a sweet tenor, intones. “God is listening!” Reinaldo, a 50-year-old labourer, sighs that his list of requests is long; he commends the Monday job-seekers’ service to your needy-looking correspondent. Not everybody in Brás is Pentecostal. The modest Catholic church of Saint John the Baptist sits in the Temple of Solomon’s shadow. By comparison it is shabby; its ethos reflects altruism, not pomp. Billboards offer help with beating alcohol or avoiding dengue fever. “We feed 50 homeless each week,” says Hevilaine Pereira da Silva, the parish secretary. Playing down the outflow to rival churches, she insists: “Those who left were never the true faithful.” But they are very numerous. Read more on Pentecostalism around the world and Pentecostalism in South Korea.Happy, clapping in Yoido TO UNDERSTAND Pentecostalism’s changing face in a country where it is thriving, take two snapshots of religious practice in Seoul. The first shows a once-common form of prayer that is now in decline, the second a style of worship that has grown hugely in popularity. Start one night by joining a reverent band of 30 worshippers in the freezing darkness of a mountainside south of Seoul. These hardy faithful come to Mount Cheonggye once a week, arriving around 9pm and staying until midnight. Prayers, they say, work better in the dark, though points of light appear as some follow lyrics on phones. Each sits alone on the damp forest floor, praying loudly or singing softly, occasionally exclaiming. The practice of praying on high ground began in the 1950s, after the division of the peninsula and a war which sent Pyongyang’s once-lively Protestant community fleeing south. Back in the 1980s, says the group’s leader, Kim Hyon-min, up to 30,000 people would pray, often for the country, on Samgak mountain north of Seoul. But this sort of service has lost its appeal, as some Koreans have switched to glitzier Pentecostal churches and others have fallen away altogether. This is one of the few mountainsides still open to late-night prayer near Seoul, says Mr Kim. Sometimes a few hundred come on a Friday, but that hardly matches the old days when “this mountainside was packed, [and] it was difficult to find a spot”. People are not as hungry as before, financially or materially, says Mr Kim. “We are blessed by God but…we have moved away from God. When the first Christians came down from Pyongyang they had nothing and experienced God’s blessing. Now we have it all.” Only the toughest continue to worship in high places: “We follow what Jesus did, he prayed…on the mountain. So we do, too.” Next, visit the Yoido Full Gospel Church, which has come a long way since 1958, when it was started by David Yonggi Cho in his mother-in-law’s living room. It claims over 700,000 members, including daughter churches and online followers. Its main building holds 12,000—enough to make a big noise. Members seem untroubled by the founder’s suspended three-year jail sentence 2014 for a scam in which church officials were urged to buy overpriced shares from his son. Even on a weekday morning, the basement lobby is nicely full for an hour-long act of prayer. Elderly men hand service sheets to worshippers, mostly middle-aged women. A minister and some worshippers speak in strange tongues, raising their arms to the sky, some crying. Then crooners with microphones lead the congregation in song. Lyrics appear on screens flanking a colossal wooden cross. Most hymns laud the Holy Spirit; cameras swerve to the strongest singers. An elder, Chang Ing-won, prays for the country’s president and protection from North Korea’s nuclear arms. Other dangers to be averted include Islamist terrorists—and homosexuals. Another pastor explains his country’s prosperity and North Korea’s poverty with reference to the story in Genesis of how Joseph helped Egypt avert famine. Then he recalls Jeong Jae-hoon, an emigrant to America who became boss of an aerospace company, and used divine help to solve engineering problems. The service is translated into English, Japanese and Chinese; at weekends, 17 languages are available. For an aspiring urban community, this style of worship allows people to bring their yearnings and celebrate their achievements. In the wealthy Seoul suburb of Gangnam, there are megachurches for higher earners; Yoido represents an intermediate step on the ladder of success. In one respect, the two congregations, one on a deserted mountain, the other in a crowded church, are similar. Among the people they dislike are shamans, practitioners of folk religion. Some see a paradox there; shamanism and Korean Pentecostalism both invoke invisible forces and believe in clairvoyance; Korean shamanists also practise night prayer on shelter-less peaks. But Mr Kim, the night-vigil leader, says commonality does not imply friendship: “They have their own mountains.” Some sociologists see things differently. As Kim Sung-gun of Seowon University puts it, Korean Pentecostalism has managed to appeal to both the middle class and the poor: the former with its happy mix of Christianity with modernity and the latter with its resemblance to shamanism. If he is right, this was clearly a winning recipe. Read more on Pentecostalism around the world, and Pentecostalism in Brazil.SHEN XIANG LIVES in a shipping crate on a construction site in Shanghai which he shares with at least seven other young workers. He sleeps in a bunk and uses a bucket to wash in. “It’s uncomfortable,” he says. Still, he pays no rent and the walk to work is only a few paces. Mr Shen, who was born in 1989, hails from a village of “mountains, rivers and trees”. He is a migrant worker and the son of two migrants, so he has always been a second-class citizen in his own country. In China, many public services in cities are reserved for those with a hukou (residence permit). Despite recent reforms, it is still hard for a rural migrant to obtain a big-city hukou. Mr Shen was shut out of government schools in Shanghai even though his parents worked there. Instead he had to make do with a worse one back in his village. Now he paints hotels. The pay is good—300 yuan ($47) for an 11-hour day—and jobs are more plentiful in Shanghai than back in the countryside. His ambition is “to get married as fast as I can”. But he cannot afford to. There are more young men than young women in China because so many girl babies were aborted in previous decades. So the women today can afford to be picky. Mr Shen had a girlfriend once, but her family demanded that he buy her a house. “I didn’t have enough money, so we broke up,” he recalls. Mr Shen doubts that he will ever be able to buy a flat in Shanghai. In any case, without the right hukou his children would not get subsidised education or health care there. “It’s unfair,” he says. There are 1.8 billion young people in the world, roughly a quarter of the total population. (This report defines “young” as between about 15 and 30.) All generalisations about such a vast group should be taken with a bucket of salt. What is true of young Chinese may not apply to young Americans or Burundians. But the young do have some things in common: they grew up in the age of smartphones and in the shadow of a global financial disaster. They fret that it is hard to get a good education, a steady job, a home and—eventually—a mate with whom to start a family. Companies are obsessed with understanding how “millennials” think, the better to recruit them or sell them stuff. Consultants churn out endless reports explaining that they like to share, require constant praise and so forth. Pundits fret that millennials in rich countries never seem to grow out of adolescence, with their constant posting of selfies on social media and their desire for “safe spaces” at university, shielded from discomforting ideas. This report takes a global view, since 85% of young people live in developing countries, and focuses on practical matters, such as education and jobs. And it will argue that the young are an oppressed minority, held back by their elders. They are unlike other oppressed minorities, of course. Their “oppressors” do not set out to harm them. On the contrary, they often love and nurture them. Many would gladly swap places with them, too. In some respects the young have never had it so good. They are richer and likely to live longer than any previous generation. On their smartphones they can find all the information in the world. If they are female or gay, in most countries they enjoy freedoms that their predecessors could barely have imagined. They are also brainier than any previous generation. Average scores on intelligence tests have been rising for decades in many countries, thanks to better nutrition and mass education. Yet much of their talent is being squandered. In most regions they are at least twice as likely as their elders to be unemployed. Over 25% of youngsters in middle-income nations and 15% in rich ones are NEETs: not in education, employment or training. The job market they are entering is more competitive than ever, and in many countries the rules are rigged to favour those who already have a job. Education has become so expensive that many students rack up heavy debts. Housing has grown costlier, too, especially in the globally connected megacities where the best jobs are. Young people yearn to move to such cities: beside higher pay, they offer excitement and a wide selection of other young people to date or marry. Yet constraints on the supply of housing make that hard. For both sexes the path to adulthood—from school to work, marriage and children—has become longer and more complicated. Mostly, this is a good thing. Many young people now study until their mid-20s and put off having children until their late 30s. They form families later partly because they want to and partly because it is taking them longer to become established in their careers and feel financially secure. Alas, despite improvements in fertility treatment the biological clock has not been reset to accommodate modern working lives. Throughout human history, the old have subsidised the young. In rich countries, however, that flow has recently started to reverse. Ronald Lee of the University of California, Berkeley, and Andrew Mason at the University of Hawaii measured how much people earn at different ages in 23 countries, and how much they consume. Within families, intergenerational transfers still flow almost entirely from older to younger. However, in rich countries public spending favours pensions and health care for the old over education for the young. Much of this is paid for by borrowing, and the bill will one day land on the young. In five of 23 countries in Messrs Lee and Mason’s sample (Germany, Austria, Japan, Slovenia and Hungary), the net flow of resources (public plus private) is now heading from young to old, who tend to be richer. As societies age, many more will join them. Politicians in democracies listen to the people who vote—which young people seldom do. Only 23% of Americans aged 18-34 cast a ballot in the 2014 mid-term elections, compared with 59% of the over-65s. In Britain’s 2015 general election only 43% of the 18-24s but 78% of the over-65s voted. In both countries the party favoured by older voters won a thumping victory. “My generation has a huge interest in political causes but a lack of faith in political parties,” says Aditi Shorewal, the editor of a student paper at King’s College, London. In autocracies the young are even more disillusioned. In one survey, only 10% of Chinese respondents thought that young people’s career prospects depended more on hard work or ability than on family connections. All countries need to work harder to give the young a fair shot. If they do not, a whole generation’s talents could be wasted. That would not only be immoral; it would also be dangerous. Angry young people sometimes start revolutions, as the despots overthrown in the Arab Spring can attest. CRISTINA FONSECA CAUGHT pneumonia a week before her final exams. “I thought I would die,” she recalls. When she recovered, she reassessed her priorities. As a star computer scientist, she had lots of job offers, but she turned them all down. “I realised that I didn’t want to spend my life doing anything that was not really worthwhile.” She decided to start her own business. After a year of false starts she co-founded a company called Talkdesk, which helps other firms set up call centres. By using its software, clients can have one up and running in five minutes, she claims. Ms Fonseca’s success helps explain why some people are optimistic about the millennial generation in the workplace. At 28, she is providing a completely new service in support of another service that did not exist until quite recently. She lives in Portugal but does business all over the globe. She sounds very much like several other young entrepreneurs your correspondent met while researching this report, such as a Russian who set up a virtual talent agency for models (castweek.ru); an Asian-American electric cellist who teaches people how to make new sounds using a laptop (danaleong.com); and a Nigerian starting a new publishing house for African romantic novelists (ankarapress.com). Elite youth today are multilingual, global-minded and digitally native; few can remember life before the internet or imagine how anyone coped without it. The best-known of them changed the world before they turned 30, including Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg, Google’s Sergey Brin and Larry Page, and Instagram’s Kevin Systrom. The global economy works well for such people. Digital startups require far less capital than, say, building a factory, and a brilliant piece of software can be distributed to millions at minimal cost. So today’s whippersnappers of great wealth have made their money much faster than the Rockefellers and Carnegies of old. But the world of work has been less kind to other young folk. Florence Moreau, a young architect in Paris, had the double misfortune to leave university in 2009, when the world economy was on its knees; and to be French. “I really need a full-time, permanent job,” she says. Under France’s 3,800-page labour code, workers on permanent contracts receive generous benefits and are extremely hard to get rid of. So French firms have all but stopped hiring permanent staff: four-fifths of new employees are on short-term contracts. Ms Moreau has had eight jobs, none lasting for longer than 16 months. With a small child at home, she has to keep looking for the next one. “It’s tiring,” she sighs. One employer suggested that she should become an “entrepreneur”, doing the same job as before but as a contractor, so that the firm could keep her on indefinitely without incurring heavy ancillary costs. She refused. Insiders v outsiders Youth unemployment in France (using the ILO definition of youth as 15-24-year-olds) is 25% and has been scandalously high for three decades. Occasionally the government tinkers with labour rules, but voters have little appetite for serious reform. Ms Moreau rejects the idea that insiders enjoy too many legal protections, and that this is why outsiders find it so hard to break in. She blames exploitative employers, and doubts that any government, left or right, will fix the problem. Rigid labour rules are tougher on young workers than older ones. People without much experience find it harder to demonstrate that they are worth employing. And when companies know they cannot easily get rid of duds, they become reluctant to hire anyone at all. This is especially true when the economy is not growing fast and they have to bear the huge fixed cost of all the older permanent employees they took on in easier times. France is not alone in having such problems. In the euro area, Greece, Spain and Italy all have rules that coddle insiders and discourage outsiders. Their youth unemployment rates are, respectively, 48%, 48% and 40%. Developing countries, too, often have rigid labour markets. Brazilian employees typically cost their employers their salary all over again in legally mandated benefits and taxes. South Africa mixes European-style labour protections with extreme racial preferences. Firms must favour black job applicants even if they are unqualified, so long as they have the “capacity to acquire, within a reasonable time, the ability to do the job”. Some 16% of young Brazilians and a stunning 63% of young South Africans are unemployed. Globally, average youth unemployment is 13% compared with the adult rate of 4.5%. Young people are also more likely than older ones to be in temporary, ill-paid or insecure jobs. Joblessness matters for several reasons. First, it is miserable for those concerned. Second, it is a waste of human potential. Time spent e-mailing CVs or lying dejected on the sofa is time not spent fixing boilers, laying cables or building a business. Third, it is fiscally ruinous. If the young cannot get a foot on the career ladder, it is hard to see how in time they will be able to support the swelling number of pensioners. Fourth, joblessness can become self-perpetuating. The longer people are out of work, the more their skills and their self-confidence atrophy, the less appealing they look to potential employers and the more likely they are to give up and subsist on the dole. This “scarring” effect is worse if you are jobless when young, perhaps because that is when work habits become ingrained. Thomas Mroz of the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and Tim Savage of Welch Consulting found that someone who is jobless for a mere six months at the age of 22 will earn 8% less at 23 than he otherwise would have done. Paul Gregg and Emma Tominey of the University of Bristol found that men who were jobless in their youth earn 13–21% less at age 42. And David Bell of the University of Stirling and David Blanchflower of Dartmouth College found that people who were unemployed in their early 20s are less happy than expected even at the age of 50. “The first ten years are essential. They shape careers in the long term,” says Stefano Scarpetta of the OECD, a think-tank for mostly rich countries. This is when people develop the soft skills that they do not pick up at school, such as conscientiousness, punctuality and teamwork. Over the next decade more than 1 billion young people will enter the global labour market, and only 40% will be working in jobs that currently exist, estimates the World Bank. Some 90% of new jobs are created by the private sector. The best thing for job creation is economic growth, so policies that promote growth are particularly good for the young. Removing regulatory barriers can also boost job creation. Mr Scarpetta applauds recent attempts in Spain, Italy and Portugal to make labour rules a bit more flexible, but argues that such laws should generally be much simpler. For example, it would be better to scrap the stark distinction between temporary and permanent contracts and have only one basic type of contract in which benefits and job security accumulate gradually. Denmark shows how a labour market can be flexible and still give workers a sense of security. Under its “flexicurity” system companies can hire and fire easily. Unemployed workers are supported by the state, which helps them with retraining and finding new jobs. Trade unions often favour a minimum wage. This can help those who already have jobs, but if it is set too high it can crowd out those with the fewest skills and the least experience, who tend to be young. It makes more sense to subsidise wages through a negative income tax, thus swelling take-home pay for the lowliest workers without making them more expensive for the employer. But this costs taxpayers money, so many governments prefer to raise the legal minimum wage, passing the cost on to others. America’s Democratic Party is pushing to double the federal minimum wage, to $15 an hour—a certain job-killer. Putting the tyke into tycoon Making it easier for young people to start their own business is essential, too. They may be full of energy and open to new ideas, but the firms they create are typically less successful than those launched by older entrepreneurs. The young find it harder to raise capital because they generally have a weaker credit history and less collateral. They usually also know less about the industry they are seeking to enter and have fewer contacts than their older peers. A survey by the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor found that businesses run by entrepreneurs over the age of 35 were 1.7 times as likely to have survived for more than 42 months as those run by 25-34-year-olds. Young sub-Saharan Africans show the greatest enthusiasm for starting their own business: 52% say they would like to, compared with only 19% in rich Western countries. This is partly because many have little choice. There are fewer good jobs available in poor countries, and in the absence of a welfare state few people can afford to do nothing. Bamaiyi Guche, a Nigerian 17-year-old, is a typical example of a poor-country entrepreneur. He goes to school from 8 to 12 every morning, then spends the afternoon in the blazing sun selling small water sachets to other poor people without running water in their homes. He makes $1 a day, half of which goes on his school fees. He wants to be a doctor one day. Some youngsters from well-off families forge careers as “social entrepreneurs”, seeking new ways to do good. Keren Wong, for example, recognises that she was “born into privilege”. (Her parents were prosperous enough to support her at Cornell University.) A Chinese-American, she now runs a non-profit called BEAM which connects teachers in rural Chinese schools so they can swap ideas for teaching more effectively. Alas, there is a huge mismatch everywhere between the skills that many young people can offer and the ones that employers need. Ms Fonseca says she cannot find the right talent for Talkdesk. “I need very good engineers, very good designers and people who speak very good English. But there aren’t enough of them,” she says. As economies grow more sophisticated, demand for cognitive skills will keep rising. The world’s schools are not even close to meeting it.Sure beats media studies JASCHA DÖKER IS a big man with a big beard, a nose ring and tattoos. His father is Turkish, his mother Austrian. He works as an electrician at the Salzburg Festival, a celebration of classical music in Mozart’s home town. He is not an opera fan—he likes the orchestra but not the singing—yet he does his bit to bring Austrian high culture to a global audience. As well as working, Mr Döker, who is 18, attends the Landesberufsschule, a vocational school. Classes mix theory with hands-on practical work. One classroom has an oven and a dishwasher; another has a mock-up of part of a production line; another lets students control an imaginary “smart building”. The school moves with the times. “We used to train lots of television and radio repair men, but now people just throw these things away,” says Eberhard Illmer, the director. The basic philosophy, though, remains the same: the school works closely with local employers, who send their apprentices there to ensure that they acquire skills that are in demand. Asked if he fears unemployment, Mr Döker says: “I’m not worried about that.” Vocational schools in Germany and Austria have a fine reputation, and for good reason. They recognise that not every young person will benefit from a purely academic education. “When I was at school I got bored,” says Mr Döker, “but the technical education here is great.” Youth unemployment in both countries is half the average for the euro area. Not all education systems serve the young so well. At a village meeting in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, parents were told that after attending the village school for five years, most of their children could not read a simple story. Many could not even recognise the letters of the alphabet. This came as a shock. One parent stood up and said to the headmaster: “You have betrayed us. I have worked like a brute my whole life because, without school, I had no skills other than those of a donkey. But you told us that if I sent my son to school, his life would be different from mine. For five years I have kept him from the fields and work…only now I find out that he is 13 years old and doesn’t know anything. His life won’t be different. He will labour like a brute, just like me.” The headmaster retorted: “It is not our fault. We do what we can with your children. But you [are] right, you are brutes and donkeys. The children of donkeys are also donkeys.” One of the people at the meeting was Lant Pritchett, an American economist now at Harvard. He argues that Indian public schools are wretched because they are unaccountable. They have to meet government targets for enrolling pupils, but they do not have to demonstrate to parents or anyone else that the children are learning anything. Barely half the teachers bother to show up on any given day. A study cited in Mr Pritchett’s book, “The Rebirth of Education: Schooling Ain’t Learning”, found that after eight years of school, 60% of Indian children could not use a ruler to measure a pencil. Sure beats media studies The good news is that in recent decades all countries, rich or poor, democratic or despotic, have made huge strides in getting young people into classrooms. In 1950 the average adult over 15 had received just three years of schooling; by 2010 the figure had risen to eight. In rich countries it went up from six to 11 years over that period, and in poor ones it shot from two to seven. These are remarkable figures. Modern Zambians or Haitians spend longer in school than the average Italian did in 1960. Furthermore, university, once the preserve of a tiny elite, has become a rite of passage for the global middle class. Some 41% of 25-34-year-olds in rich countries now have tertiary education, up from 26% in 2000. Developing countries are catching up fast. The bad news is that how much people actually learn in classrooms and lecture halls varies widely. In developing countries, which account for the majority of pupils, many schools are atrocious. PISA, the OECD’s international benchmark for 15-year-olds’ attainment in science, maths and reading, does not cover the poorest nations, but results in several low-to-middle-income countries are disappointing. A Finnish student is 170 times more likely than a Mexican one to be a “top performer” in the PISA science test. In the maths test, more than 60% of the Brazilians would be among the bottom 10% in South Korea. In most developing countries ranked by PISA, more than half the students achieved only very basic competence in maths. In rich countries only a fifth did this badly. Those who cannot read or manipulate numbers earn less. Robert Barro of Harvard and Jong-Wha Lee of Korea University estimate that, on a global average, the wages of those who have completed secondary school are about 77% higher than of those with only primary schooling, and college graduates make 240% more. If developing countries are to realise the “demographic dividend” from a young, energetic population, those young people will have to be educated better. Since the biggest gaps in test scores are between rich countries and poor ones, you might think that money played a big part. Yet “resources per se have little to no statistically significant impact” on how much pupils learn, concludes Mr Pritchett. Rich countries have doubled or tripled spending on schools since around 1970, to little effect. America spends twice as much as Poland, yet both countries’ 15-year-olds get similar results on PISA. South Africa spends more than Kenya but does much less well. Many educational fads are harmful. One survey found that 85% of American parents thought they should praise their children to bolster their self-esteem, but studies suggest that undeserved praise makes children complacent. Amanda Ripley, the author of “The Smartest Kids in the World”, describes how an American student visiting one of Finland’s outstanding schools was surprised to see so few gleaming trophies on display. What works Good school systems come in many shapes. Sweden and the Netherlands have voucher-like systems, where parents can spend public money on the private or public schools of their choice. South Korea has a centralised system in which public-school students also use private crammers to get through a high-stakes exam at 18. Finland went from also-ran to world-beater by insisting that only the brightest graduates could become teachers, whereas in America “almost anyone who claim[s] to like children” can find a place on a teacher-training course, says Ms Ripley. And what works in one country may not travel easily to another. For example, Dieter Euler of the University of St Gallen found that Teutonic vocational schools cannot easily be replicated in other countries where governments, firms and unions do not have the same close relationship. The quality of teachers clearly matters, and in countries with great schools they tend to be well paid. But if the system is dysfunctional, offering them more money is pointless. In parts of India teachers’ pay is so high that people who have no interest in teaching pay large bribes to be hired. Nearly all systems, public or private, produce some excellent schools. To improve results across the board, Mr Pritchett urges decentralisation. Central governments should set standards and make sure that private schools are not preaching jihad, but headmasters should have the power to hire and fire teachers and good schools should be allowed to drive out bad ones. Crucially, performance should be independently measured. Brazil’s education reforms after 1998 loosened federal control and let the money follow the child. As a result, Brazilian students achieved the largest gain on PISA maths tests in 2003-2012. Overall, young people are better educated than ever before. But as H.G. Wells once put it, history is “a race between education and catastrophe”. No nation can afford to slow down.WHEN TENG PENGFEI was 16, he asked his parents for money to travel around China. They refused, so he threatened to get on his bike and pedal hundreds of miles to Beijing anyway. “You can’t stop me,” he told them. They paid up. After school he went to Griffith University in Australia. He was an only child, and at first his parents provided financial support. Eventually he earned enough from part-time jobs to pay his own bills. He imported exercise machines from China and sold them on eBay, making “quite a lot of money”. He moved back to China because his parents were unwell—a common reason for returning—and found a job in a bank, but did not enjoy it. So he left and started his own company. He now manages TNT Partners and CareerFrog, firms that help Chinese who study abroad find jobs back in China. Young adults like Mr Teng are more mobile than any other age group. They are old enough to leave the parental home but have not yet acquired a family of their own to tie them down. They can fit their lives into a small bag—especially now that their book and music collections are stored in the cloud—and catch the next bus to adventure. A global Gallup poll found that 19% of 15-29-year-olds wanted to move permanently to another country—more than twice the proportion of 50-64-year-olds and four times the share of over-65s who felt the same way (see chart). Young adults are more footloose within their own country, too. The average American moves house 6.4 times between the ages of 18 and 45 but only 2.7 times thereafter, the census shows. And in developing countries, young people are 40% more likely than their elders to migrate from the countryside to a city. Such mobility is a good thing. In the absence of a war or flood, it is voluntary. People move because they think they will be better off elsewhere. Usually they are right. If they are wrong, they can always return home. Moving tends to make people more productive, especially if it is from a poor country to a rich one. Michael Clemens of the Centre for Global Development, a think-tank, estimates that if a typical migrant from a poor to a rich country is allowed to work, he can earn three to five times more than he did at home. (And this assumes that he learns no new skills, though he probably will.) To win such a prize, migrants will take huge risks. A study by Linguère Mbaye of the African Development Bank found that those heading from Senegal to Europe were prepared to accept a 25% chance of dying in the attempt. If all international borders were completely open, global GDP would double, Mr Clemens estimates. For political reasons, that is very unlikely to happen. In America, liberal immigration bills die in Congress. In Europe, the surge of refugees from Syria and the Paris terror attacks have reinvigorated xenophobic political parties and jeopardised free movement within the EU. Voters fret that some immigrants might be terrorists, which very occasionally turns out to be true. They also fear that the incomers will poach jobs from the native-born. Some studies find that unskilled migrants depress pay by a tiny amount for unskilled locals. But overall immigrants bring complementary skills, new ideas and entrepreneurial zest, so they tend to boost growth. Also, because they are mostly young, healthy and working, they typically pay more in taxes than they receive in benefits. Movement within countries follows a similar pattern. Migrants, again mostly young, go where the best jobs are. This has led to rapid urbanisation. Today 54% of the world’s people live in cities, up from 30% in 1950. The UN predicts that by 2050 the proportion will rise to 66%. Poor countries are urbanising fastest because they started off more rural. In sub-Saharan Africa 64% of young people who work scratch a living from the soil; in South Asia it is 45%. Almost any city job pays better than work on the land: in developing countries, non-farm workers add four times as much value as agricultural workers. In China, urban wages are three times rural ones. Westerners looking at the crowded shantytowns around Manila or Nairobi cannot imagine why anyone would leave a picturesque village to live there. Migrants see it differently. They are giving up lives of back-breaking toil, stifling tradition and periodic hunger. They are moving to places with bright lights, better wages and infinite variety. Victor Daniel left Yobe, a cotton-growing state in Nigeria, and moved to Lagos, the country’s commercial capital, when he was 18. Now he works in a bar for $110 a month plus a bed. “I needed to find my own freedom,” he says. “Life is better in Lagos.” In rich countries young people—especially the brightest—are clustering in big, vibrant cities. A quarter of Londoners are aged 25-34, for example, nearly twice the share in the rest of England. A survey of students at Harvard found that only 26% planned to return to their home state after graduation; 64% planned to work in New York, California, Massachusetts or Washington, DC. Networks and soulmates In the knowledge economy, it pays to be close to lots of other bright people to bounce ideas off. It also pays to be plugged into global networks—and the cities that are most attractive to native youngsters are often also the most attractive to immigrants. Nearly half of Canada’s immigrants live in Toronto, for example, and 40% of America’s live in New York, Los Angeles, Miami, Chicago or San Francisco. Another attraction of big cities is that they house vast numbers of single adults, so they are great places to meet a soulmate. Both internal and cross-border migration are often temporary. Migrants may stay for a few years and then take their savings, experience and contacts home with them, as Mr Teng did. But governments try to discourage them from moving in the first place. Most obviously, they erect barriers at national borders to keep foreigners out. More surprisingly, they try to deter internal migration, too. China’s hukou system is the most egregious example, but there are many others. When the UN surveyed 185 countries in 2013, it found that 80% of governments had policies to reduce migration from the country to the cities. Some such policies—such as promoting rural development—are benign. Others are not. India makes it hard for poor people to obtain public services if they move to a new state. Indonesia used to move inhabitants from densely populated Java to more remote islands, stopping only in June 2015. More subtly, onerous planning rules in almost all countries block the construction of new homes in the cities where young people most want to live. Property owners, who tend to be older, favour these rules because they make their homes more valuable. (Christian Hilber and Wouter Vermeulen estimate that they double the cost of property in Britain, for example.) Hence the refrain heard from young people everywhere: that housing is unaffordable. Hence, too, the large number who still live reluctantly with their parents. American women aged 18-34 are more likely to live with parents or relatives now than at any point since 1940. “I don’t know anyone my age who lives in central London without [parental] support,” says Peter Fuller, an intern at a bank. “I’m 24. I need a sense of independence. It’s hard to get that when you’re living at home.”HO YI JIAN sits in a trendy café in Kuala Lumpur, swiping through images of single women on Tinder, a dating app created by millennials. On the balcony outside, models in Islamic headscarves are taking part in a fashion shoot. Malaysia, like much of the world, is a confusing mixture of piety and tradition on the one hand and secular individualism on the other. In the countryside sharia courts sentence adulterers to canings. City people are more liberal. Mr Ho, who works from home as a freelance researcher, uses his smartphone to find single women who live nearby. But he observes that unlike Westerners, Malaysians use the app to arrange dates, not hook-ups. Young people’s experience of sex, love and marriage is undergoing gigantic shifts. The most visible one is that dating apps allow them to fish in a larger pond than their parents did. Three other trends are less obvious but more important. First, puritanical attitudes to sex (and the variety of human yearnings) are mostly in retreat. Second, marriage is evolving from a contract between families into a contract between individuals. And third, couples are having fewer children, later. In some parts of the world the traditional approach to all these things remains dominant. Sex before marriage is still frowned upon or even outlawed. Gay people are persecuted. Marriages are arranged between families, sometimes without the bride’s (or, less commonly, the groom’s) consent. Women give birth early and often. Consider the story of Aisha Abdullai. She lives in north-east Nigeria, where women have on average 6.3 babies. Ms Abdullai was forced to marry young. “My stepmother did not like me,” she recalls, “so they thought it was better to marry me off. He was 50 and I was 13. I kept running away but they brought me back to him. He was lying with me when I was 13. I didn’t start my period until I was 14, and at 15 I got pregnant.” Her education ended abruptly. She spent all day cooking, cleaning and caring for her stepchildren. Her husband eventually divorced her for refusing to sleep with him any more. Her child died. Her parents made her marry another man, with whom she had two more children. His family did not like her and he, too, divorced her. She is angry at her parents for making her marry men she disliked. Had she remained in school, she says, she “could have done something” with her life. She is 28. Not now, darling Stories like Ms Abdullai’s are growing rarer. The proportion of young women who married before they were 15 fell from 12% worldwide in 1985 to 8% in 2010, according to UNICEF. The share who wed before their 18th birthday fell from 33% to 26%. Women are becoming more educated, which makes them less likely to put up with forced or early marriages. Arranged unions are declining, too. At the beginning of the 20th century at least 72% of marriages in Asia and Africa were arranged by the families. That figure has fallen by 40% or more, estimates Gabriela Rubio of the University of California, Los Angeles. In some countries, such as China, Japan and Indonesia, they have all but vanished. “It’s my marriage, not my family’s,” says Lu Xinyan, a Chinese student. In other places, such as India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, arranged marriages (defined broadly) are still at least 95% of the total. But they are evolving. In India, parents used to suggest a suitable match and their children could say no. Now, at least among educated urbanites, the children are more likely to find their own partners, whom the parents may veto. This is not yet Western-style individualism, but it is a big step towards it. An argument often advanced for arranged marriages is that parents can make a more clear-headed choice, unfogged by lust, so they can filter out the charming drunkard or the selfish beauty. Yet the institution has always had an economic rationale, too. Marriages cement ties between families. This can act as a kind of insurance, Ms Rubio argues. If one family raises pigs and the other grows rice, the pig farmers can help the rice-growers in years when the rice crop fails, and vice versa. As societies grow richer, the calculation changes. Economic security comes from staying longer in school, not forming alliances with pig farmers. So young people are marrying later, in order to complete their own education, and having fewer children, so they can lavish more education on each of them. A preference for smaller families has taken hold nearly everywhere, even in poorer countries. The global fertility rate has halved since 1960, from five babies per woman to 2.5. The pressure to educate children is bound to intensify further as technology advances, so families will keep getting smaller. “I’d like to have two children eventually. I’m not sure I could afford more and still give them a good education,” says Hiqmar Danial, a student in Malaysia, where the fertility rate has fallen from six to two since 1960. The spread of liberal attitudes to love and marriage empowers individuals, especially young women, but it causes its own complications. One is the increasing fragility of the nuclear family, especially in the rich world. The proportion of children born outside marriage in OECD countries tripled between 1980 and 2007, from 11% to 33%, and divorce rates doubled between 1970 and 2009. Many women can now walk out of disagreeable or abusive marriages, so men have to treat their wives better. But the lack of a stable family can be disastrous for children. Those who do not live with two biological parents do worse at school, earn less as adults and raise less stable families of their own. In rich countries, working-class families have grown far more fissile than middle-class ones. Only 9% of births to American women with college degrees are outside marriage; for high-school dropouts the figure is 57%. The most educated and ambitious couples delay having children the longest. Some leave it too late and find they cannot have any. The only way for young women to combine high-powered careers with parenthood is for men to share domestic tasks equally, says Cristina Fonseca, the young founder of Talkdesk, the Portuguese technology firm. Men her age, she explains, “are clearly adapting. They cook and do laundry.” Surveys bear this out. American fathers who live with their kids do 2.6 times as much child care and housework as they did in 1965, according to the Pew Research Centre. Some scholars fret that young Westerners are so self-absorbed that they find parenting harder than their own parents did. Keith Campbell, Craig Foster and Jean Twenge analysed data from 48,000 respondents and found that once children arrive, young American couples today suffer a greater drop in marital satisfaction than previous generations did. “When you’re used to calling the shots, and then the baby dictates everything, it’s hard to keep your sanity, much less get along with your spouse,” writes Ms Twenge, a professor at San Diego State University. Another possibility is that middle-class parents are stressed because they set themselves such high standards. They invest more time in their children than their own parents did, shuttling them to extra maths and flute lessons in the hope that they will get into a good university. Bryan Caplan, the author of “Selfish Reasons to Have More Kids”, argues that middle-class parents in rich countries would be happier, and do their children no harm, if they let them run wild a bit more.A bad day in Nigeria IN AUGUST 2014 Boko Haram fighters surged through Madagali, an area in north-east Nigeria. They butchered, burned and stole. They closed schools, because Western education is sinful, and carried off young girls, because holy warriors need wives. Taru Daniel escaped with his father and ten siblings. His sister was not so lucky: the jihadis kidnapped her and took her to their forest hideout. “Maybe they forced her to marry,” Mr Daniel speculates. Or maybe they killed her; he does not know. He is 23 and wears a roughed-up white T-shirt and woollen hat, despite the blistering heat in Yola, the town to which he fled. He has struggled to find a job, a big handicap in a culture where a man is not considered an adult unless he can support a family. “If you don’t have money you cannot marry,” he explains. Asked why other young men join Boko Haram, he says: “Food no dey. [There is no food.] Clothes no dey. We have nothing. That is why they join. For some small, small money. For a wife.” Some terrorists are born rich. Some have good jobs. Most are probably sincere in their desire to build a caliphate or a socialist paradise. But material factors clearly play a role in fostering violence. North-east Nigeria, where Boko Haram operates, is largely Islamic, but it is also poor, despite Nigeria’s oil wealth, and corruptly governed. It has lots of young men, many of them living hand to mouth. It is also polygamous: 40% of married women share a husband. Rich old men have multiple spouses; poor young men are left single, sex-starved and without a stable family life. Small wonder some are tempted to join Boko Haram. Beware the youth bulge Globally, the people who fight in wars or commit violent crimes are nearly all young men. Henrik Urdal of the Harvard Kennedy School looked at civil wars and insurgencies around the world between 1950 and 2000, controlling for such things as how rich, democratic or recently violent countries were, and found that a “youth bulge” made them more strife-prone. When 15-24-year-olds made up more than 35% of the adult population—as is common in developing countries—the risk of conflict was 150% higher than with a rich-country age profile. If young men are jobless or broke, they make cheap recruits for rebel armies. And if their rulers are crooked or cruel, they will have cause to rebel. Youth unemployment in Arab states is twice the global norm. The autocrats who were toppled in the Arab Spring were all well past pension age, had been in charge for decades and presided over kleptocracies. Christopher Cramer of the School of Oriental and African Studies in London cautions that there is no straightforward causal link between unemployment and violence. It is not simply a lack of money that spurs young men to rebel, he explains; it is more that having a job is a source of status and identity. Throughout history, men have killed men roughly 97 times more often than women have killed women. The reasons are biological. In all cultures, the appetite for mayhem peaks in the late teens or early 20s, “just when males are competing more fiercely for mating opportunities, as in other mammals”, notes Matt Ridley in “The Evolution of Everything”. In “Homicide”, Martin Daly and Margo Wilson put it like this: “Any creature that is recognisably on track towards complete reproductive failure must somehow expend effort, often at risk of death, to try to improve its present life trajectory.” Wars, alas, give young men a chance to kill potential rivals (ie, other men) and seize or rape women. From Islamic State to the Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda, rebel forces often let their troops treat females as spoils. In some parts of India and China, where girl babies are routinely aborted, millions of young men are doomed to eternal bachelorhood. Mr Urdal found that Indian states with surplus males were more likely to suffer armed conflict—and by 2050 India could have 30% more single men hoping to marry than single women. In China, too, areas with extra men tend to have higher rates of rape and forced prostitution. The polygamy powder keg Any system that produces a surplus of single men is likely to be unstable. Polygamous societies suffer “higher rates of murder, theft, rape, social disruption, kidnapping (especially of females), sexual slavery and prostitution,” note Joseph Henrich, Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson in “The Puzzle of Monogamy”. The Mormon church banned polygamy in 1890 but some breakaway enclaves still practise it. They solve the problem of surplus males by expelling teenage boys from their isolated communities for minor infractions. In southern Utah your correspondent met Kevin (he would not give his surname), who was thrown out of such a sect at 17 for playing video games. He said it was odd how the elders almost never expelled girls. Nigeria’s new president is determined to crush Boko Haram militarily. Meanwhile, other organisations such as the American University of Nigeria are trying to prevent young people from turning to violence. Previously radical imams preach peace; others teach job skills. Will this work? A study by Christopher Blattman of Columbia University and Jeannie Annan of the International Rescue Committee offers hope. They looked at more than 1,000 ex-fighters in Liberia, where a civil war had just ended. This was not a promising group. Besides knowing how to kill people, they had few skills. Only 27% of its members were literate, even though they had spent an average of six years at school. All were making a living from crime: mining illegally or stealing rubber from plantations. And war was beckoning them again. A conflict had broken out across the border in Ivory Coast, and both sides were recruiting Liberian veterans with signing bonuses of $500-$1,500—a fortune for men who were making an average of $47 a month. There was every reason to expect that these men would soon dig up their buried AK-47s. But a non-profit called Action on Armed Violence offered half the men a package of agricultural training, counselling and farming kit (such as seeds, piglets and tools) worth $125, in two instalments. The results were striking. The ex-fighters who were helped to farm got better at it, so they spent more time farming and less on illicit work. They made $12 a month more than the control group and showed less interest in going to fight in Ivory Coast. They were 51% less likely to say they would sign up as mercenaries for $1,000 and 43% less likely to say they had met with recruiters. As the world ages, it is becoming more peaceful. Since medieval times the murder rate in most Western countries has fallen by a factor of nearly 100, estimates Stephen Pinker in “The Better Angels of Our Nature”. The past decade has seen the fewest war deaths of any in recorded history. Hard though it is to believe in the age of Islamic State, the world is heading for what Mr Urdal calls a “geriatric peace”.They’re so vain; I bet they think this article’s about them SOME PEOPLE DESPAIR of the young. Books such as “Generation Me” by Jean Twenge and “The Road to Character” by David Brooks describe young Americans as deluded narcissists. Having constantly been told they are special, they are now far more likely than their elders to believe that “if I ruled the world, it would be a better place” or that “somebody should write a biography of me.” They are materialistic, too. About 65% of American college students expect to become millionaires, and some are not too fussy about how they get to the top. In one study of high-school students, 95% admitted to having cheated in tests. The millennials’ expectations of life are so out of kilter with reality that “they will probably get less of what they want than any previous generation,” frets Ms Twenge. Moral panic is not confined to America. Chinese parents worry that their “little emperors” have grown up lazy, spoiled and promiscuous. When a video of a young couple having sex in the fitting room of a trendy clothes shop in Beijing went viral last year, officials vowed to arrest the culprits, spluttering that their behaviour was “against socialist values”. Young Beijingers just laughed; a number made pilgrimages to the store to take defiant selfies outside. Where some see a generation in crisis, others think the young are adapting quite well to the challenges of a changing world. They flit from job to job not because they are fickle but because job security is a thing of the past. They demand flexible hours and work-life balance because they know they don’t have to be in the office to be productive. They spend six hours a day online because that is how they work, and also how they relax. Their enthusiasm for new ideas (and lack of spare cash) has kickstarted money-saving technologies from Uber to WhatsApp. They take longer to settle down and have children, but so what? They will also be working far later in life than their parents did. What will the world be like when today’s young people are in charge? Some worry that it will be more cynical. In China, for example, eight out of ten students say they want to join the Communist Party, but of those who do, only 4% are motivated by a belief in the system, observes Eric Fish in “China’s Millennials: The Want Generation”. Party membership opens doors, and millennials grab opportunities where they can. Others take a cheerier view. When the millennials rule, society will be “more meritocratic and better governed,” says a young journalist in Malaysia, where the 62-year-old prime minister has given a confusing explanation of why nearly $700m was found in his bank accounts. (He denies wrongdoing.) When the millennials rule, the world may also be greener. They have shown great ingenuity in using resources more efficiently by sharing cars, bikes and spare rooms with strangers. The world will surely grow socially more liberal. Young people nearly everywhere are more comfortable with homosexuality than their elders, partly because they are less religious but mostly because they know more openly gay people. In rich countries the debate is practically over; in developing nations the liberals are winning. A Pew poll in 36 countries found the young to be more tolerant than the old in 30 of them, often dramatically so: 18-29-year-old South Koreans were four times likelier to be gay-friendly than those over 50. Most millennials in China and Brazil now approve of same-sex marriage, an idea unheard of a generation ago. Even more agree that “people are exploring their sexuality more than in the past.” The young are less racist than the old, too. In a survey by JWT, an advertising agency, 86% of youngsters in Brazil, Russia, India and China agreed that “my generation is accepting of people from different races,” and 76% said they differed from their parents on this topic. American students are so sensitive to any hint of racism that they sometimes see bigotry where there is none. When a professor at Yale suggested that students should be free to choose their own Halloween costumes, activists furiously protested that without strict rules, someone might wear an offensive one. Still, today’s oversensitivity is vastly preferable to the segregation of yesteryear. Tolerance is unlikely to erode as the millennials grow older. They may grow more fiscally conservative as they earn more and notice how much of their pay is gobbled up by tax. They may move to the suburbs and buy a car when they have children. But they will not suddenly take against their friends who look different or love differently. In several countries the young are warier than their elders of their governments using military force, partly because they are the ones who get drafted. Young Chinese are less likely than their parents to favour sending in troops to settle territorial disputes, despite the Communist Party’s efforts to fire them up with an aggrieved nationalism. American millennials see global warming as a bigger threat than China or Islamic fundamentalism; for older Americans it is the other way around. In every generation, the young are the first to take to the streets to demand reform. Sometimes their fury leads nowhere, but autocrats still fear it. That is why China’s government rolled tanks over the Tiananmen Square protesters, and why it censors social media today. Young Africans, for their part, may not put up indefinitely with gerontocrats such as 91-year-old Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and 82-year-old Paul Biya of Cameroon. In democracies, young people will some day realise that signing online petitions is no substitute for voting (just as their elders started voting when they acquired grey hairs and mortgages and sent their children to government schools). When the young show up at polling stations, democratic governments will heed their views. And when the millennials start calling the shots more widely in society, they will do so for a long time. For thanks to steady advances in medical technology, they will remain healthy and able to work for longer than any previous generation. Indeed, if scientists’ efforts to crack the “ageing code” in human genes bear fruit, many of them will live past 120.THE Chinese government has been trying, on and off, since the 1970s to build an indigenous semiconductor industry. But its ambitions have never been as high, nor its budgets so big, as they are now. In an earlier big push, in the second half of the 1990s, the government spent less than $1 billion, reckons Morgan Stanley, an American bank. This time, under a grand plan announced in 2014, the government will muster $100 billion-$150 billion in public and private funds. The aim is to catch up technologically with the world’s leading firms by 2030, in the design, fabrication and packaging of chips of all types, so as to cease being dependent on foreign supplies. In 2015 the government added a further target: within ten years it wants to be producing 70% of the chips consumed by Chinese industry. It has a long way to go. Last year China’s manufacturers, both domestic and foreign-owned, consumed $145 billion-worth of microchips of all kinds (see chart). But the output of China’s domestic chip industry was only one-tenth of that value. And in some types of high-value semiconductor—the processor chips that are the brains of computers, and the rugged and durable chips that are embedded in cars—virtually all of China’s consumption is imported. To help them achieve their dream, the authorities realise that they must buy as much foreign expertise as they can lay their hands on. In recent months, state-owned firms and various arms of government have been rushing to buy, invest in or do deals with overseas microchip firms. On January 17th the south-western province of Guizhou announced a joint venture with Qualcomm, an American chip designer, to invest around $280m in setting up a new maker of specialist chips for servers. The province’s investment fund will own 55% of the business. Two days earlier, shareholders in Powertech Technology, a Taiwanese firm that packages and tests chips, agreed to let Tsinghua Unigroup, a state-controlled firm from the mainland, buy a 25% stake for $600m. Officials argue that developing a home-grown semiconductor industry is a strategic imperative, given the country’s excessive reliance on foreign technology. They can point to the taxpayers’ money that politicians in America, Europe and other parts of Asia have lavished on their domestic semiconductor industries over the years. China’s microchip trade gap is, by some estimates, only around half of what the raw figures suggest, since a sizeable proportion of the imported chips that Chinese factories consume go into gadgets, such as Apple’s iPhones and Lenovo’s laptops, that are then exported. Even so, a policy of promoting semiconductors fits with the government’s broader policy of moving from labour-intensive manufacturing to higher-added-value, cleaner industries. Morgan Stanley notes that profit margins for successful semiconductor firms are typically 40% or more, whereas the computers, gadgets and other hardware that they go into often have margins of less than 20%. So if Chinese firms designed and made more of the world’s chips, and one day controlled some of the underlying technical standards, as Intel does with personal-computer and server chips, China would enjoy a bigger share of the global electronics industry’s profits. In the government’s earlier efforts to boost domestic manufacturing of solar panels and LED lamps, it spread its largesse among a lot of local firms, resulting in excess capacity and slumping prices. This time it seems to be concentrating its firepower on a more limited group of national champions. For instance, SMIC of Shanghai is set to be China’s champion “foundry” (bulk manufacturer of chips designed by others). And HiSilicon of Shenzhen (part of Huawei, a maker of telecoms equipment) will be one of a select few champions in chip design. Most intriguing of all, Tsinghua Unigroup, a company spun out of Tsinghua University in Beijing, has emerged in the past year or so as the chosen champion among champions, a Chinese challenger to the mighty Intel. Zhao Weiguo, the firm’s boss, started out herding goats and pigs in Xinjiang, a remote province in north-western China, to where his parents had been exiled in the 1950s, having been labelled as dissidents. After moving to Beijing to study at the university, Mr Zhao made a fortune in electronics, property and natural resources, before becoming chairman and second-largest shareholder (after the university itself) at Tsinghua Unigroup. The company’s emergence from obscurity began in 2013 when it spent $2.6 billion buying two Chinese chip-design firms, Spreadtrum and RDA Microelectronics. In 2014 Intel bought a 20% stake in its putative future rival, for $1.5 billion, as part of a plan for the two to work together on chips for mobile devices, an area in which Intel has lagged behind. In May last year Tsinghua spent $2.3 billion to buy a 51% stake in H3C, a Hong Kong subsidiary of Hewlett-Packard that makes data-networking equipment. And in November it announced a $13 billion share placement to finance the building of a giant memory-chip plant. Shopping for silicon savvy Other Chinese firms have also been splashing out. Jiangsu Changjiang, a firm that packages chips, paid $1.8 billion in 2014 to gain control of STATS ChipPac, a Singaporean outfit in the same line of business. In 2015 state-controlled JianGuang Asset Management paid a similar sum for a division of NXP of the Netherlands, which makes specialist chips for cell-phone base stations. A group led by China Resources Holdings, another state enterprise, has made a $2.5 billion takeover bid for Fairchild Semiconductor International, an American firm. But the undisputed leader of the “national team” buying up foreign chip know-how is Tsinghua. “Many people suspect I’m a ‘white glove’ for the government,” Mr Zhao declared recently, “but we’re really just a very market-oriented company.” That somewhat understates the official backing that it clearly enjoys: without this, it is hard to imagine the company affording the 300 billion yuan ($45 billion) that Mr Zhao says Tsinghua plans to spend on further deals over the next five years. Zhao: Chinese chip champion Chinese approaches to foreign semiconductor firms—unlike its firms’ acquisitions of foreign consumer brands—have not always met with a warm reception. Tsinghua reportedly made a $23 billion bid last year for Micron, a big American maker of DRAM—the type of memory chips used to store data on desktop computers and servers. But the bid faltered because of political opposition. The firm’s overtures to SK Hynix, a South Korean maker of DRAM and flash-memory chips (as used in USB sticks and smartphones), were rebuffed in November. In December Tsinghua bought a 25% stake in Siliconware Precision Industries (SPIL), a Taiwanese chip packager and tester. The resulting political backlash prompted Advanced Semiconductor Engineering (ASE), a bigger Taiwanese chip packager, to launch a takeover bid for SPIL in December. Tsai Ing-wen, the main opposition candidate in Taiwan’s presidential election, declared China’s investments in the island’s chip firms a “very big threat”—and on polling day, January 16th, she emerged the victor. As to whether China will realise its ambitions, or whether it will continue to be dependent on foreign chip technology, Taiwan’s own experience is instructive. From the 1980s, it was highly successful in developing world-class chip foundries, such as TSMC, and in cultivating sparky designers of processor chips such as MediaTek. But in part that was because of good timing: the chip industry was moving towards a model of separating the design and the fabrication of chips, and Taiwan successfully rode that trend. But its more recent attempt to be big in memory chips was a disaster. Mark Li of Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, reckons that despite $50 billion in capital expenditure during the late 1990s and 2000s, mostly financed by the government, Taiwanese firms met with “en masse failure in memory.”  These firms lost further fortunes chasing market share. From 2001 to 2010, the global memory-chip business made $8 billion in aggregate profits—but subtract the two successful South Korean makers, Samsung and SK Hynix, and everyone else lost nearly $13 billion. Despite their vast outlays, reckons Mr Li, Taiwanese firms spent too little to reach the technology frontier and were expecting profits too early. Douglas Fuller of Zhejiang University in Hangzhou argues that the maturing of the global semiconductor industry in recent years will make it harder still for China to crack. The incumbents in memory chips have become entrenched, especially after recent consolidation; and the chips themselves, with their associated software, are becoming much more complex, making it harder for Chinese firms to master them. ASE’s chief operating officer, Tien Wu, adds that Taiwanese firms were entering the chip market at a time when it was enjoying heady expansion; it will be more difficult for Chinese firms to succeed at a time of slow growth. If China’s putative chip champions are to succeed, they must accomplish three hard things. Lee Wai Keong, head of ASM Pacific Technology, a Hong Kong-listed supplier of equipment to the industry, believes that, first, Chinese firms must shift from “a culture of cost to a culture of innovation.” He laughs when asked if firms like Tsinghua can buy in cutting-edge research through acquisitions, insisting there are “no short cuts in semiconductors.” His scepticism is justified: export controls and other policy barriers in Taiwan, South Korea and America inhibit the transfer of the latest technologies to Chinese firms.  The mainland’s chip firms mostly lag far behind global leaders in invention (though HiSilicon is a notable exception). Intel alone spends about four times as much on research and development as does the entire Chinese chip industry, calculates Christopher Thomas of McKinsey, a consulting firm. Besides pumping more into research, Chinese firms also need to attract many more experienced scientists and engineers. This is not impossible, given that Silicon Valley is teeming with brilliant people of Chinese extraction. But if firms like Tsinghua are to attract them, they must learn how to innovate globally, for example by running multiple R&D centres around the world.   That points to the second challenge: the need to shift to a global frame of mind. So far Chinese firms have been mostly catering to booming local consumption. But they must prepare for demanding global markets. Even Chinese firms, especially those serving foreign markets, are unlikely to remain satisfied with subpar chips just because they are made at home.  The final challenge may be the most daunting. Investors in China’s chip firms need to get ready for a long, hard slog. Analysis by McKinsey reveals that across the global semiconductor industry, in memory or processor chips, and in design, fabrication or packaging, the top one or two firms in each area account for all profits—with the rest losing money. A positive example China could follow, if it wants to avoid wasting its $150 billion, is that of Samsung. It has become a semiconductor colossus by investing heavily in R&D, amassing an array of technical talent and accepting low returns for many years. Boosters argue that Chinese firms could pull this off, given that the government will be the main investor, and is in it as a strategic priority rather than for profit. However, there is a potential contradiction in the way the government is implementing its latest plan. Burned by the poor outcome of previous efforts to promote microchips, solar panels and LEDs, officials are funnelling a large chunk of their initial investment—around $30 billion—through a handful of state-backed investment funds. The hope is that these intermediaries will make more market-minded investments than bureaucrats did in the past. However, managing these funds so that they achieve this objective, even though outside investors will want a profitable exit before the government’s 2030 target, will be no mean feat. Even so, Morgan Stanley’s analysts think Chinese firms have a fair chance at becoming world-class in certain parts of the industry. Local chip firms may have a strong hand in product areas such as televisions, mobile phones and computers, in which China dominates both production and consumption. Regulators may be tempted to tilt the playing-field further in their favour by dictating indigenous standards or imposing local-content requirements, though the risk is that China ends up with firms that are strong at home but lack global competitiveness. In memory chips of either the DRAM or flash variety, Chinese firms’ chances would be bolstered if they could persuade some of the largest foreign firms to form technology-sharing alliances, enlisting those firms to help overcome their home governments’ curbs on technology transfer. In this, having deep pockets will be a great help. In September an offshoot of Tsinghua agreed to pump $3.8 billion into Western Digital, an American maker of hard-disk drives. Its balance-sheet bolstered, Western Digital soon afterwards spent $19 billion buying SanDisk, another American firm, which is among the world leaders in flash memory. China’s efforts to develop national champions in what it calls “pillar industries” have a decidedly chequered record. In carmaking, its attempts to make foreign firms share their technology through compulsory joint ventures with domestic makers have only entrenched local firms’ dependence on their foreign partners. In commercial aircraft, a state aerospace conglomerate, COMAC, has spent years, and huge sums, developing planes that are still not ready for the market, and will be outdated by the time they arrive. In the various parts of the microchip business, Chinese firms may eventually catch up technologically, but in the process undermine the industry worldwide, as happened in solar panels, through excessive capacity-building. As Bernstein’s Mr Li puts it, China “will not stop until it dominates the market, with value and economics being destroyed.” Tsinghua’s boss, Mr Zhao, is unabashed about his ambitions. “The chip sector is entering the era of giants, with accelerating integration,” he declared recently, making it clear that he intends his firm to be one of the few surviving giants. The coming shakeout will separate the sheep from the goats, which is an area in which Mr Zhao happens to have some experience. 
