THE slumping oil price has cut the cost of petrol, making it a lot cheaper for Americans to drive. Yet although the price of jet fuel—which makes up around 30% of airlines’ costs—is down by more than half since January 2014, domestic air fares in America have barely budged (see chart). Unsurprisingly, then, the country’s four biggest airlines—Southwest, Delta, American and United—are coining it. On January 19th Delta kicked off the results season for the airlines, announcing record fourth-quarter profits and forecasting that first-quarter margins in 2016 would be twice as high as in 2015. Analysts also expect its rivals to report bumper earnings for the most recent quarter. In July the US Department of Justice launched an investigation into allegations of collusion over pricing and capacity between the big four (which they deny). But arguments abound on why air fares are so high in America—and what regulators should do to cut them. Some think the fact that America’s five biggest fund managers happen to be among the largest shareholders in each of the big four airlines discourages the carriers from competing vigorously. Together, for example, the five investors own around 17% of both American and Delta. In a paper published in April José Azar, an economist, and two co-authors looked at the data and concluded that this common ownership means ticket prices may be up to 11% higher than they would otherwise be. Mr Azar was the lead author of another study, published this month, which found similar effects from overlapping shareholders in American banks. In Europe the industry’s falling costs will translate into cheaper tickets (see article). Low-cost carriers such as easyJet and Ryanair compete fiercely with older airlines such as BA and Air France, and young upstarts such as Norwegian Air Shuttle and Wizz Air of Hungary are muscling into the market. The overlap among institutional shareholders in all these carriers is much smaller than in America. It is clear, to say the least, that the same economic forces are not present in North America as they are in Europe, says Jonathan Wober at CAPA, an aviation-research firm. Operating margins for North American carriers are likely to exceed 14% this year, around double those of airlines from Asia and Europe, reckons CAPA. One reason for American carriers’ fat profits is a rule banning foreigners from owning more than 25% of voting shares in a domestic carrier in America. Besides preventing the likes of Ryanair and AirAsia from creating wholly-owned American subsidiaries, the rule starves domestic challenger airlines of foreign capital. Analysts say Virgin America would have attacked the domestic incumbents more vigorously if Virgin Group, a British firm that holds an 18.6% stake, were able to inject more capital. Even an increase in the limit to 49.9%, as in the European Union, might encourage more foreign carriers to enter America in joint ventures with locals. Perhaps a greater problem is that a shortage of take-off and landing slots at America’s busiest airports makes it hard for challengers to achieve a decent share of the market. At 40 of America’s 100 biggest hubs, a single carrier now operates more than half of the seat capacity. This pushes up prices. For instance, the merger of American and US Airways in 2013 increased American’s market share at Philadelphia’s airport to 77%, resulting in fares there rising from 4% below the national average in 2013 to 10% above it now. The Department of Justice has started to wake up to this. In November it blocked the sale of 24 slots at Newark airport to United, already its biggest operator. But so far there have been few other signs that the authorities are ready to brave the wrath of the incumbents and take the sort of vigorous action that is needed to make American air travel a competitive market.IN 2013, Europe’s two largest low-cost carriers, Ryanair and easyJet, were having an annus horribilis. EasyJet’s executives were battling its founder and biggest shareholder, Stelios Haji-Ioannou, over the airline’s strategy. Ryanair issued two profit warnings, its first in ten years. Three years on, things look better. The two—which make up 47% of the low-cost market in Europe— are expected in the coming days to reveal strong results for the October-December quarter. Both airlines say this success is a result of making their flights more attractive to businesspeople. Previously, their customers were mainly price-conscious holidaymakers who did not mind an uncomfortable flight as long as it was cheap. The big untapped market, easyJet and Ryanair’s bosses twigged, was the short-haul business market, which was still dominated by pricey full-service airlines. EasyJet led the way, reintroducing allocated seating in November 2012, as well as introducing add-ons such as airport-lounge access, to appeal to businesspeople not wanting to turn up to their meetings in a mess. In September 2013 Ryanair followed, when Michael O’Leary, its abrasive boss, announced plans to improve its customer service. In 2014 it also introduced “Business Plus”, an option that charged extra for bundling back in some services corporate customers need, such as flexible ticketing and a hold-baggage allowance. There are other, less obvious ways that the two carriers are making their schedules more attractive to businesspeople, says John Strickland, an aviation expert at JLS Consulting. Ryanair, for instance, is moving flights to airports much closer to the cities they serve, such as in Brussels and Paris, to appeal to people for whom time is money. And flights to some lesser destinations are being dropped in order to increase capacity on popular business routes. But the extent to which these changes have boosted bottom lines is easily overstated, says Douglas McNeill of Macquarie, a bank. EasyJet has struggled to increase its business-traveller numbers as a share of the total. Rising margins are more the result of falling oil prices. As its hedging of fuel prices last year unwinds, Ryanair’s margins will be lifted further by cheaper oil into 2016. But for both carriers and their rivals, the European market is so cut-throat that their excess profits will soon be competed away, especially since Ryanair and easyJet plan to keep expanding their capacity by up to 10% a year. RBC, a bank, forecasts that revenue per passenger will fall by 9% at Ryanair in 2016. Expansion by other budget carriers, such as Norwegian Air Shuttle, Wizz Air of Hungary and Vueling of Spain, will add to the downward pressure on fares. In a race to the bottom, Ryanair will win: it still has the lowest unit costs in the industry. But with rivals snapping at its heels, its shareholders should enjoy the temporary windfall from falling oil prices—before customers grab it all.WILLIAM HEATH ROBINSON would have felt at home at one of Indutrade’s many factories. The English cartoonist, who drew outlandishly elaborate machines that performed simple tasks, could have made imaginative use of the endless variety of valves, hydraulic hoses, couplings and other parts churned out by the Swedish engineering group. The illustrator—and indeed his American counterpart, Rube Goldberg—would also have admired how Indutrade structures itself. The parent firm, listed in Stockholm, sits atop 200 varied subsidiaries, so loosely bound together that little more than twine is involved. Disparate businesses have their own management, staffing policies and brands. Indutrade is no minnow, employing around 5,000 people, but it does so without a central personnel department, for example, trying as much as possible to leave its firms to set strategy and run operations. Its bosses have resisted the modern management fad for making their underlings collaborate incessantly (see Schumpeter). The group is thriving. In the past five years Indutrade’s shares have almost doubled, whereas the OMX Stockholm 30 Index has risen by just 15%, despite it being packed with other Scandinavian engineers. Recently it posted annual net sales of 11 billion Swedish krona (about $1.3 billion), up by 26% on the year before. In the past 35 years annual sales growth has averaged 17%—and most of it has come from northern Europe, not from emerging markets. The group’s operating margins have been reliably decent, usually over 10% (compared with, say, last year’s 6.5% at Airbus, Europe’s largest engineering group). That pays for lots of shopping. Last year it bought 13 smaller manufacturers—for an average of about $10m each—most of them Nordic or British. More will follow in 2016, as Indutrade also sniffs for targets in America, Canada and Germany. The group’s targets are typically a couple of decades old, and owned and run by their founders. Even when they sell, they often care deeply about the firm’s future survival and growth, not just about getting the best price. Indutrade’s reputation as a hands-off parent, its easy-going culture and its promise not to resell, all help to charm business owners. Some keep working for Indutrade long after selling up. Indutrade is not unique. A bigger Nordic engineering group, AssaAbloy, has reached annual sales of 57 billion krona by mopping up firms that make assorted devices for opening and locking doors. Its total return to shareholders in the past five years, 25% a year on average, beats even Indutrade’s 18%. A British engineering conglomerate, Melrose, is also a serial buyer of businesses, though it looks for ones it can fix up and sell on. It most recently did so last month, completing the £2 billion ($2.8 billion) sale of a maker of water, gas and electricity meters to Honeywell of the United States. More usual is the Indutrade approach, holding what you buy. The challenge then is for bosses to keep a proper eye on a potentially sprawling business. Growing by buying is not necessarily the best strategy for an engineering conglomerate, but it helps to spur bosses to think hard about competition and emerging threats to their markets. Engineering firms are alert to the risk that, as more of the value attached to their products derives from software and the gathering and analysis of data, they risk losing profits to the digital firms that provide such services. Johnny Alvarsson, Indutrade’s quietly spoken boss, argues that having a loose governance model that allows for experimentation means the group is more likely to adapt to this new age. Roland Haslehner of the Boston Consulting Group says what matters is less the chosen model of governing, and more whether it is applied consistently by capable managers. The centre might leave subsidiaries free to be entrepreneurial, or it might become an “integrator”, setting strategy, overseeing operations and offering support services to all its companies. Whereas the looser approach has the benefit of being more flexible, the integrators ought in principle to be more efficient. However, ThyssenKrupp, a massive German conglomerate that controls 670 engineering companies, shows that this is not always the case. It has a strong headquarters but does not allow small firms’ spirit to flourish, says an analyst. Its boss, Heinrich Hiesinger, admitted in his most recent annual report that the firm’s situation is unsettled, noting that it had just turned a tiny profit, the first in a decade. Indutrade could surely cut costs by getting its many businesses to share more operations but it prefers them to preserve the advantages of being small, which include the fact that workers and customers like it that way. Mr Alvarsson says a number of people have noted the similarities with Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway, a compulsive buyer and holder of a far broader variety of businesses. E-mails and meetings are kept to a minimum; bureaucracy is discouraged; the head office is small. The manager of the best-performing subsidiary gets a small award at the group’s annual party.A whole lot of sauce WHEN he left a job in banking to join a “company that sells fish sauce” in Vietnam, Michael Nguyen’s parents wondered if he was throwing away a lucrative career. Now a big cheese at Masan Group, one of the country’s largest listed companies, the Vietnamese-American seems happy with his gamble. Masan’s brands meet a big chunk of the local demand for pungent sauces, noodles and freeze-dried coffee—and in December the firm accepted a $1.1 billion investment from Singha, a Thai brewer, to help finance an assault on Vietnam’s frothy beer market. Singha’s purchase of a 25% stake in Masan’s consumer-goods arm and 33% of its brewery capped a busy 12 months for mergers and acquisitions in the country. Their combined value in 2015 is reckoned to have been around $10 billion (see chart). Overall foreign direct investment into Vietnam began to pick up, after a slump following the financial crisis. More big deals are “percolating”, reckons Fred Burke of Baker & McKenzie, a law firm. This month All Nippon Airways of Japan said it would pay $108m for an 8.8% stake in Vietnam Airlines. The government may soon sell a $1 billion chunk of Sabeco, the country’s biggest brewer, and a stake of around $2.5 billion in Vinamilk, a dairy firm. All this reflects renewed optimism for Vietnam, a country of 93m people with a median age of around 30 and an economy expanding by nearly 7% a year. Its consumer sector is particularly appealing. Vinamilk’s revenues have been growing more than 20% annually; per-capita beer consumption is the highest in Asia after China and Japan, and rising. Masan’s latest wheeze is animal feed, as it hopes to gain from the rising consumption of fresh meat. In part the country has benefited from its neighbours’ weaknesses. Despite lower productivity and limited local supply chains, Vietnam’s manufacturers are gradually taking business from China, where wages are higher. Elsewhere in the region, Indonesia is shrinking back into protectionism; political scandals are unsettling Malaysia. And Thailand’s companies are keen on tie-ups in Vietnam, to flee low growth and irascible military rule at home. But foreign enthusiasm has also been greatly boosted by a barrage of trade agreements which the government negotiated in 2015—not just the American-led Trans-Pacific Partnership but also a hodgepodge of treaties with places including Europe, South Korea and Japan. Meanwhile a new law on investment and enterprise, passed in 2014 but only implemented last summer, has cut red tape. Vietnam ranks mid-table in the World Bank’s ease-of-doing-business index, but is inching upwards. Foreigners often find it easier to operate in Vietnam than in China, and its recent reforms compare favourably with those elsewhere in South-East Asia, says Alberto Vettoretti of Dezan Shira, a consulting firm. There are plenty of frustrations, nonetheless. The unusual esteem which has accrued to Vinamilk—praised at home and abroad as a paragon of corporate governance—says as much about the grimmer standards among other Vietnamese firms. Even many well-run ones have a disconcerting taste for adventurism: Mr Nguyen promises that Masan will be picky with its investments, after its bet on a tungsten mine turned sour. There is also more for the government to do. Despite a few recent exceptions, reform of the flabby state sector has been a let-down, with many state firms selling only tiny slivers of equity. A promise to lift caps on foreign ownership of listed firms—for the moment limited to 49% in most industries—is bogged down in bureaucratic twaddle. Kevin Snowball of PXP Vietnam Asset Management says the representatives of foreign institutional investors who turned up “in droves” late last year were disappointed at the limited liquidity of, and restricted access to, Vietnam’s stockmarkets that they encountered. All this makes more important the decisions to be reached at the five-yearly congress of the Vietnamese Communist Party, which began in Hanoi on January 21st. By the time it concludes, on the 28th, some or all of the country’s top officials could be replaced. Most of Vietnam’s local and foreign businesspeople would like to see Nguyen Tan Dung, its prime minister for the past ten years, retain high office. He holds some blame for leading Vietnam into a deep banking crisis from which it is only now emerging, but he is also credited for a competent clean-up and for the many pro-business policies which have followed. Yet the latest rumour is that Mr Dung, and perhaps some of his younger allies, will be sidelined by a conservative faction loyal to Nguyen Phu Trong, the present party leader.  That would somewhat dampen spirits among businesspeople and investors. But it need be no disaster. Analysts worry that the pace of liberalisation could soften, but few expect the direction of reform to reverse. For one thing, Mr Dung’s trade deals mean that once-vague party promises have now been written into international treaties, notes a Vietnamese economist and government adviser. “The only way is forward,” he insists.IT IS hard to identify the moment when podcasting took off, because it keeps having them. In June last year Barack Obama showed up at a Californian man’s garage to tape a podcast (“WTF with Marc Maron”), while “Serial”, a podcast series about disputed real-life stories that was launched in 2014, has surpassed 100m downloads. Listeners will be forgiven if they feel they have heard this story before. Podcasts were meant to have arrived a decade ago. But they remain a tiny market for advertisers—$50m to $80m annually in America compared with $16 billion on terrestrial radio. Can podcasts finally hit the big time as a business? There are reasons for optimism. The audience has grown quickly. In 2006 11% of Americans aged 12 or over had listened to a podcast; by 2015 that had tripled, according to Edison Research and Triton Digital (an ad-technology firm). Technology is pushing podcasts into listeners’ ears. In 2014 Apple put a podcast app on the iPhone that is all but indelible. In 2015 Spotify and Pandora added podcasts to their music-streaming services. As increasing numbers of cars get wireless-internet connections, that will give podcasts another fillip. An industry to support podcasting is developing. In 2015 two former bosses of Westwood One, a broadcaster, launched DGital Media, which hosts and monetises podcasts. In July E.W. Scripps, another broadcaster, bought Midroll, a firm which connects podcasts to advertisers, for $50m. Firms like Art19 allow advertisers to update and insert ads into podcasts, including back catalogues. For presenters, podcasting can be lucrative. In October Bill Simmons, a sports pundit who had a popular podcast at the ESPN network, launched one under his own name with multiple sponsors. With 20m downloads in the first three months, Mr Simmons could gross more than $5m in his first year. In December Gimlet Media, a podcast network started by Alex Blumberg, a radio journalist, raised $6m at a valuation of $30m. Still, most podcast ads are for smallish niche businesses. There are two obstacles to attracting big-budget advertisers. One is that it is hard to know who is listening to podcasts, rather than just downloading them. The second is that, so far, few podcasts have a big enough audience. “You’re either buying a premium podcast or you’re not buying,” says Teddy Lynn of Ogilvy, an ad agency. However, Mr Lynn believes podcasts will one day be “bundled” for sale as TV shows are, and that the audiences will prove attractive for advertisers because they are “highly engaged”, not passive listeners. That is surely true of “The Nerdist Podcast”, a chat show started in 2010 by Chris Hardwick. In its first year it had no revenues. In 2012 Legendary Entertainment, a film studio, bought it. Now it grosses millions of dollars a year. Mr Hardwick says the show helped dispel the myth that podcasts were “just this thing you did in your mom’s basement.”BEAR markets are triggered, by convention, when share prices fall by more than 20%. So the widespread stockmarket declines on January 20th took Tokyo’s Nikkei 225, London’s FTSE 100 and France’s CAC-40 into bear-market territory (see chart), since all had declined at least that much since their highs of last year. Mind you, another old saw is that bear markets do not end until prices pass their previous peak; on that measure, the Nikkei 225, which is less than half its 1989 high, is still caught in a 26-year-long bear run. The rich world is not alone in its ursine infestation. China’s CSI 300 index is more than 40% below last year’s high. The FTSE All-World Index, having breached the 20% mark, ended down 19% on January 20th. Indeed New York, although hit hard that day (the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell more than 500 points at one stage, before rebounding a bit), is one of the few big markets not to have entered bearish territory. Among the primary causes of the sell-off is worry about China’s economic health, despite the latest GDP numbers, published this week, that were in line with forecasts of 6.9% growth. Investors fear that the real numbers are worse than the official data suggest, and see the sharp fall in commodity prices, particularly oil (see article), as evidence for the hypothesis of weaker Chinese demand. In a sense, equity markets are only catching up with the bearish implications of moves in other markets, such as the rise last year in corporate-bond spreads (the interest-rate premiums paid by riskier borrowers). Higher spreads usually reflect fears that more borrowers will default in the face of adverse economic conditions. Investors have also been rushing for the perceived safety of government bonds, with the yield on ten-year American Treasuries falling back below 2%. In June it was nearly 2.5%. Forecasts for global growth this year are being revised down, as they have been for the past few years. The IMF has cut its estimate from 3.6% to 3.4%. World trade has also been worryingly sluggish, with volumes falling in the first half of 2015. Daily dispatches: China's market mess So far manufacturing appears to have been hit harder than services, with industrial production in America falling in each of the last three months of 2015. But a wide range of companies are facing a squeeze in profits. Macy’s, a retailer, IBM, a computer-services company, and Shell, an oil giant, all recorded big declines in their latest results. Overall, the profits of the constituent companies of the S&P 500 index in the fourth quarter of 2015 are expected to be down by almost 5% on the same period a year earlier. Part of the sell-off in global equities may reflect this reduced outlook for profits. In a recent survey of fund managers by Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, more than half expected profits to decline further over the next 12 months. Cash now makes up 5.4% of portfolios, the third-highest level since 2009. But fund managers are not as bearish as they might be: a net 21% of them have a bigger weighting in equities than usual and only 12% expect a global recession in the next year. Some also blame the Federal Reserve for pushing up interest rates in December. To the extent that monetary policy, via both low rates and quantitative easing, has pushed up asset prices since 2009, the fear is that tighter policy may drag those prices back down. But the stockmarket decline may be altering the outlook for monetary policy, too. Back in September, when the markets were suffering another tumble, the Fed stepped back from a rate rise, citing fears about a slowing global economy. Judging by the futures market, investors think the Fed will take fright again: they are now expecting it to raise rates only once this year, when previously they had been expecting three increases.  DMITRY MALIKOV, a wavy-haired crooner, normally sings schmaltzy love tunes. But his latest clip, which he calls “A New Year’s Appeal to the Rouble”, captures the zeitgeist in Russia. “Sure, it’s a bit tough, but happiness is ahead,” he belts. “Just wait, just wait, don’t fall.” Despite his plea, the rouble is falling: on January 21st it dropped to more than 85 to the dollar, a record low. References to the economic “crisis” pepper daily conversation; news broadcasts lead with breathless coverage of the oil markets, and even the patriarch of the Russian Orthodox church was asked his thoughts on the exchange rate during his annual Christmas interview.  Russia’s economy had a torrid 2015. As the oil price tumbled from its mid-2014 peak of over $100 a barrel, Russia’s exports and government revenues, heavily dependent on oil and gas, collapsed. GDP shrank by nearly 4%; inflation ran close to 13%. Having lost half its value against the dollar in the second half of 2014, the rouble dipped a further 20% in 2015. But in the autumn the contraction slowed. Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, triumphantly declared that “the peak of crisis” had passed.  Recent turbulence in the oil market has put hopes of a speedy recovery to rest. The IMF reckons GDP will contract again this year, by 1%. Senior officials speak morosely of a “new reality”, acknowledging that their energy-driven growth model has exhausted itself. Yet Russia is unlikely to see a repeat of the acute problems that befell it in late 2014. For one thing, Russian businesses have much healthier finances. Their foreign debt has fallen by a third since 2014. From now until May, firms and banks are due to repay less than they did in December 2014 alone. The second half of the year will be about as easy. INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability The banking sector is looking better, thanks to a raft of measures from the central bank to recapitalise it and to allow greater forbearance on souring debts. The big oil companies, meanwhile, have coped with a weak currency. Their operating expenses are priced in roubles but most of their revenues come in dollars. Progressive oil and gas taxes have also helped: when prices fall, the state budget absorbs much of the pain. Total oil production grew by 1.4% in 2015, reaching record highs. The profitability of beasts like Rosneft, Lukoil and Bashneft is higher than it was in 2014, according to Moody’s, a rating agency.  The government’s finances, however, are shaky. The budget for 2016 assumes an average oil price of $50 a barrel, which was to have produced a deficit of 3% of GDP. However, the arithmetic of Russia’s public finances is unforgiving: the budget deficit rises by roughly 1% of GDP for every $5 drop in the oil price. At the current $30 a barrel (and assuming no change in spending plans or the exchange rate), the deficit would probably hit 7%. Yet Mr Putin has decreed that the deficit should not exceed 3%. In response, the finance ministry has called for cuts of 10% (defence and social spending are largely exempt). Officials have also suggested privatising state assets. All this, though, is unlikely to yield enough to plug the growing deficit. Filling the gap by issuing bonds would be expensive: yields are high. Moreover, Russia’s default in 1998-99 left its elite with an aversion to debt. Oil price and Russian politics: a history The government can always tap its rainy-day fund, but it holds only $50 billion, down from $90 billion a year ago. If the budget deficit hits 6% of GDP the fund will be empty by the end of the year, says Timothy Ash of Nomura, a bank. A second fund, which is supposed to finance pensions, holds a further $70 billion, but many of its assets are illiquid. If the government runs out of ready cash, Mr Putin may be tempted to repeat a well-worn trick—printing roubles. But that would boost inflation and hasten the rouble’s decline, further sapping the purchasing power of Russian firms and families. Deep cuts to government spending, on the other hand, will also add to the travails of the non-oil economy. Russians face a fundamental degradation of their quality of life, says Natalia Zubarevich of the Independent Institute for Social Policy, a think-tank. Real wages fell by 9% in 2015 and 4% in 2014, the first dip since Mr Putin came to power in 2000 (see chart). GDP per person is down from a post-Soviet peak of close to $15,000 in 2013 to around $8,000 this year. While official unemployment is just 6%, wage arrears are up. More than 2m people fell into poverty in 2015, and the share of families that lack funds for food or clothes rose from 22% to 39%. Pensions are normally indexed to inflation, but in 2016 they will rise by just 4%. In turn, consumer spending, once the engine of Russia’s economy, has withered. Retail sales dropped by 13%, year on year, in November. Foreign travel during the recent holiday season dipped by 30% compared with a year ago. Even those seeking darker escapes are finding them ever less affordable: the price of heroin (mainly smuggled from Afghanistan) has doubled in roubles over the past year. In theory the 25% fall in the inflation-adjusted exchange rate in the past year provides a golden opportunity to diversify away from hydrocarbons. To a foreign buyer, labour is now cheaper in Russia than in China. However, foreign investment is wilting too. FDI inflows, which were sliding before the crisis, fell from a quarterly peak of $40 billion in early 2013 to $3 billion in the second quarter of 2015. Foreigners are likely to become net divestors soon. Small wonder that manufacturing production was down by 5% year on year in the first half of 2015; agricultural output is stagnant. The first, most dramatic phase of Russia’s crisis may indeed be behind it, as Mr Putin claimed. But for ordinary Russians, phase two will not seem much better.WHEN Thomas Guerriero came knocking, pulses quickened at Oxford City, a club in the sixth tier of English football. The snappily dressed American appeared to be building a thriving conglomerate that included sports teams and private universities. He bought a 50% stake and talked of propelling the club into the big time. The tie-up appears to have been an own-goal. Mr Guerriero’s stake has been frozen as he awaits trial in America on ten charges, including fraud and witness-tampering. (He denies wrongdoing.) Oxford City has lost face, but little money: its assets are safely parked with the charity that owns the other 50%. Others have fared worse: prosecutors allege that Mr Guerriero ran a “boiler room”—a brokerage that uses high-pressure tactics to sell shares and other investments of little or no value to unwary individuals over the phone—which bilked 150 American investors out of $6.5m. Boiler rooms trade on coercion and intimidation, and this one was no exception, say prosecutors. Victims were told that their conversations had been recorded and were legally binding agreements to buy, and that if they reneged they would face late fees and property liens. It is alleged that one even liquidated an annuity to hand over $250,000. The heyday for boiler rooms was the dotcom boom of the 1990s, when Jordan Belfort, the “Wolf of Wall Street”, strutted his stuff. Today, online and e-mail-based fraud is seen as a bigger problem. But the steady stream of convictions suggests that old-style boilers remain common. The Guerriero case is one of dozens of its type brought by the SEC in recent years. Crime-busters worry that scams are evolving. While stock fraud has waned, says a regulator, there has been a “significant rise” in boiler-room tactics being used to sell things like carbon credits, fine wine, rare earth metals and even bogus Ebola treatments. America remains the world’s investment-fraud capital, but police in Britain—where investors lost an estimated £1.7 billion ($2.8 billion) to such scams in the 12 months to September 2014—fret that the City of London could become infested with financial cockroaches. They are leading a multi-agency crackdown. Britain’s Financial Conduct Authority runs a website, ScamSmart, that lists more than 1,000 dodgy operators.
