We invite applications for the 2016 Richard Casement internship. We are looking for a would-be journalist to spend three months of the summer working on the newspaper in London, writing about science and technology. Applicants should write a letter introducing themselves and an original article of about 600 words that they think would be suitable for publication in the Science and Technology section. They should be prepared to come for an interview in London or Washington, DC, at their own expense. A stipend of £2,000 a month will be paid to the successful candidate. Applications must reach us by January 29th. These should be sent to: [email protected]MASSIVE, chaotic, endless and, despite it all, also charming, Jakarta can seem less a city than some sort of organic life form inexorably consuming north-western Java. More people live in greater Jakarta than in Australia; its residents send out more tweets than those in any other city. Yet millions of Jakartans also live in slums with pirated electricity and no running water. Traffic clogs the streets from dawn until well after nightfall—kita tua di jalan (“We grow old in the streets”), complain the city’s eternally harried drivers—and people from every corner of Indonesia cram into every available corner of the city. Eka Kurniawan, a young novelist, lives on the outskirts with his wife and daughter. When he sits down for a meeting at one of central Jakarta’s many shopping malls at 4.30pm, he says traffic will make it impossible for him to get back home before 10. Mr Eka may well be glad of the chance to sit still for a while. In the past few months he has appeared at book festivals in Melbourne, Brisbane, Brooklyn and Frankfurt—where Indonesia was the national guest of honour. Last year his American publisher, New Directions, whisked him around the country on a six-city book tour. Benedict Anderson of Cornell University, a luminary of South-East Asian studies who has recently died, called him “Indonesia’s most original living writer of novels and short stories”, and proclaimed him a successor to Pramoedya Ananta Toer, author of the social-realist “Buru Quartet”, and the man many consider to be Indonesia’s greatest-ever novelist. Now 40, Mr Eka has published four books of short stories and three novels, only two of which have so far been translated into English: “Beauty is a Wound” (New Directions), which is being published in 27 languages and was included in eight international lists of best books of 2015, and “Man Tiger” (Verso), which has been nominated for the 2016 Man Booker International prize. The English-language rights to his third novel, “Love and Vengeance”, have recently been acquired by New Directions and Pushkin Press; publication is set for 2017. If Mr Eka feels burdened by other people’s expectations, he does not show it. Small, slight and bespectacled, with a thoughtful elfin manner and a ready grin, he looks perhaps half his age, and chats freely and easily, without any apparent writerly agony. Mr Eka is Sundanese, and grew up in a small town in West Java which he used in “Beauty” as a model for Halimunda, the fictional setting that acts, as in William Faulkner’s novels, as a prism that filters and refracts Indonesia’s history. For a time he ran a souvenir shop, like Kliwon, the determined, sweet, relentlessly level-headed rebel in “Beauty”. When not working on novels Mr Eka blogs and writes for television—“soap operas, and whatever else they order from me”. Like many writers, he says, “I always think about doing something else. But in the end I sit down and write again.” And again and again: he has a book called “O”—a fable, he says, modelled on George Orwell’s “Animal Farm”—coming out later this year in Indonesian. The two books available in English are strikingly different. “Beauty is a Wound” is a sprawling work—seen through the eyes of Halimunda’s gangsters, rebels, prostitutes and gravediggers—that obliquely covers the history of Indonesia from the late colonial period onwards, through the 31-year rule of Indonesia’s second president, Suharto. Its opening line is hard to match: “One afternoon on a weekend in March, Dewi Ayu rose from her grave after being dead for 21 years.” The author said he spent much of his youth reading sastra picisan—pulp fiction filled with sex and violence, and his work has plenty of both. Mr Eka bristles at the suggestion that “Beauty” is fictionalised history: “I tried to make it a joke about a historical novel,” he says, “and the joke is that you can’t have a historical novel.” “Beauty” is not about Indonesian history; it is about characters buffeted by that history. In its scope and seamless weaving of the fantastical and the quotidian, it owes a hefty debt to Gabriel García Márquez, though Mr Eka’s magical realism is much earthier and less lyrical than his Latin American predecessor’s (in a nifty bit of irony, the only character able consistently to use magic to his advantage is Kliwon, a communist who disavows religion and superstition). The second book, “Man Tiger”, is slimmer and a quicker read—a murder mystery of sorts, though the first sentence reveals both murderer and victim. Even the motive is no mystery. Yet it is a testament to Mr Eka’s gift as a storyteller, particularly his skill at ratcheting up and tactically releasing tension, that he keeps readers enthralled nonetheless. Margio, the protagonist, is a sort of Javanese Raskolnikov (Dostoyevsky’s protagonist in “Crime and Punishment”), though technically it is not he, but a white tiger living inside him, that does the killing. Mr Eka calls this his most personal book: “There is a parallelism between me and Margio…In Indonesia we keep our anger, we repress our anger, but in the end…the tiger comes out, and we don’t know how to handle this tiger.” Such concern for the personal rather than the political, and his rejection of conventional realism in “Beauty”, exorcises the ghost of Pramoedya’s socialist-realism. Writing towards the end of colonialism, Pramoedya wanted most of all to give Indonesians an identity. If he was the nation’s Zola, Mr Eka is shaping up to be its Murakami: approaching social concerns at an angle rather than head-on, with hefty doses of surrealism and wry humour. What Belongs to You. By Garth Greenwell. Farrar, Straus & Giroux; 194 pages; $23. To be published in Britain by Picador in April. A YOUNG American teacher working in post-Soviet Bulgaria encounters a seductive hustler in the men’s room of the National Palace of Culture. Mitko is slender and beautiful, utterly at ease yet achingly remote. What follows is the poignant story of the two men’s unequal dance of need and longing. “What Belongs to You”, a first novel by Garth Greenwell, an American writer with a growing reputation, is a sensitive, almost nostalgic, meditation on desire. The strength of this slim book is the vibrant, heartbreaking character Mr Greenwell creates in Mitko: object of the unnamed narrator’s desire, fear, obsession and, ultimately, pity. He is a sweet, increasingly desperate product of a broken country, a child of the East who sells sex to survive. Mitko’s attractiveness stems as much from “a kind of bodily sureness or ease that suggested freedom from doubts and self-gnawing” as from his brazen sexuality. Throughout their brief relationship, the narrator minutely observes both Mitko and his country, as well as his own past. Yet he remains opaque, as estranged from the reader as he is from himself. This alienation, the narrator reveals, is rooted in early experiences of rejection for his awakening homosexuality. In the novel’s remarkable central section, told in one unbroken rush of past impressed upon the present, he recalls watching a boy he loved receive fellatio from a girl. “I’ve sought it ever since,” he thinks; “the combination of exclusion and desire I felt in his room.” The central theme of gay identity has led some to liken “What Belongs to You” to powerful coming-out narratives by such writers as James Baldwin and André Aciman. Edmund White, a writer and critic whose novel “A Boy’s Own Story” (1982) is a classic of the genre, has called it a “masterpiece”. (Indeed, Mr Greenwell’s novella, “Mitko”, the seed for this novel, won a novella prize and was nominated for a Lambda award for gay writing.) Yet the book is less about gay experience, in all its interpersonal and social dimensions, than it is a study of obsession and the self. Intense introspection makes it feel like a book from another age. Mr Greenwell, a poet, writes in the elaborate, melancholic voice of the mid-century novel of Mitteleuropa. Events are related in long, winding sentences punctuated by asides, filtered through the narrator’s gaze; attention is lavished on landscape, often pregnant with meaning. The tone may be apt for a post-communist world caught in aspic; it can also feel mannered. Still, his language is often beautiful: “How helpless desire is outside its little theatre of heat.” The narrator’s “humiliating need…has always, even in my moments of apparent pride, run alongside my life like a snapping dog”. All this self-scrutiny can leave the reader hungry for deeper exploration of the questions raised by the novel’s setting. The theme of the innocent abroad is not new, yet the complex dynamics of Mitko’s precarious existence and the ethics of their transaction are barely addressed. Ultimately, this is a story about chances and the unequal possibilities for escape for those emerging from different forms of wreckage. The Westerner feels regret, but shows startlingly little awareness of his privilege; Mitko is simply the canvas on which he projects his need. A bigger, deeper novel might have remedied this shortcoming, elevating this to a major novel of gay life. As it is, Mr Greenwell offers a tender portrait of the longing for connection and acceptance that inhabits us all, gay or straight.God Is Watching You: How the Fear of God Makes Us Human. By Dominic Johnson. Oxford University Press; 286 pages; $27.95 and £18.99. MANY people think that religious belief is inherent to human psychology. This does not mean that specific beliefs are wired, but that the brain is predisposed to believe in supernatural agents. Some proponents of this idea argue that supernatural beliefs have hijacked innocent or otherwise useful features of the mind. But Dominic Johnson argues in “God Is Watching You”, belief in God—specifically, in supernatural forces that can punish—is a useful evolutionary adaptation. Mr Johnson has doctorates both in evolutionary biology, where most of the research in the belief instinct has been done, and political science. He assembles well-known features of the mind in a tidy case. Human brains have a “hyperactive agency-detector device”, seeing agents (spirits, gods and the like) in natural phenomena and random happenings. This is useful. There is little harm if you overreact to something that turns out not to exist. But underestimating a rustling in the undergrowth, which might conceal a predator, could be fatal, leading to evolutionary selection of a tendency to see agents everywhere. The instinct is easily triggered, even in atheists. Even pictures can set it off: in one experiment, an office honour-system to pay for shared coffee got more contributions when someone taped a picture of a pair of eyes on the collecting tin. Another component in the belief instinct is a belief in justice, the idea that most people get what they deserve. (This may be one reason why even 30% of those Americans unaffiliated with any church nonetheless believe in punishment in hell.) A third factor is the tendency in most people to put greater emphasis on punishment than on reward: losing $100 is far more painful than winning the same amount is pleasing. Why would belief in an angry god be any use? When humans developed language, they could spread word of cheating, freeriding and the like. Raping your neighbour’s mate might once have made evolutionary sense—spreading your own genes at little cost—but “in a clever and gossiping species, knowledge of selfish actions could spread and come back to haunt us” in the form of a furious husband or a village mob. Since cheating is now costlier, belief in an invisible monitor helps people avoid those costs, and so survive with their reputations intact, and pass on their genes. So much for the evolutionary biology. Mr Johnson brings his political science into the picture by arguing that societies which punish cheaters are more likely to survive and grow. He quotes John Locke, a 17th-century English philosopher: “Those who deny the existence of the Deity are not to be tolerated at all. Promises, covenants and oaths, which are the bonds of human society, can have no hold upon or sanctity for an atheist.” Those bonds and covenants allow societies to co-ordinate action and plan for the future. Mr Johnson’s own research into 186 preindustrial cultures found that moralising religious beliefs were more prevalent in larger and more complex societies; these were more likely to be policed, use money and pay taxes. Others have noticed that religious kibbutzim in Israel are thriving, whereas secular socialist ones are in decline. The fact that moralising religious beliefs are more prevalent in more complex societies does not prove that one caused the other. But the striking number and variety of examples add credence to Mr Johnson’s theory. This book is not a detailed account of religious belief. Nor does Mr Johnson bother grappling with modern theologians’ subtle and abstract ideas of God and hell. His subject is the mind, not the deity, and he finishes by musing how resilient religious thinking has proved to be in the face of science: “Learning religion is part of human nature. Learning science is a battle against human nature.” Mr Johnson does not seem a pious man himself. But unlike atheists such as Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris, he is not out to embarrass religious belief and chase its subscribers from the public square. The religious instinct is too deep-seated, he thinks. Instead, critics of superstition are best advised to work with the grain of human psychology rather than against it, finding more benevolent ways to satisfy human yearning for something “out there”. What form such an atheist religion should take, though, God only knows.THE past seven years have been an extraordinary period for central bankers. Not only have they cut interest rates to zero (and even below) in the developed world; for the first time in their history central banks have greatly expanded their balance sheets, buying government bonds and other assets. Most economists agree that vigorous action was needed in the wake of the financial crisis in 2007-08 in order to head off a repeat of the Great Depression. Nevertheless, the sheer scale and protracted nature of such monetary stimulus is now a cause for concern among some commentators; have the banks permanently distorted the economy? In December the Federal Reserve made the first, tentative step towards normality, with a quarter-point rate increase. Mohamed El-Erian, a former IMF economist and executive at the Pimco fund management group, is the latest to sound the alarm. While central banks “averted tremendous human suffering”, he argues that they have failed to generate what the Western world really needs—“the combination of high, durable and inclusive growth together with genuine financial stability”. Worse still, politicians have come to rely on central bankers to provide the main source of economic stimulus. As a result, Mr El-Erian asserts, they have failed to force through reforms that were badly needed. The long period of easy monetary policy has pushed up asset prices and thus wealth inequality. It has also meant that the appetite for financial risks (market speculation, in other words) is greater than the willingness of businesses to take economic risks by increasing investment. Other problems include high long-term unemployment, a loss of trust in authority and the failure to co-ordinate economic policy. The global economy is rapidly approaching a T-junction, he argues, where the road heads in two diametrically opposite directions. One will lead to higher growth, reduced financial risk and a lessening of inequality; the other will see all those measures head in the wrong direction. Mr El-Erian does a good job of describing the problems. But the book falters when he tries to set out his plan for taking the right path away from the T-junction. He cites a number of necessary measures, including revamping the education system, strengthening infrastructure, improving labour competitiveness and flexibility, while simultaneously closing tax loopholes and increasing marginal tax rates on the wealthy in order to reduce inequality. But he only touches on these issues; a lot more detail is needed. Improving education may be a good idea, but it will be a decade or so before today’s schoolchildren have any impact on labour productivity. How will growth be improved in the meantime? Instead of answering such questions, he launches into a meandering section about the need for new thinking to deal with “bimodal distributions” (his T-junction metaphor). Just when readers want to get into the meat of the debate on economic policy, they are served a chapter called “Translating Awareness into Optionality, Resilience and Agility”. Mr El-Erian is right that employers need to embrace diversity in hiring, but that subject does not belong in a book on central banking. In a sense, however, the disappointing ending symbolises the state of economic debate. Central banks have provided all the help they can, and the burden of improving long-term growth ought to fall on politicians. But no one can agree on precisely what needs to be done. The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability and Avoiding the Next Collapse. By Mohamed El-Erian. Random House; 296 pages; $28.So hard to capture him The Vanishing Man: In Pursuit of Velázquez. By Laura Cumming. Chatto & Windus; 304 pages; £18.99. To be published in America by Scribner in April. EDOUARD MANET, a French Impressionist artist, considered him “the greatest painter that ever was”. To Laura Cumming, art critic of the Observer, a British Sunday paper, Diego Velázquez, whose precocious talent propelled him to the position of sole portrait painter to Philip IV of Spain at just 24, is something more. Shattered by the death of her father when she was in her late 20s, Ms Cumming retreated to Madrid. It was there she first saw Velázquez’s late masterpiece, “Las Meninas”, an enigmatic group portrait of the long-faced Spanish Habsburgs. She was transfixed. The princess, the dwarf and the artist himself looked out at her, as she looked at them, and in that moment they were alive again. Somehow the painting held back death: “He gave me the consolation to return to my own life.” This spiritual experience prompted Ms Cumming to look for historical records of other personal encounters with art. One she found concerned John Snare. In October 1845 Snare, a bookseller, peered closely at the painting he had come 30 miles (48km) to see sold at auction, a supposed Anthony Van Dyck of the young King Charles I. Licking a finger, he rubbed at the grimy varnish: “I never can forget the impression as the tones came alive like magic.” He was sure this was no Van Dyck, but the famous “lost Velázquez” painted while the English prince was in Spain courting the infanta. Snare’s quest to prove this conviction would consume his whole life, leading him from provincial prosperity in Reading to ruin and isolation in a cold-water tenement on Broadway. Ms Cumming’s book is thus a double biography, alternating between the life and endeavours of Velázquez and those of this humble man who loved him, framed in a fragment of memoir by a woman who loves them both. Like Snare, Ms Cumming is an evangelist for Velázquez, this book her case for more conversions. Through explorations of his work, she illuminates the innovations with which he would transform painting. His subjects do not inhabit a specific place, but rather a moment in time, which the painting shares with the viewer. From Velázquez’s former slave to the king himself, each is portrayed with respect as he or she fixes the viewer with that unsurpassed intensity of gaze. With almost no preparatory studies, he translated his subjects onto the canvas in a flurry of expressive colour. Up close, they dissolve into what Kenneth Clark, a British historian and one-time director of the National Gallery, once called “a salad of beautiful brushstrokes”; yet step back, and the colours resolve into likenesses of remarkable realism. Among the delights in this book are the many vignettes and miniature histories that punctuate the narrative—the socioeconomic significance of the stiff white golilla collar in Philip IV’s bankrupt court, the establishment of the Stuyvesant Institute in New York and the circumstances of the first world boxing title. As compelling and entertaining as a detective novel, this is an engaging book, comparable to C. Lewis Hind’s “Days with Velázquez” from 1906. Written in the fluid prose that characterised her first book, on self-portraits, “A Face to the World”, it is a labour of love even if her enthusiasm can be overwhelming; repetitions and occasional hyperbole temper the enjoyment. The densely researched web of pictures and catalogues, receipts, translations and letters, court proceedings and handbills, painters, courtiers and players is at times confusing. Ms Cumming, nonetheless, paints a beguiling picture of lives lived for art. When Sir Lawrence Gowing, a British artist and writer, reviewed Jonathan Brown’s seminal biography, “Velázquez: Painter and Courtier”, for the New York Times in 1986, he reflected that “No painting is harder to write about than that of Velázquez, and we must still, I think, await the words that will convey the compassionate integration of vision and paint with human subject that makes [his painting] so noble.” In “The Vanishing Man”, Laura Cumming succeeds in coming close.City of Thorns: Nine Lives in the World’s Largest Refugee Camp. By Ben Rawlence. Picador; 384 pages; $26. Portobello; £14.99. POLICEMEN clutching battered AK-47s stifle yawns in the hot sun outside the Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi. On the road leading up to the entrance cameras flash every few seconds, recording the number plate of each passing car. A city that once was fairly relaxed now feels as if it is under siege, its slumber ended by an attack on the mall in 2013 that left 67 people dead and as many as 175 wounded. The Shabaab, a Somali jihadist group, claimed responsibility. Kenyan politicians quickly blamed Dadaab, the world’s biggest refugee camp, demanding that it should be closed. No connection was found between the attackers and the camp, yet the same demand is made every time Kenya suffers another outrage. The sprawling camp was set up in 1992 to provide short-term shelter for refugees fleeing Somalia’s civil war and famine. It kept growing. Today Dadaab is home to about 500,000 people, dwarfing the main towns in the north-east of Kenya. Its economy, including its role as a way-station for a vast sugar-smuggling operation that is worth as much as $400m a year, powers that of the immediate region. Yet Dadaab is a refugee camp that has been largely forgotten by the world. A generation of young people have been born and educated in it; now they scrabble to earn a living there. Many are starting families in its confines. Trapped in limbo, they wait for resettlement abroad, too afraid to return to Somalia. Their lives, chronicled in detail by Ben Rawlence in “City of Thorns”, are a constant struggle for dignity and agency in a place that seems determined to deny them both.  The stories he tells are gripping. A Somali mother takes her five children, a pot, a kettle, a cup and a plate and sets out to walk for more than two weeks to the camp across the Kenyan border. She chivvies the youngest by telling him that a lion is pacing right behind. These tales do not come together in a neat ending, as they might in a novel. Instead the reader is left with a sense of loss and limbo—and the scent of dry wind, brush and sand. Lingering over it all is a strong feeling of lives being wasted by a world compassionate enough only to prevent people starving or being slaughtered in civil war, but not caring enough to resettle its many children and young adults—and make their lives worth living. THE slightly leaning point of the Aiguille de la République, in the Mont Blanc range, is just large enough for a nerveless climber to sit and admire the view: 2,300 metres of empty air between his perch and the glacier below. But on September 4th 2014 Tancrède Melet was not sitting on it. He was pirouetting in his wingsuit to display the underarm webbing that would make him swoop down like a bird, and blowing kisses to the camera with which he was filming himself. A moment later, he jumped. It made sense. To go back to his partner and supper in Chamonix the way he had come, by train, hike, 650 metres of rock-climbing and a brief bivouac in the snow, would consume ten hours. It would take three minutes, if he flew. Every void and drop seemed to beckon him to throw himself into it, with only a parachute to save him. He couldn’t see a cliff or a building without wanting to jump off: sometimes in his wingsuit, sometimes half-naked, somersaulting or cartwheeling over the edge. Once he was fired from a giant catapult, howling with joy at the speed with which the mountain walls shot past. If clouds or rainbows filled the void, so much the better, because he or others would usually be filming his performance, and the beauty of it—l’esthétique of his body curving and cavorting in space—was almost the most important thing. Foremost, though, was the extraordinary clearing and freeing of his mind. He could seldom hide his slight vexation when the parachute checked his fall. Jumping was one route into emptiness. The other was to walk out into it along a thin nylon slackwire, to see if he could get across from safety to safety and what might happen if he failed. He walked across the gorges of the Dourbie in southern France, and between the Tours Mercuriales in Paris; in Kjerag in Norway, in winter, he crossed on a wire between ice-walls 450 metres above a fjord. He walked the line, almost invisibly high, that joined two hot-air balloons. On many highlines he had a leash to save him. On some, he did not. He would step slowly, often barefoot for better grip, arms out, as the wire swayed. If he slipped—and he did slip—he had to grab the wire, with hands or curling feet, and hang limply over the far blue view until he could lever himself back. Sometimes he crossed with an open, but quite useless, umbrella in one hand. Wasn’t he scared? Occasionally. Yet he was no closer to death, he thought, than a man who drove too fast on the motorway—or anyone else in this “community of mortals”. With base-jumping, he was mostly just curious to find out what surprises lay in store for his body or his mind if he flew through limits unbreached before; or through the life/death limit everyone crossed, if it came to that. “Who”, his publicity ran, “will be the first to venture into the unknown and reach for the stars?” With highlining, he felt more cautious. A slackwire between two trees was a doddle; on a somewhat higher wire, it was still possible to centre himself and focus calmly across the distance. But great heights, with their choppy winds and the loss of visual landmarks, racked both his nerves and his balance. He had to “beat himself up” to do the walk at all—or remember how on his first highline, too scared to go more than three steps, he had felt such an “explosion of sensations” that he was hooked for life. The devil’s whisper Thin, dark and shy, he did not look like an extreme sportsman and disliked being called one. Nor was he a daredevil; he was more thoughtful than that. There was a dash of the devilish, though: a whisper in his ear that said, “Why don’t you just try…?”, to which, after communing with his laptop and maps for a while, he would grin back, “That should work!” His summer climbing gear was Bermuda shorts, a white straw hat and a “Think Different” T-shirt. Point made: he seemed to think like no one else. Essentially he saw himself as an artist of the void, weaving together base-jumping, acrobatics and highlining to make hair-raising theatre among the peaks. Love of wild mélanges had been encouraged by his parents, who took him out of school when he was bullied for a stammer and, instead, let him range over drawing, music, gymnastics and the circus. Though for four years he slaved as a software engineer, he dreamed of recovering that freedom. “One beautiful day” he threw up the job, bought a van, and took to the roads of France to climb and walk the slackwire. In the Verdon gorges of the Basses-Alpes he fell in with a fellow enthusiast, Julien Millot, an engineer of the sort who could fix firm anchors among snow-covered rocks for lines that spanned crevasses; with him he formed a 20-strong team, the Flying Frenchies, composed of climbers, cooks, musicians, technicians and clowns. These kindred spirits gave him confidence to push ever farther out into empty space. Many thought him crazy. That was unfair. He respected the rules of physics, and made sure his gear was safe. When he died, by holding on too long to the rope of a hot-air balloon that shot up too fast, he had been on the firm, dull ground, getting ready. It looked like another devil-prompted connerie to push the limits of free flight, but this time there was no design in it. He was just taken completely by surprise, as he had hoped he might be all along. Several governments in Latin America and the Caribbean advised women to delay getting pregnant because of an outbreak of Zika, a mosquito-borne virus that may cause birth defects in babies of mothers who are infected. The government of El Salvador suggested that women wait until 2018 to get pregnant. Those of Colombia, Ecuador and Jamaica recommended shorter delays. Brazil, which has more cases than any other country, will deploy 220,000 troops to help battle the epidemic. See here and here.  Venezuela’s National Assembly rejected a request by the president, Nicolás Maduro, for emergency powers to deal with an economic crisis caused by a combination of low oil prices and the government’s populist policies. The opposition-controlled legislature said that the government already has enough powers to deal with the crisis. The IMF forecast that the economy will shrink by 8% this year and that the inflation rate will be 720%. The United States further eased restrictions on trade to Cuba. The new rules allow American banks to finance exports of all products except farm goods. Sales of products to government agencies will be permitted on a case-by-case basis if they benefit ordinary Cubans. Harvest doom The impact of a drought across large parts of southern Africa became clearer when South Africa forecast a 25% fall in the harvest of maize, its staple crop. Zimbabwe is likely to be particularly hard hit after poor crops in 2015. The 2016 harvest is expected to be even smaller and 16% of its population already gets food aid. A panel of experts at the UN recommended that sanctions should be imposed on the leaders in both sides of South Sudan’s bloody civil war, now in its third year. Talks aimed at bringing an end to five years of civil war in Syria failed to get under way as planned in Geneva because of arguments about which factions should be invited and whether a ceasefire should precede negotiation. It was hoped that they might start on January 29th. See article.  Iran’s president, Hassan Rohani, visited Rome and Paris hoping to drum up investment in his country, newly liberated from nuclear-related sanctions. In Rome, nude statues were covered up to spare Mr Rohani’s blushes. Migration watchers Greece was criticised by the European Commission for “seriously neglecting” its obligations during the migration crisis as a member of the Schengen passport-free area. As a result the commission may advise other EU member states to reintroduce temporary migration controls at their frontiers. Austria and Hungary decided to pre-empt this by tightening their borders. The Danish government approved a bill which allows policemen to seize valuables worth more than DKr10,000 ($1,460) from refugees, in order to pay for food and accommodation. The measure, which was criticised by human-rights groups, is similar to ones already in place in the Netherlands, Switzerland and in the state of Bavaria in Germany. In Chisinau, the capital of Moldova, the poorest country in Europe, 20,000 protesters took to the streets to demand the resignation of Pavel Filip, the prime minister. The protests brought together both pro-European and pro-Russian citizens, with both camps complaining of inequality and corruption in the country. See article.  Generation no-change The Communist Party in Vietnam chose not to endorse the hopes of the colourful reformist prime minister, Nguyen Tan Dung, to accede to the post of party chief. Instead, that position remained with the grey incumbent, Nguyen Phu Trong, whose backers ended Mr Dung’s political career. Meanwhile, the Communist Party in next-door Laos replaced a 79-year-old party head with a 78-year-old. Vietnam’s party wants to steer a delicate course between America and China, while that in Laos needs to balance its two biggest neighbours, China and Vietnam. Bold reform will have to wait. See article.  Akira Amari resigned as Japan’s economy minister, after it was claimed his constituency office had not reported cash it received from a building company seeking favours. He said he had been so busy negotiating Japan’s membership of the Trans Pacific Partnership trade deal that he failed to spot wrongdoing by his aide. Mr Amari is a key architect of Shinzo Abe’s reform programme; his departure is a setback for Abenomics. In Malaysia the attorney-general found that no laws had been broken when hundreds of millions of dollars were transferred into bank accounts belonging to the prime minister, Najib Razak, supposedly by members of the Saudi royal family. His decision was met with disbelief. China deported a Swedish civil-rights activist after detaining him amid a sweeping crackdown on dissent. After his arrest, the activist, Peter Dahlin, was shown on Chinese television making a “voluntary” confession to having broken the law by helping unlicensed Chinese lawyers. See article.  During a visit to Beijing (which followed ones to the capitals of Laos and Vietnam), America’s secretary of state, John Kerry, and his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi, agreed on the need for a new UN resolution on North Korea’s nuclear programme following its test of a nuclear device. But China has not said whether this should include new sanctions, as America wants. Mr Wang warned that a resolution should not provoke tensions. He’s got the money Rumours swirled that Michael Bloomberg might enter the race for the American presidency as an independent. He is apparently worried by Donald Trump’s dominance in the Republican race, and also by the rise of Bernie Sanders in the Democratic one. A “Draft Bloomberg” movement tried in 2008 and 2012 to get Mr Bloomberg to run. Ammon Bundy, a car-fleet manager and anti-government protester who led the armed occupation of a federal wildlife reserve in Oregon, was arrested with four other members of his “militia” 50 miles from the reserve. One of his supporters was shot and killed during the arrest. Mr Bundy said he was following “divine” instructions. His antics have doubtless made it less likely that his complaints about federal over-regulation will be heeded.
