The World Bank reduced its forecast for the average price of a barrel of oil this year to $37, from the $51 it had projected just last October. In all, price forecasts for 37 of the 46 commodities that the bank monitors were revised lower. The Federal Reserve cited concerns about the world economy at its latest meeting, which suggests it is hesitant about raising interest rates again at its March meeting. The Chinese new fear China’s stockmarkets had another turbulent week, with the Shanghai Composite index falling by 6.4% over one day to its lowest point in more than a year. The central bank injected $67 billion into the financial system to boost liquidity. It also continued to prop up the yuan, which is under pressure partly because of the large amount of capital that is flowing out of the country. Meanwhile, the government decided to reduce capacity in steelmaking, which could result in 400,000 job losses. Italy, which has one of the highest rates of non-performing loans in Europe, struck a deal with the European Commission to help its banks sell off their bad debt. The government will provide guarantees to investors who buy the loans. The agreement comes after a dramatic fall in the share prices of Italian banks in recent weeks. See article.  Andrew Bailey, who oversees financial stability for the Bank of England, was selected by the government to head Britain’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates banks’ behaviour and integrity. His appointment comes after a six-month search for someone to replace Martin Wheatley, who was ousted by the Treasury last summer, in part because of his uncompromising approach towards wrongdoing in the City. Senior bankers generally welcomed Mr Bailey as someone who is tough but fair. A jury in London found five former brokers not guilty of conspiring with Tom Hayes to manipulate LIBOR, the benchmark inter-bank interest rate. Mr Hayes was sentenced to prison last August. Blasts from the past JPMorgan Chase paid $1.4 billion to resolve a claim by Lehman Brothers’ creditors that it unnecessarily siphoned liquidity from the investment bank before it collapsed in September 2008. In a separate settlement the bank agreed to pay $1 billion to Ambac, an insurer, in a dispute over mortgage-backed securities sold by Bear Stearns, a distressed bank that was bought by JPMorgan Chase in a government-backed rescue in March 2008. American International Group said it would return $25 billion to shareholders, a move it hopes will rally shareholder support in the face of calls from activist investors, led by Carl Icahn, to split the insurance company in three. Johnson Controls, a maker of car parts, agreed to merge with Tyco, which builds electronic security-systems. The $20 billion merger will allow Johnson to move its headquarters to Ireland, where Tyco has relocated its base, in order to lower its tax bill. The American Treasury had introduced rules last year to make such “inversion” deals harder after a political backlash. Tyco, which became entangled in a high-profile corporate scandal in 2002, will lose its name after the acquisition. In Britain, where the generous tax arrangements enjoyed by multinationals has created a political kerfuffle, Google reached an agreement with British tax authorities in which it will pay £130m ($186m) in back taxes. This came after a lengthy investigation into whether the internet giant had coughed up all the taxes it should have over the past decade. The inquiry found that Google had not evaded tax, but critics allege that the deal was still too generous to the tech firm. See here and here.  Facebook posted a quarterly profit of over $1 billion for the first time on the back of strong revenues from its ads on mobile devices. DeepMind, a secretive artificial-intelligence company acquired by Google for $400m in 2014, announced that it had hit an AI milestone by developing a computer that can beat the best humans at Go, a complicated board game of East Asian origin. Such a feat had not been expected for years. Sorry, wrong number Apple warned that it expects sharply slower sales of the iPhone, which accounts for two-thirds of its revenues, in the current quarter. It blamed currency fluctuations, uncertainties in the global market and a sluggish China, its biggest market. Sales of iPhones were flat in the last three months of 2015 compared with the same quarter in 2014, and it shifted 25% fewer iPads. Still, its quarterly profit of $18.4 billion was the biggest to date for any listed company. Commenting on the global outlook, Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said the situation is “dramatically different” from a year ago. See article. More KAL's cartoonsTHE muscle-bound rivals have entered the ring. The verbals are at fever pitch. On February 1st Iowans will caucus in the opening round of America’s presidential tussle. Just over a week later, voters will gather in New Hampshire. From there the contest will move on towards Super Tuesday on March 1st, and beyond that to the conventions in July. It is the world’s greatest electoral tournament. It is not going to plan. Across America, political elites and moderate voters are in a state of disbelief. Hillary Clinton, as much part of the establishment as the Washington Monument, is under pressure from Bernie Sanders, a crotchety senator from Vermont who calls himself a democratic socialist. The sensible squad on the right—“Jeb!” Bush, Marco Rubio, John Kasich et al—have been impaled by the gimlet gibes of Ted Cruz and swamped by the sprawling, tumultuous diatribes of Donald Trump. The choice was supposed to be between a Bush and a Clinton—more a coronation than an election. Instead, the race for the world’s most powerful office has been more dramatically upended by outsiders than any presidential campaign in the past half-century. America, what on earth is going on? Bigger and brasher The United States is not the only country where the establishment is on the ropes. Britain’s Labour Party is in thrall to a man well to the left of Mr Sanders. In the first round of France’s recent regional elections, the far-right National Front won the largest vote. Populists are leading the polls in the Netherlands and running the government in Poland and Hungary. In politically correct Sweden, nativists are polling at 30%. Like voters across the West, Americans are angry—often for the same reasons. For years a majority of them have been telling pollsters that the country is heading in the wrong direction. Median wages have stagnated even as incomes at the top have soared. Cultural fears compound economic ones: in 2015 a Pew poll found that white Christians had become a minority in America. And in recent months, fears of terrorism have added a menacing ingredient to the populist brew (see pages 19-21). Though the trends are common, populism in America is especially potent. Europe has grown used to relative decline. As the sole superpower, America has smarted at the rise of China and the spread of jihadism from parts of the Middle East that it had poured blood and treasure into trying to pacify. When Mr Trump promises to “Make America great again” and Mr Cruz vows that the sand of Iraq and Syria will “glow in the dark”, they are harking back to a moment, after the fall of the Soviet Union, when America enjoyed untrammelled power. A second reason is that, in America, outsiders channel popular anger into a political duopoly. In Europe Mr Trump and Mr Sanders would have their own protest parties, which inevitably struggle to win high office. In contrast, America’s two-party system sucked in Mr Sanders, who joined the Democrats last year, and Mr Trump, who rejoined the Republicans in 2009. If they win the primaries, they will control political machines designed to catapult them into the White House. And a third, related, explanation is that elites cannot easily manage America’s raucous democracy. Populist insurgencies are written into the source code of a polity that began as a revolt against a distant, high-handed elite. The electoral college devolves power from the centre. Primaries attract the 20% of eligible voters most fired up by politics. Candidates with money behind them—his own in the case of Mr Trump, someone else’s for Mr Cruz—can sneer at their party’s high command. Hence populists and anti-establishment candidates make frequent appearances in American presidential races. But as the thrilling spectacle runs its course and voters reluctantly compromise with reality, they tend to fade. That usually happens early (Pat Buchanan, a Republican firebrand who promised a “pitchfork rebellion” in 1996, won the New Hampshire primary, but was out of the race by the end of March). On the rare occasion when insurgents win the nomination, they have collapsed at the general election: Barry Goldwater lost 44 of 50 states in 1964. Those who stand as independents (as Ross Perot did in 1992) have also failed—which would not bode well for a self-financing candidate like Michael Bloomberg. For the Democrats, history is likely to be repeated in 2016. Even if he wins Iowa and New Hampshire, it is hard to see Mr Sanders thriving as the race moves to the delegate-heavy South. Mrs Clinton has money, experience and support from black Democrats. National polls put her 15 points ahead. But this time really could be different for Republicans. Goldwater’s surge came late; Mr Trump has mesmerised crowds, and been rewarded in the polls since July. Some Republican grandees who detest Mr Cruz even more than they despise Mr Trump have fallen in behind the billionaire. Perhaps on the day people won’t turn up for either man; perhaps the two of them will throw enough vitriol to destroy each other; perhaps what is left of Mr Bush’s $100m war chest will leave the elite time to mount a counter-attack. As of now, both populists have a chance of taking the fight to the convention and even, barring a backroom establishment deal, of winning the nomination. The 50:50 nation That prospect worries this newspaper. Neither Mr Trump nor Mr Cruz offers coherent economics or wise policy. Neither passes the test of character. Yet, merely by being on the ballot in November either would come close to the presidency. General elections have become 50:50 affairs, determined by a few votes in a handful of states. Mrs Clinton is not a good campaigner; Mr Trump and Mr Cruz are. In so far as he has policies, Mr Trump borrows freely from right and left. He could win votes by tacking brazenly to the centre. In a close race, a terrorist attack or a scandal near polling day could be decisive. Pessimism about America is misplaced. The economy is in better shape than that of any other big, rich country; unemployment is low; so is violent crime. But mainstream Republicans have pilloried Barack Obama with such abandon that they are struggling to answer Mr Trump and Mr Cruz. If anyone should regret the spectacle about to unfold, it is they.“GIVE me lucky generals,” Napoleon is supposed to have said, preferring them to talented ones. Muhammadu Buhari, a former general, has not had much luck when it comes to the oil price. Between 1983 and 1985 he was Nigeria’s military ruler. Just before he took over, oil prices began a lengthy collapse; the country’s export earnings fell by more than half. The economy went into a deep recession and Mr Buhari, unable to cope, was overthrown in a coup.   Now he is president again. (He won a fair election last year against a woeful opponent; The Economist endorsed him.) And once again, oil prices have slumped, from $64 a barrel on the day he was sworn in to $32 eight months later. Growth probably fell by half in 2015, from 6.3% to little more than 3% (see article). Oil accounts for 70% of the government’s revenues and 95% of export earnings. The government deficit will widen this year to about 3.5% of GDP. The currency, the naira, is under pressure. The central bank insists on an exchange rate of 197-199 naira to the dollar. On the black market, dollars sell for 300 naira or more. Instead of letting the naira depreciate to reflect the country’s loss of purchasing power, Mr Buhari’s government is trying to keep it aloft. The central bank has restricted the supply of dollars and banned the import of a long list of goods, from shovels and rice to toothpicks. It hopes that this will maintain reserves and stimulate domestic production. When the currency is devalued, all imports become more expensive. But under Mr Buhari’s system the restrictions on imports are by government fiat. Factory bosses complain they cannot import raw materials such as chemicals and fret that, if this continues, they may have to shut down. Many have turned to the black market to obtain dollars, and are doubtless smuggling in some of the goods that have been banned. In charts: Explore Nigeria’s economy and politics Nigerians have heard this tune before. Indeed, Mr Buhari tried something similar the last time he was president. Then, as now, he resisted what he called the “bitter pill” of devaluation. When, as a result, foreign currency ran short, he rationed it and slashed imports by more than half. When Nigerians turned to the black market he sealed the country’s borders. When unemployment surged he expelled 700,000 migrants. Barking orders at markets did not work then, and it will not work now. Mr Buhari is right that devaluation will lead to inflation—as it has in other commodity exporters. But Nigeria’s policy of limiting imports and creating scarcity will be even more inflationary. A weaker currency would spur domestic production more than import bans can and, in the long run, hurt consumers less. The country needs foreign capital to finance its deficits but, under today’s policies, it will struggle to get any. Foreign investors assume that any Nigerian asset they buy in naira now will cost less later, after the currency has devalued. So they wait. Those who fail to learn from history... Mr Buhari’s tenure has in some ways been impressive. He has restored a semblance of security to swathes of northern Nigeria that were overrun by schoolgirl-abducting jihadists. He has won some early battles against corruption. Some of his economic policies are sound, too. He has indicated that he will stop subsidising fuel and selling it at below-market prices. This is brave, since the subsidies are popular, even though they have been a disaster (the cheap fuel was often sold abroad and petrol stations frequently ran dry). If Mr Buhari can find the courage to let fuel cost what the market says it should, why not the currency, too? You can forgive the general for being unlucky; but not for failing to learn from past mistakes.IT WAS meant to win plaudits for clawing more money out of cunning, tax-shy multinationals. Instead, a deal between Google and the British government, in which the tech giant will pay £130m ($185m) in back taxes covering a ten-year period, has attracted only opprobrium. Critics at home and abroad argue that Google has got off lightly. On the European mainland, for example, suspected corporate tax-dodgers face raids and whopping demands: France wants €500m ($550m) or more from Google. Apple could be on the hook for $8 billion if the European Commission, which is investigating its Irish operations, concludes that it got a cushy deal from the Emerald Isle. Britain may well have been too generous to Google. But the bigger problem with the deal is what it says about international efforts to crack down on corporate-tax avoidance. Nineteen for me, one for you Corporate taxes are a poor way to raise revenue. Since the burden is ultimately borne by people, whether investors, workers or consumers, it would, in theory, be more efficient to tax them directly. But abolishing corporate levies would create its own problems (see article). In poor countries with large informal sectors, big companies are a rare source of reliable tax revenue. In rich countries, wealthy people would doubtless turn themselves into companies to avoid income taxes. For policymakers, therefore, the priority is to make corporate taxes less distorting and less easy to avoid. The rules governing the taxation of multinationals are a threadbare patchwork of national laws and bilateral treaties, dating back almost a century and designed for an age of manufacturing, not multimedia. They grow ever more gameable with the spread of e-commerce and companies’ increasing reliance on intangible intellectual property (IP). Technology and drug firms, for instance, routinely move their IP to subsidiaries in tax havens, which can then manipulate the fees they charge other parts of the group for access to it in order to suck their profits into the lower-tax country. These manoeuvres may be legal, but their goal is tax avoidance, often in a way that flouts the spirit of the law. In an era of austerity, that offends the public mood, which is why governments around the world are being pressed to implement dozens of anti-avoidance measures proposed last year by the OECD, a club of mainly rich countries. Many of these measures make sense. They seek to tie tax more closely to economic activity and also to limit some arcane but hugely profitable tricks, such as using internal loans to claim tax deductions. Progress at the OECD is spurring action: indeed, as part of its deal with British tax authorities, Google has agreed to pay tax in future on a chunk of its sales to British advertisers. The problem is that the OECD approach maintains a damaging fiction which is ingrained in the current system: that a multinational can be seen as a cluster of separate companies to be treated as if they are trading with each other at arm’s length. The “transfer pricing” rules that police this system are complex and flawed. Keeping this approach, but toughening up the policing, means creating yet more rules—and loopholes. Better to think of each firm as a single entity. Then countries could either agree to share the tax on companies’ worldwide profits according to a formula that takes account of their sales, employees, assets and so on; or allow the entire worldwide profits to be taxed by the home country, with a tax-credit mechanism for countries where the work actually goes on or revenue is earned—but, crucially, not brass-plate jurisdictions—in order to avoid double taxation. In both cases, the incentives and opportunities to move profits into tax havens would be greatly reduced. Instead of this unitary approach, however, the patchwork persists, and with it the likelihood of unco-ordinated national tax policies. This is the context in which Google and the British government forged their deal. The bill presented to the company looks from the outside like a sweetheart deal, but it is impossible to be sure because you cannot know how it was calculated. This lack of transparency will do nothing to increase public confidence that tax avoidance is being curbed. Nor, in the long run, will the Google approach help multinationals. If a lot of countries go their own way, at their own pace, the result could be tax chaos, a bloody battle over countries’ taxing rights in which overlapping claims cause the pendulum to swing back from under- to over-taxation. Tax diplomacy, like politics, is the art of the possible. But failing to push harder for a radical overhaul, at a time when the planets were aligned for change, looks like a costly mistake.PANDEMICS make for good horror films. Few things are scarier than a dangerous, incurable new disease that spreads quickly. And globalisation means that plagues can travel far, wide and terrifyingly fast. Diseases such as HIV/AIDS, SARS, West Nile virus and Ebola fever were born in places as varied as African jungles and Chinese poultry markets. Then they broke out to spread panic around the world. The newest horror is Zika (see article). This mosquito-borne virus, which originated in Africa, was spotted in Brazil last year. It is now moving across Latin America and the Caribbean, with cases in more than 20 countries. Originally, it was thought to cause little worse than a rash and fever. Now, propelling the disease into the realm of nightmares, doctors suspect that when pregnant women catch it, their babies may be permanently damaged. Zika is the prime suspect for a sharp increase in the number of babies with microcephaly in Brazil. Children are born with abnormally small heads and are likely to be brain-damaged. They may suffer severe learning difficulties, seizures and other problems. Many will die young. Scientists are trying to confirm the link between Zika and microcephaly. Some suspect that the virus may also occasionally cause serious damage to nerves and the immune system in infected adults. Though a mosquito bite is the main way to catch it, there are fears that it can also be transmitted sexually. Are the risks so high that countries lucky enough to be free of it should advise their citizens to stay away from those known to have it? Will it sweep through entire populations, creating herd immunity? And if so, should women try to avoid getting pregnant until that happens, as governments in some Latin American countries have advised? Zika has no cure and a vaccine will not be available for at least a decade. But that is no cause for despair—nor for governments to scare women into not having babies. Two things are known for certain. The first is that the main, possibly only, transmission route is via mosquitoes, which pick up the virus from infected people and pass it on when the pests next take a meal. The second is how to cut the number of mosquitoes—and preferably eradicate them. The idea of fighting mosquitoes has a long history. Aedes aegypti, the species that carries not only Zika but dengue, chikungunya and yellow fever, was almost eliminated from much of South America by the early 1960s, after a long anti-dengue campaign. The insects were killed with frequent fumigation. Health workers visited households to urge people to mop up standing water, where mosquitoes breed. But some countries slackened their efforts too soon. After the number of cases fell, politicians’ attention waned. And the mosquitoes returned in their buzzing billions. Biting back That campaign was led by the American regional branch of the World Health Organisation. It now needs to rally governments for a new push. Brazil is mobilising its armed forces for a nationwide door-to-door information campaign; other affected countries should do likewise. In poorer countries, donors could pay for ad campaigns, new health workers, insect repellents, insecticides and bed nets. If reservoirs of the virus are not to remain, ready to re-emerge, action is needed across the territory where Zika is at large and also in places, such as the subtropical parts of the United States on the Gulf of Mexico, where it is sure soon to arrive. Research into novel ways to kill mosquitoes also deserves more funding. Genetic modification, which produces mosquitoes that are sterile but still attractive to other mosquitoes, shows promise. A trial in Brazil suggests that releasing swarms of modified insects can reduce the unmodified population in months. All this will be pricey. But it would bring not one, but several, dread diseases under control. Aedes aegypti does not carry malaria, but the methods used to kill it will also kill Anopheles, which does. The moment has come again to take the fight to the mosquitoes—and this time to finish the job.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Cultural dissonance Ayaan Hirsi Ali has long and rightly complained of the West’s dual standards in the way it regards the Muslim mistreatment of women. By highlighting the issue as one affecting “European women”, you are reinforcing that hypocrisy (“Migrant men and European women”, January 16th). The most basic research into what happens inside Muslim communities—within Europe as well as outside—reveals a pattern of discrimination, physical and sexual abuse, and general misogyny that Western women (and hopefully men) would find intolerable. The Economist appears to have an idée fixe that immigration is a universal good, regardless of origin and consequences and holds pious hopes that work, time and education will promote integrated communities. Unfortunately, evidence is that even some second- and third-generation immigrants have not integrated successfully: the persistence of FGM; “honour-killing” and forced marriages; the support of terrorism at home and overseas; electoral fraud and malpractice in strongly immigrant areas; all suggest a significant, systemic failure. Kipling’s line that “East is East, and West is West and never the twain shall meet” may well be a good starting point for policy. Require all citizens—prospective, newly arrived or settled—to embrace the values of a modern, liberal democracy and for those who won’t, show them the door. SIMON DIGGINS You ask where the migrants from the Middle East and Africa should go if they can’t come to Europe. Surely they should be settled somewhere near their countries so that they can easily return home again one day? Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan have already taken in 4m migrants, four times more than Europe. If there was trouble in my country, I would not want to go far away and settle among people with an utterly different culture. Most of the 800,000 Kosovars who fled their country during the war with Serbia went home when the war was over. The Palestinians are still near their country, waiting to go home. I admire their steadfastness and hope that one day the Israelis will abandon Zionism like the South Africans abandoned apartheid, and allow the Palestinians to return home. MIKAEL GRUT Family values The real reason that local, family-owned stores in India are thriving in the face of modern retail chains is because families do not reckon the opportunity cost of the property they occupy (“Local Heroes”, January 16th). They either own the real estate or are paying a decades old, peppercorn rent protected by rent laws. As the chairman of the board of directors of a modern retail chain, I asked many such family patriarchs if they had considered this. The majority felt they owed it to their forebears from whom they had inherited the store to keep it going. Additionally, if it were to shut, they would lose their standing in their community. So until their progeny undergo a course in economics, you will continue to see the kiranas beat up the newfangled, tablet-wielding entrepreneurs. NAWSHIR MIRZA The case for aid * Your article on foreign aid highlights an important risk to the effectiveness of British aid which has received too little attention (“Strings Attached”, January 9th). When Tony Abbott abolished AusAID in 2013 and integrated its functions into those of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, it made aid less effective and project selection and evaluation became influenced by political motives. The Labour Party Bagehot is right to point out that the 230 Labour MPs in the House of Commons represent a much bigger and wider constituency than Jeremy Corbyn’s self-selected non-parliamentary supporters, who are accountable to no one but themselves (January 16th). But he is wrong to suggest that the moderate MPs should form a new “social democratic party”. They have absolutely no need to: all they need do is declare that the leadership of the Labour Party is entirely in the gift of members of the parliamentary party. They should then proceed to elect their own leader and return Mr Corbyn to the backbenches where he performed with such notable lack of distinction for more than 30 years. This assertion of their undoubted rights as elected lawmakers will no doubt send Mr Corbyn’s ragbag of political nutters even madder than they already are. It will also set off all sorts of show-trials, expulsions and deselections. In that event, the parliamentary Labour Party should simply endorse its own candidates for all constituencies. But in no circumstances should it relinquish its claim to be the real Labour Party which many millions of British voters support. MICHAEL EGAN In the name of science * This new preference for “scientific” exploration (“A new age of discovery”, January 2nd) isn’t so new. It brings to mind George Palmer Putnam, the American publisher, writer, and sometime-explorer who famously married Amelia Earhart in 1931. Catalonian politics When the new president of Catalonia, Carles Puigdemont, quoted a Catalan journalist, Carles Rahola, who was executed under Francisco Franco’s dictatorship saying “the invaders will be expelled from Catalonia”, he was not referring to the Spanish government, as you incorrectly reported (“Rebel, Rebel”, January 16th), but to the German and Italian fascist army that air-bombed Catalan cities during the Spanish civil war. Mr Puigdemont explained when he was sworn in before the Catalan parliament on January 10th how his use of the quote, at a memorial service in 2013, had been distorted and he was in fact using the reference to illustrate that the clutch of fascism doesn’t loom over Catalan lives any more. JOSEP SUÁREZ The big bank theory * The theory that big bank fees are high due to competition being “phoney” would be more convincing if not for the high number of low-fee competitors of the big banks (“Blunt Elbows”, January 9th). For instance, the vast majority of Americans are eligible to join member-owned credit unions, which generally have much lower fees. That the big banks are still huge despite this suggests that a more plausible explanation is that banking relationships are quite “sticky” and that the perceived hassle of switching to a low-fee competitor outweighs the benefits in many consumers’ minds. Indeed, extensive customer research in banking has indicated as such. Another level I found your conclusion on the future of European clubbing disheartening (“Less than ecstatic”, January 9th). The most demoralising part comes from the overwhelming statistical data illustrating a decline in the number of European venues. Nightlife is fundamental to the eclectic mixture of urban identity. It offers release, an ability to evade the realities of everyday existence. The case for the possibility of festivals overtaking clubbing is compelling. The rise in the number of festival-goers each summer arguably doesn’t have an inversely proportional effect on the allure of dark, grungy club scenes. No matter how financially compelling the economies of scale of big festivals are, there are DJs intent on returning to and retaining the urban scenes from which they came. This gives one hope. Councils may be able to close and regulate the buildings themselves, but the 24-hour party people are here to stay. JOSEPH MILLARD Ageing gracefully As one of the octogenarians who “fiddles with my hearing aid and takes afternoon naps” (“Three wise men”, January 9th), I wonder what the age limit is in order to avoid being ridiculed by your young reporters? Wasn’t it Tom Lehrer who wrote the song: “Make-fun-of-the-handicapped-week”? HANS ROTHENBORG * Letters appear online only
