WHEN Jeb Bush announced he was running for president seven months ago the tutting newspaper commentaries almost wrote themselves. With his famous name and war chest of over $100m, whistled up from Bush family benefactors in a matter of months, the former Florida governor was almost as strong a favourite for the Republican ticket as Hillary Clinton, who had made her inaugural campaign speech two days earlier, was for the Democratic one. Bush against Clinton? The prospect made American democracy seem stale and dynastic, rigged on behalf of a tiny political elite, whose members alone had the name recognition and deep pockets required to win its overpriced elections.    But now the primary process is about to get serious. In Iowa on February 1st perhaps 250,000 voters will brave icy roads to pick their champion in small groups, or caucuses. And the tutting has given way to real fear. On the Republican side, Mr Bush—or “Jeb!” as his campaign has cruelly styled him—is all but irrelevant. The son and brother of past presidents is clever and has a solid record of cutting taxes and privatising services. But Republican voters have dismissed him as dull and out-of-touch, an emblem of the political class they despise. The Republican front-runner, Donald Trump, is a celebrity builder with no previous political experience. He has raised little money, was once a registered Democrat and still refers derisively to his party as “the Republicans”, as if it is some unpromising acquisition he has been arm-twisted into buying. Mr Trump is quick-witted, charismatic and, during years as a reality television star, has built an outrageous public persona around his gargantuan ego. “I’m intelligent,” he likes to say. “Some people would say I’m very, very, very intelligent.” Uncertainty over whether this is self-parody or undiluted egomania is part of the act. Mr Trump is to public service what professional wrestling, which he loves, is to sport: entertaining and ludicrously implausible, a suspension of disbelief for escapists, a crude deception for the gullible. The digs he makes at his rivals, often in the form of tweets offering “advice”, can be amusing. A former propagator of conspiracy theories about Barack Obama’s place of birth, Mr Trump is now dishing out the same treatment to his closest challenger, Ted Cruz. A first-term senator from Texas, Mr Cruz was born in Canada, but to an American mother, which puts his eligibility to be president beyond serious doubt. “Ted—free legal advice on how to pre-empt the Dems on citizen issue. Go to court now & seek declaratory judgment—you will win!” Mr Trump tweeted to his nearly 6m followers. Yet his front-runner status is based less on Mr Trump’s wit than on his gift for understanding and pandering to people’s fears. The billionaire says that America has been beggared and wrecked by immigrant rapists, venal bankers and idiot politicians, is imperilled by Muslim maniacs, and mocked by the rest of the world. He rages against the Chinese, whom he accuses of inventing global warming to destroy American industry. Announcing his run at Trump Tower, his Manhattan skyscraper, he lamented: “We got $18 trillion in debt… we need money. We’re dying. We’re dying. We need money…Sadly, the American dream is dead.” Trumped-up charges Fortunately, Mr Trump has a plan to “make America great again”, a Reaganite phrase he has purloined. He wants to deport 11m illegal immigrants and their offspring, impose a 45% tariff on Chinese imports, kill the relatives of terrorist suspects and bar Muslims from entering America. To stanch the influx of “rapists” (never mind that for the past six years there has been a net outflow of people from America to Mexico), he would build a “beautiful wall” along the southern border. This is his signature policy and the subject of a much-anticipated call-and-response moment at the rallies he—descending from the sky in his monogrammed helicopter—has held all over America. “What are we gonna build?” he asks. “A wall!” the crowds holler back. “Who’s gonna pay?” “Mexico!” The notion of Mr Trump, who is backed by around 35% of Republican voters (see chart 1), as a presidential nominee is alarming. Yet Mr Cruz, who has 20% and is running him close in Iowa, is hardly a reassuring alternative. The self-made son of a Cuban immigrant, he came to national attention in 2013 when he tried to shut down the federal government in a vainglorious bid to defund Barack Obama’s health-care reform, an effort he compared to the resistance against Adolf Hitler. It was an example of the sort of cynical self-promotion for which Mr Cruz is loathed by his colleagues in the Senate. He aims to unite the most fiscally conservative part of the Republican coalition with the most socially conservative, evangelical Christians. Offering himself as a no-compromise right-winger and scourge of the party’s elite, Mr Cruz has done well in televised debates, raised more money than most of his ten surviving rivals—including $20m in the last three months of 2015—and covered the ground assiduously in pious Iowa. Hence his new preacherly style. “In the days that follow,” Mr Cruz recently declaimed while touring the state’s ultra-devout north-west, “we will send the regulators that descend on farmers like locusts back to Washington!” Raising his nasal voice, he then beseeched his small audience of corn farmers and their wives to pray, “for just a minute every day”, that God would make him president. If He does, Mr Cruz promises to scrap the Internal Revenue Service, institute a 10% flat-tax on income and urge the Federal Reserve to readopt the gold standard. Without divine intervention, it is hard to imagine Americans electing either of the Republican front-runners to be president. The lesson the party drew from Mitt Romney’s failure to dislodge Mr Obama in 2012 was that, in an increasingly diverse society, the Grand Old Party needed to widen its appeal. Mr Cruz’s target audience, white Christians, represent less than half the population. The obvious solution was to woo Hispanics, one of America’s fastest-growing electoral groups, who hold some conservative views, though only 27% of them voted for Mr Romney. That was why, in 2013, a handful of Republican senators, including Marco Rubio, who is running third in the primary contest, joined a bipartisan, and ultimately fruitless, effort to legalise the status of millions of illegal immigrants. “It’s really hard to get people to listen to you…if they think you want to deport their grandmother,” declared Mr Rubio, a son of poor Cuban immigrants, at the time. It is even harder when you call them rapists. Mr Trump is easily the most disliked candidate of either party; 60% of voters disapprove of him. There is a consolation for the Republicans. The Democrats could nominate someone even less electable. In Mrs Clinton’s path stands Bernie Sanders, a 74-year-old “democratic socialist”, who says American capitalism is rigged against the 99% and vows to dismantle banks and build Medicare into a universal health-care system. His claim that this would save $10 trillion over a decade has elicited scepticism. An independent senator from Vermont, Mr Sanders was until recently neither a member nor even an admirer of the Democratic Party, which he has called “ideologically bankrupt”. Yet polls suggest he has the support of 37% of its primary voters and could win in Iowa and at the New Hampshire primary on February 9th. From William Jennings Bryan and Huey Long to Ross Perot and Pat Buchanan, populists are as much a part of the American political tradition as tirades against Washington. They have typically thrived at a time of anxiety. Bryan and Long were creatures of depressed economies; Mr Perot went to war with free-trade, which many Americans feared, just as the two big parties decided to embrace it; Mr Buchanan stoked the same nativist fires that have given Mr Trump’s candidacy much of its heat. This time the unease seems to be mainly economic, and it is widespread. America has recovered well from the great recession of 2008-09—its unemployment rate is low, at 5%—yet wage growth remains anaemic. Real median household income in 2014 was almost $4,000 below its peak in 2007. That has shaken the national self-esteem; so have unsuccessful wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and their messy aftermath, including the rise of Islamic State. Asked “Are America’s best days behind us?”, in a recent survey, 49% of respondents said that they were. Black Americans, for whom that is clearly not true, are almost the only hopeful group. The squeeze has been hardest for people feeling pre-existing pressures: blue-collar workers, hurt by globalisation, and millennials facing rising college debts and competition for jobs. Last year’s college-leavers are, on average, $35,000 in the red, more than twice the figure of two decades ago. One or both groups are at the forefront of Europe’s many populist insurgencies: including, on the left, Syriza in Greece and the socialist leadership of Britain’s Labour Party; and on the right the French National Front and the UK Independence Party. America is no different. Mr Trump’s biggest fans are the most pessimistic Americans, working-class whites. “The country’s spiralling downwards, people are not getting pay rises, we’re not the superpower we think we are,” lamented Todd Winslow, an office-equipment supplier, at a Trump rally in Claremont, New Hampshire. By articulating such fears, Mr Trump has validated them. That is why his supporters love him, whether or not they believe his promises. “He tells us what we all think but are afraid to say,” Mr Winslow declared. Others in the crowd liked Mr Trump’s success in business, his tough-guy style and the fact that he was not a politician. These qualities were evident in the diatribe that followed. Ad-libbing as usual, Mr Trump boasted of his “big beautiful brain”, suggested dumping Bowe Bergdahl, an American prisoner-of-war released in a hostage swap with the Taliban, from the air over Afghanistan, and, after inviting questions from the crowd, showed familiarity with none of the issues raised. Asked whether he supported equal pay for men and women, he said: “I love equal pay, I mean I have many women, I was very, very far advanced on women…We’re going to come up with the right answer.” Bern brightly Mr Sanders’s crowds are similarly fervent, but younger. They are often dominated by bearded, beaded and disgruntled 18- to 29-year-olds, to whom Mr Sanders promises free education in public universities and relief on college debts. The sheer improbability of his assault on American power—he is old, cranky and wears crumpled suits—is to this group part of his appeal. If the humour of Mr Trump’s campaign is WrestleMania burlesque, Mr Sanders’s is college rag. “Feel the Bern” is its unofficial slogan. Yet that gentler tone reflects a big difference between America’s red and blue insurgencies, which is likely to determine how far they go and how much damage they do their respective parties. Mr Sanders’s supporters want to undo the accommodation with business that the Democrats reached under Bill Clinton. But they do not hate their party: most strongly approve of Mr Obama, who is much closer politically to Mrs Clinton than he is to the Bern. That she is not doing better is largely down to her shortcomings as a candidate. Her well-funded campaign is being run by veterans of Mr Obama’s brilliant grass-roots operations and aims to emulate it in seeding and revving up networks of autonomous volunteers; but Mrs Clinton, a continuity candidate when the mood is for change, is not doing much revving. Mr Sanders’s campaign, which in 2015 netted over 2.5m donations, resembles the president’s more closely. A scandal concerning Mrs Clinton’s foolish use of a private e-mail account while secretary of state has been damaging. It has highlighted her longstanding reputation for being untrustworthy; in a general election, that could hurt her badly. So could the independent run mulled by Michael Bloomberg, a moneybags former-mayor of New York. A free trader who worries about the environment, he would probably take more votes from the left than from the right. Yet Mrs Clinton, who is at 52% in the polls, is lucky in her opponent. Had Elizabeth Warren, a senator from Massachusetts and a milder version of Mr Sanders, decided to run, she might now be in Jeb! territory. She is lucky in her party’s residual discipline. And she is lucky that a series of southern states, where black voters, who tend to like her, matter more, will vote shortly after Iowa and New Hampshire (see chart 2). This will present her with an early opportunity to douse whatever fires Mr Sanders may have started. For the Republican establishment, none of that good fortune applies. Mr Trump and Mr Cruz are more formidable and the Republican voters who like them more mutinous than their Democratic counterparts. In their shadows, a clutch of more electable candidates, of whom Mr Rubio along with two serving governors, John Kasich of Ohio and Chris Christie of New Jersey, are probably the last serious contenders, have meanwhile struggled to distinguish themselves. Mr Bush’s spluttering campaign has exacerbated the problem. Its fund-raising drew resources from other mainstreamers; Mr Rubio raised a paltry $6m in the third quarter of 2015, a third of the amount raised by Ben Carson, a former neurosurgeon and momentary front-runner. Now it is hurting them even more, with Mr Bush desperately splurging on attack ads against his establishment rivals, especially Mr Rubio. The result is that the Republicans’ erstwhile centre ground—the “somewhat conservative” vote that constitutes about 40% of the total and usually decides the party’s nomination—is hopelessly split. The early results may fix that problem. Whichever of the three surviving mainstreamers does best in Iowa and New Hampshire, a “somewhat conservative” state, could swiftly consolidate the establishment’s share of the vote and take on the front-runners. Mr Rubio, who is clever, fresh-faced, Spanish-speaking and almost the only Republican candidate to beat Mrs Clinton in head-to-head polling, has long looked most suitable for that role. He is expected to top the establishment roster in Iowa. Mr Kasich, who has a good governing record, and Mr Christie, an articulate bruiser, have worked harder in New Hampshire and could beat Mr Rubio in that state. But it would have to be by a decent margin to impress the conservative donors and media eagerly waiting to anoint the next establishment champion. Mr Kasich seems too much of a stick-in-the-mud for this election, Mr Christie too moderate for many Republicans. And Mr Rubio—if he can only survive the early states—would probably do better in later-voting, more moderate states, especially his native Florida. In a protracted contest, that could prove decisive A three-horse race could even mean that no candidate wins a majority of delegates, which might also argue for Mr Rubio over his mainstream rivals. The candidates would then try to woo each other’s delegates at the party’s convention in July, something that last happened in 1948. And across the Republican coalition Mr Rubio is a popular second choice. Yet it is also possible that no candidate of the establishment will do well enough in the early states to rise above the others. Its vote would then remain split. In that case, Mr Trump, if his supporters turn out, or Mr Cruz, whom the early schedule favours, by moving from evangelical Iowa to the southern Bible-belt, could wrap up the nomination while the mainstreamers are stuck squabbling among themselves. It is bad luck for Republican leaders. But they have earned it, for having long encouraged the sort of polarising invective that Mr Trump and Mr Cruz spout. Mr Obama’s health-care reform is socialist; climate science is a liberal fraud; Democrats are not just wrong but anti-American: such are mainstream Republican verities. Even before Mr Trump doubled down on it, this sort of rabble-rousing had damaged the party, because its leaders never acted commensurately with their rhetoric, making them seem weak or insincere. An uninviting establishment Mistrusted by voters, the establishment candidates have found it increasingly hard to offer a positive alternative to Mr Trump’s miserabilism. To some degree, all have emulated it. Invited to condemn Mr Trump’s promised ban on Muslims, at a televised debate on January 14th, Mr Rubio instead praised his rival for having “tapped into some of that anger that’s out there”. Yet if the Republican pitch is about anger, not optimism, Mr Trump should win, because he is best at that. This has probably already made it harder for the party to win a general election; before Mr Rubio could woo many Hispanics, he would have some explaining to do. Naturally, his capitulation to Mr Trump hasn’t won him any favour with the front-runner, either. After Mr Rubio, who is of average height, was recently pictured wearing Cuban heels, Mr Trump commented: “I don’t know, they’re big heels. They’re big heels. I mean those heels were really up there… I just hope it works out fine for him.” It still might. But if Mr Trump or Mr Cruz takes Iowa and New Hampshire, the establishment will start to fear the worst. Some Republican grandees are already seeking to build bridges with Mr Trump—including Bob Dole, a former presidential candidate, in a recent article in the New York Times—on the basis that even a narcissistic bully is less awful than Mr Cruz. That is a startling admission of weakness, before any vote has been cast. Yet the leadership’s usual means of influence—money and endorsements—have proved strikingly ineffective in this strange contest. Mr Trump has spent less than any other leading candidate; his campaign has received more television news coverage than all his rivals combined. Neither of the front-runners has been endorsed by any serving Republican governor or senator. Their strength is from a different source. “We’re Not Gonna Take It” is the shouty rock anthem that concludes Mr Trump’s seething rallies. Americans, and the world, have a nail-biting few weeks ahead, wondering what that could mean.NO FIRM in the world matches the economic imprint of Walmart. The retailer, based in Arkansas and known across America for its vast “supercentres” and low prices, is the world’s largest company by revenue. Its 2.2m worldwide workforce is about the same size as China’s army, excluding reservists. Sam Walton built his empire with a relentless focus on costs: “Control your expenses better than your competition. This is where you can always find the competitive advantage,” he said. Yet change is afoot at “Wally world”. In April 2015 Walmart abruptly raised the wages of its lowest-paid staff: all now earn at least $9 an hour. On February 1st that will rise to $10 an hour for trained-up workers—fully one-third higher than the federal minimum wage. The change is curious, because in the past Walmart has paid notoriously little. In 2014 the average hourly wage of an American cashier was $9.93. According to data from Glassdoor, a jobs website, Walmart’s cashiers then took home $8.62. Retail salesmen made $12.38 nationwide; at Walmart, they earned only $8.53. Walmart wages were low, but not pitifully so; for both cashiers and salesmen, average pay at Walmart was close to the 25th percentile nationwide. What has made Walmart look mean is the firm’s enormous size. It employs 1.4m of America’s 16m retail workers. Almost 4.5m others toil in small shops with fewer than 100 employees. Wages there are expected to be low. But, typically, big firms pay more. One study from 2014 found that high-school graduates earn 15% more at retailers with more than 1,000 workers, compared with those who have fewer than ten staff. Not so at Walmart, which paid corner store wages while making megachain profits. This—combined with a fierce resistance to unions—made the firm a target for campaigners. One common accusation against Walmart—whose shareholders made a 17% return in the year to January 2015—is that its low wages mean it benefits from hidden government subsidies. Many low-wage workers rely on government programmes to top up their low wages, and on Medicaid for health insurance. Without this support—the argument goes—firms relying on cheap labour would collapse. In May 2013 congressional Democrats produced a report which furiously alleged that a typical Walmart supercentre in Wisconsin, employing 300, costs the taxpayer $900,000 a year in welfare payments to its staff. That was hyperbole; it assumes some other employer would be willing to hire Walmart’s workers at higher wages. Looks matter, though, and the benefit of today’s pay rises is partly cosmetic. Other factors are in play, too. “In some ways it demonstrated leadership, in other ways it [was] a market reaction,” Doug McMillon, Walmart’s boss, told investors in October 2015. Recently wage growth has been higher for junior retail staff than for other workers, suggesting that competition for staff may be hotting up (see chart). Walmart’s first pay rise, to $9 an hour, was emulated by Target and TJX, which owns the retailers T.J. Maxx, Marshalls and HomeGoods. The pay rise is also a strategic investment. Walmart wants to boost its productivity and give its workers more freedom to innovate, as it seeks to make its stores more pleasant and, perhaps, appealing to more affluent customers. That requires motivated staff. It is too soon to judge conclusively whether the rise to $9 an hour has worked, although Walmart says that the number of stores rated as sufficiently “clean, fast, friendly” by customers has increased from 16% in February 2015 to over 70% today. That will please advocates for higher minimum wages, who argue that better-paid workers are more productive. Economists call this the “efficiency wage” hypothesis. Opponents of higher minimum wages note that pay rises cannot be free. Some combination of Walmart’s customers, shareholders, suppliers and other employees must be paying for the increase. Walmart’s customers are unlikely to feel the pinch soon; low prices are a cornerstone of the brand. But the firm now says that higher wages come before price cuts: “You clean up your house before you invite people over,” argues Mr McMillon. Wage rises are certainly denting profits. Walmart’s share price barely moved when they were first announced in February last year, suggesting that investors thought them immaterial at first. But in October the firm warned that it expected profits to fall by 6-12% in 2017, with higher wages responsible for three-quarters of the shortfall. Following that announcement, the share price fell by 10%—its biggest one-day drop since 1988. A transfer from capital to labour, though, is precisely what campaigners want to achieve. A more potent criticism of higher wages is that they cause job losses. And on January 15th Walmart announced that it would close 154 stores in America, with the possible loss of 10,000 jobs. The firm says that wage costs are not to blame. The closures mostly reflect Walmart’s wholesale abandonment of its small “Walmart Express” stores. Elsewhere, Walmart hired 8,000 new department managers at the same time as raising pay. Adding middle-management is hardly the hallmark of a firm set on trimming its labour force (though some say hours have been cut instead). Not every firm would find it easy to copy Walmart. Wages only cost retailers 9.5% of their revenues. In the food-and-drink industry—a prime target of the “Fight for $15” campaign to raise the minimum wage—wages amount to 31% of revenues (see chart). A much higher fraction of workers in the food, drink and hotel industries make the minimum wage, so any rise would have a greater effect on those industries. Even within retailing, there are nearly 600,000 small firms with fewer than 20 workers. In Mississippi, half of all cashiers make less than $8.79 an hour; a big increase there would have unpredictable effects. Walmart has had some difficulty with the move. Long-serving staff who already earn more than $10 are miffed at missing out on a bumper rise. A section of Reddit, an online message board, for Walmart employees is filled with complaints. “I’m mad at the company...for invalidating 15 years of my hard work,” writes one. Incrementally higher wages will not much reduce the welfare bill for Walmart’s workers; campaigners will go on claiming that low-wage firms are subsidised. Whether they are right depends on who bears ultimate responsibility for caring for the poor and sick. Campaigners think it is employers, which implies that government-funded health care in Britain or Canada is primarily a subsidy for businesses. And employers, unlike governments, can disappear in response to regulation. It is usually more efficient to let market outcomes play out and leave transfers to the government. Still, minimum wages, set carefully, are beneficial—perhaps even for the firms who pay them. Another piece of Sam Walton’s advice: “High expectations are the key to everything.”“THESE children have fewer rights than prison inmates,” says Tom Morrison, a Republican state representative in Illinois. Mr Morrison is talking about girls at a high school in his constituency, Palatinate, who share a locker-room with a transgender girl. Late last year the Department of Education ruled that the school had violated anti-discrimination laws by banning a pupil, who was born male but identifies as a girl, from the girls’ locker room. Male prison inmates have successfully argued in court that letting female guards supervise them when they are taking a shower violates their privacy, reasons Mr Morrison, so they now have more rights than Illinois schoolchildren.   Schools in Illinois, as in many other states, have a patchwork of rules governing where transgender people can pee. Some allow them to use the locker and restrooms (or loos to Brits) of their choice; others make them use designated facilities. This is confusing for parents and children, says Mr Morrison, which is why he introduced a bill in the legislature on January 20th that would require all pupils at high schools in Illinois to use loos and changing rooms that correspond to the gender on their birth certificate. The bill would make it optional for schools to provide separate facilities for transgender pupils. The debate in Illinois is part of a national discussion that pits those who think of gender as something a person is born with against those who argue that being male or female can be a choice. Progressives have taken the “choice” side of the argument—in April 2015 the White House added a gender-neutral toilet—prompting conservatives to take the opposing one. In South Dakota a bill similar to Mr Morrison’s is moving forward in the legislature. Last autumn voters in Houston, Texas, rejected a broad anti-discrimination ordinance because its opponents had depicted it as a “bathroom ordinance” that would enable potentially predatory men and even registered sex offenders to enter women’s loos. In Indiana Jim Tomes, a Republican state senator, introduced a bill last December which would make the use of a facility that does not correspond with a person’s birth certificate a misdemeanour, punishable with up to one year in jail and a fine of $5,000. A spokesman for Mr Tomes says the bill will not be submitted to a vote in the legislature, but that does not mean that “similar language in a different bill couldn’t be considered”. Given all the troubles faced by transgender people, who make up just 0.1% of the population according to the least unreliable estimate, why the focus on loos? According to Human Right Campaign, a gay lobby group, in the first ten months of 2015 at least 21 transgender people—nearly all of them black or Hispanic women—were killed, more than in any other year recorded by activists. Unemployment among transgender people is double the national rate and as much as four times that of the general population for non-whites. Fully 90% of those who have a job say they have experienced harassment at work. The issue is more pressing than it seems, says Kim Hunt of the AIDS Foundation of Chicago. Some transgender people do not go to the loo all day because they have been harassed, assaulted or kicked out of one. This can result in dehydration, urinary-tract infections and kidney problems. A survey by the Williams Institute, a think-tank, found that 68% of those questioned had been subjected to slurs while using a bathroom. This month San Francisco joined Washington, New York, Philadelphia, Austin, Seattle and Santa Fe in requiring all businesses and city buildings to designate single-stall loos as all-gender. The bigger battle, though, is over multi-stall restrooms and locker rooms, especially in schools. Title IX , an amendment tacked on to the Higher Education Act in 1972, says that “no person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education programme or activity receiving federal financial assistance”. The Obama administration has interpreted this as meaning that transgender pupils must be allowed to use facilities for the gender with which they identify. In October it filed a legal brief in a federal appeals court backing the legal challenge of Gavin Grimm, a transgender boy, to the policy of his school in rural Virginia which bans him from using the boys’ toilets. On January 27th the judges will hear oral arguments in GG v. Gloucester County School Board. It is the first time a federal court will have to weigh up the question. Correction: The original version of this article stated that a bill would require schools to provide separate facilities for transgender pupils; the bill would in fact make this optional.   Safe and warm in LA STILLNESS pervades the South Los Angeles Wetland Park. A turtle floats by, undisturbed by lunch hour at the high school opposite. Tall bulrushes bend around the pool at the centre of the nine-acre (3.6 hectare) site. The water comes from the city’s storm drains, cleaned of oil and rubbish. Completed in 2012 for $26m, the park captures urban run-off after wet weather—vital in a state suffering from severe drought. Water from rain in recent weeks, brought largely by El Niño, the world’s largest climatic phenomenon, now flows through the park’s fountains. More will come. El Niño sees warm water, collected over several years in the western tropical Pacific, slosh back eastwards after the weakening, or reversal, of winds that blew it there. This affects atmospheric cycles, and therefore weather patterns, around the world. The current Niño is one of the strongest on record; its rivals in 1982-83 and 1997-98 ushered in two of California’s wettest years after storms between January and March. In the first week of this year more than 100mm of rain fell near Lake Tahoe; snow turned the Golden State’s peaks white. At Mount Waterman ski slopes have opened for the first time since 2011. The Los Angeles fire department has prepared more than 200,000 sandbags; churches and shelters have flung open their doors to the 18,000 or so living on the city’s streets. Across the state, the number of people with flood insurance has jumped by 12% in recent months, according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Such foresight makes sense. El Niño caused more than $500m-worth of damage 18 years ago. Rainfall on dry, cracked ground is likely to run across it, not soak in, causing flooding and mudslides. And the state is truly parched: California has missed more than a year’s worth of precipitation. Three months ago, about 46% of the state was suffering “exceptional” dryness according to US drought monitor, a research tool; now just less than 43% of it is. Snow business Yet even if California endures ark-worthy deluges, the drought will probably persist anyway, says Noah Diffenbaugh, a professor of earth-system science at Stanford University. Studies published in recent years agree that for the past three winters a region of high atmospheric pressure off the coast has diverted seasonal storms to the north. Underground aquifers, raided mercilessly to compensate, will not recover quickly. They may have provided as much as 65% of the water used in the state in 2014—up from 40% during average years—according to the California Water Foundation, an environmental group. Snow, as well as rain, is needed to quench the state’s thirst; it supplies about a third of the water needed by cities and farms. It falls in the Sierra Nevada in the winter; meltwater then flows to reservoirs in the spring, and thence to users. Randall Osterhuber runs a 70-year-old weather station near Lake Tahoe for the University of California, Berkeley. This year the snow is slightly more abundant than usual, while last winter brought “the least amount of snow we’ve ever measured, by a wide margin”, he says. Yet 2011 was among the whitest years for the station. Mr Osterhuber frets about the “ever-increasing variation” in the state’s weather. Since the 1980s average temperatures in California have been higher than they were in the 50 years before; 2014 and 2015 were among the hottest on record. A study published last year in Geophysical Research Letters claims that man-made warming can explain 8-27% of the anomalous drought conditions between 2012 and 2014. The rest is natural variability in precipitation levels in a drought-prone state. Jerry Brown, California’s governor, told city-dwellers to cut water consumption by a quarter last April; in the second half of 2015 it dropped by just over 26%. Once-lush lawns now crunch underfoot; fields that formerly grew alfalfa, a thirsty crop, now lie fallow in the Central Valley. Felicia Marcus, head of California’s State Water Resources Control Board, says conservation saves money and buys time; better water-use monitoring would help still more, as could more projects to collect run-off. For any Niño rains, “we need every ounce of storage we can get,” she says. To prosper, the state’s primates will have to start living more like south LA’s turtles.AT THE end of the highway, 200 miles from Anchorage, sits a small fishing and tourism town where, in early January, thousands of dead common murres, or guillemots, were washed ashore. These penguin-like seabirds littered the tidal wracks so densely that beach walkers had to be careful where they stepped. And beyond Homer, tens—probably hundreds—of thousands of these birds have drifted in dead along Alaska’s vast coastline or have been found far inland half-dead in the snow. Alaska is home to about 3m common murres, which spend most of their lives on the open ocean but come to shore to nest in dense colonies on coastal cliffs. The female lays a pear-shaped egg so pointed at one end that it will roll in a circle, helping to keep the egg from plummeting off the bird’s narrow nest. Murres are renowned divers, using their wings to “fly” down 600 feet (183 metres) under water in search of a meal. Around Homer, they are a daily sight all summer. They nest in a raucous crowd on a rocky island a few miles offshore, which becomes a magnet for tour boats during the warm months. But last summer they failed to raise chicks. And they have been dying in large numbers along the Pacific coast, from California to Alaska. The birds appear to have starved. The likely cause is warmer ocean waters. Temperatures in the North Pacific have been three to seven degrees Fahrenheit higher than average for the last two years. The “warm blob”, as it has been called, is rattling the marine food chain from bottom to top. “Whole systems are out of whack,” says Heather Renner of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge, a federal agency which manages a collection of far-flung islands and remote coastline in Alaska which, if laid over a map of the continental United States, would stretch right across it. The refuge contains nesting colonies for most of the state’s murres, which are a sizeable chunk of the worldwide population. In a town that grew up as a collection of homesteads, where people still build their own houses, split wood, tend gardens and put up a winter’s-worth of fish and game, local knowledge is valuable currency. But know-how is not enough to explain what is happening to these birds. “I think we’re going to start seeing more events like this that we don’t have the right data to explain,” says Ms Renner. Scientists are starting to understand certain links between climate change, ocean warming and their impact on polar regions. These areas warm at twice the rate of the rest of the world on average; what’s happening now may hint at what more ocean warming would bring. Old-timers in Homer have never experienced anything like this. And they are perplexed by a host of other freakish phenomena: humpback whales lingering in local waters months after they typically head south for the winter, toxic algae populations surging, sea otters dying in large numbers, and out-of-this-world king-salmon-fishing. “Global weirding,” the complex impacts of climate change, can be a mixed bag. While the sea has taken back many of the dead birds, a robust population of bald eagles has carried other carcasses off the beach, scattering bits and pieces into back yards and parking lots. Ms Renner expects murres to continue to wash ashore for the rest of the winter. They will serve as a constant reminder, as the days slowly lengthen into spring, of mysteries still to be solved.IN APRIL 2014, three men were shot when a drug deal turned sour on a tree-lined residential street in Baltimore. The city’s police department quickly linked the crime to Kerron Andrews, a dreadlocked 22-year-old, but could not find him at his registered address. Agents used phone records to determine roughly where he was, but instead of going door-to-door until they found him, they opted for something far more efficient: a Hailstorm. Using this, they tracked Mr Andrews directly to an acquaintance’s sofa, between the cushions of which he had stuffed the gun used in the shooting. The Hailstorm is a more advanced version of the StingRay, a surveillance device that operates by mimicking a cellular tower, forcing all nearby mobile phones to reveal their unique identifying codes, known as IMSI numbers. By crosschecking the IMSI numbers of suspects’ phones with those collected by “cell-site simulators” such as Hailstorm and StingRay, police officers can pinpoint people with astonishing precision. The tools have been used to trail suspects to specific rooms in apartment blocks and to find them on moving buses on busy city streets. Developed at first for military and intelligence services, cell-site simulators are now furtively used by federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) as well as by local police forces across the land. Law-enforcement agencies rarely seek explicit court approval to employ cell-site simulators, and rarely admit to using them after the fact. As a condition for purchasing them, state and local police forces must sign strict non-disclosure agreements with the FBI, since the more information is made public about cell-site simulators, the more “adversaries” will adapt to them. The agreements prohibit police from disclosing any information about the technology, even to judges in the form of warrant requests; prosecutors must drop cases if they are pressured to reveal details about them. In one case in Baltimore, a judge threatened to hold a detective in contempt after he refused to testify about the use of StingRay in locating an armed-robbery suspect. Instead of instructing the detective to answer, the prosecution dropped the evidence. In another armed-robbery trial in Tallahassee, prosecutors offered the defendants a generous plea deal rather than demonstrate how the device worked in open court. Given this secrecy, it is impossible to identify all the agencies using cell-site simulators. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) has counted 58 agencies that possess the devices, across 23 states and the District of Columbia, but thinks the true number may be much higher. The technology has been used not only to trace murderers and armed robbers, but also to nab car thieves, phone pilferers and, in one case, a woman who made a series of abusive phone calls. The city of Baltimore alone has admitted to using the technology 4,300 times between 2007 and 2015. “I have never seen a tool that is on one hand treated in such a cloak-and-dagger fashion, but on the other used as a bread and butter tool,” says Stephanie Pell of West Point’s Army Cyber Institute. The ray and the net Civil-liberties advocates claim the secrecy around cell-site simulators is unjustified. According to Christopher Soghoian, a technologist at the ACLU, the wiliest criminals already know to use disposable “burner” phones and, short of forgoing cellular communication altogether, there is no foolproof way for them to evade StingRays and Hailstorms. But their covert use raises worries about privacy, he says. Cell-site simulators often trace phones to pockets, purses, homes and other places protected by the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition on “unreasonable searches”. Moreover, they do not just gather information from the target’s phone, but also from other phones nearby. Brian Owsley, a law professor at Texas Tech University School of Law who, as a judge, rejected several federal requests to use cell-site simulators without a warrant, says there should be laws requiring data inadvertently gathered in this way to be deleted. Lawmakers are starting to address such grievances. Washington state, California, Virginia, Minnesota and Utah have passed laws requiring their police forces to seek warrants before using cell-site simulators. Congressman Jason Chaffetz of Utah hopes to pass a bill that would do the same on a federal level, though he is unlikely to prevail in such a politically charged year. Movement in the courts may come more quickly, however. After the Baltimore police department grudgingly confessed in a court hearing last summer that it had used a Hailstorm to locate Mr Andrews, the presiding judge suppressed all evidence related to the surveillance operation—including Mr Andrews’s gun. Without a warrant, she held, the police had breached his Fourth-Amendment rights. Civil-libertarians are optimistic about the precedent the case may set. The state of Maryland will appeal against the ruling on February 9th.Chicago’s freedom tower WHEN Louisiana State University fired a professor in June 2015 for using rude words in a class designed to prepare teachers for careers in inner-city schools, it was an early skirmish in a conflict between students (one of whom had complained) and faculties over free speech that has since spread across the land. The university’s faculty is now considering something that others in the same position have done: copying the University of Chicago. In response to a number of universities cancelling invitations to controversial speakers and challenges to academic freedom, Geoffrey Stone of Chicago’s law school was appointed chair of a committee that would restate its principles on free speech. The statement was issued a year ago, shortly before the murderous attack on Charlie Hebdo, a French satirical publication, for its cartoons of Muhammad. Since then the debate over permissible speech on college campuses has only become more contentious. A website, thedemands.org, lists speech-curbing demands from students at 72 institutions. Administrators are tying themselves in knots in an effort to balance a commitment to free expression with a desire not to offend. One consequence of this has been to call attention to the Chicago Statement, which has been adopted by Purdue, Princeton, American University, Johns Hopkins, Chapman, Winston-Salem State and the University of Wisconsin system, according to the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (Fire), a pro free-speech non-profit which is actively promoting it. It is brief (three pages) and emphatic. “It is not the proper role of the university to attempt to shield individuals from ideas and opinions they find unwelcome, disagreeable, or even deeply offensive,” it states. “Concerns about civility and mutual respect can never be used as justification for closing off discussion of ideas, however offensive or disagreeable.” The responsibility of a university, it concludes, is not only to promote “fearless freedom of debate”, but also to protect it. The committee gave much consideration to concerns about “hate speech” and “micro-aggressions”. Whatever harm such expression caused, it concluded, should be redressed by “individual members of the university…openly and vigorously contesting the ideas that they oppose,” rather than by censorship. The widening adoption of the statement came as a surprise, says Mr Stone, because it was built upon the college’s own history, including a controversial invitation by students in 1932 to William Z. Foster, then the Communist Party candidate for president. The proper response to unpopular ideas, responded then-president Robert Maynard Hutchins, “lies through discussion rather than inhibition”. In 1967, during protests over civil rights and the Vietnam war, and demands that the university itself should take a stand, a faculty committee chaired by Harry Kalven, one of Mr Stone’s professors, concluded that would be wrong: “The university is the home and sponsor of critics; it is not itself the critic”. This approach was not universal. The most prominent committee to follow Chicago’s was Yale’s, in 1974. It concluded that intellectual growth requires “the right to think the unthinkable, discuss the unmentionable, and challenge the unchallengeable”. When read in full, however, the report is confused, foreshadowing the current debate. Although Yale’s committee was “gratified” to find that most people surveyed supported freedom of expression, a minority “held reservations of various kinds about how much freedom should be tolerated.” One member dissented from the report, calling its support for free speech “too facile and simplistic”. Even the Chicago Statement has reservations. Expression that “invades substantial privacy” or “constitutes a genuine threat” can be punished. The university has the right to regulate the “time, place and manner of expression”, so that ordinary activities are not unduly disrupted—though this should never be used to undermine an “open discussion of ideas”. The statement is, in short, written not only to allow speech, but to facilitate protest. When it first appeared, this may have seemed a bit academic. Not any more.EVERY four years, American presidential candidates pledge to get tough and confront China. Populists promise to bring jobs home, if need be by starting trade wars. Security hawks vow to use every form of American might—from sanctions to the Seventh Fleet—to curb Chinese mischief-making. Yet, in the search for a China policy, it is hard to recall a candidate demanding America return looted Cambodian antiques. Yet inspecting newly returned sculptures—including a splendid tenth-century statue of a monkey god, handed back in 2015 by the Cleveland Museum of Art—is how John Kerry, the secretary of state, began a visit to Cambodia on January 26th, a day before he headed to Beijing. It was a striking scene at the National Museum of Cambodia in Phnom Penh, as Mr Kerry was shown carvings looted during the civil war of the 1970s, and traced after they were shown to be perfect matches for plinths unearthed in a jungle-clad temple. Addressing the local press a few hours later, Mr Kerry cited the return of stolen treasures as an example of his country’s commitment to Cambodia and other members of the ten-country Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Mr Kerry also touched on “painful reminders” of the Vietnam war, including unexploded American ordnance that continues to take Cambodian lives and limbs. There is in fact a China logic to this approach—though many China-bashing politicians back home would doubtless call Mr Kerry naive and too apologetic for past deeds. To critics, President Barack Obama’s “pivot to Asia”—a move to rebalance American diplomatic and military attention away from the Middle East and towards the Asia-Pacific—has generally been a flop, because it has not stopped Chinese officials from bullying American businesses, building runways on disputed rocks in the South China Sea or setting cyber-spies to steal commercial and state secrets. They would like to see China challenged to behave, or else. Mr Obama’s foreign-policy machine sees it differently. To simplify, their Asia policy is built around two ideas. The first is rather bleak: that the China led by Xi Jinping, its assertive president since 2013, has shown itself to be a mercantilist, arrogant and stubborn power, too self-interested and suspicious of American intentions to be swayed by appeals to its better nature. At best, this China can be persuaded to behave as America hopes when it sees that policy as coinciding with its self-interest. Nonetheless, China is too large and too important to the global economy to be taken on frontally as electioneering politicians urge. The second idea is that China’s overbearing behaviour in its neighbourhood is an opportunity for America to strengthen old bonds with such allies as Japan and South Korea, and to forge new ties with ASEAN nations that want an alternative to Chinese regional hegemony. ASEAN leaders have been invited to a summit with Mr Obama in February. Mr Obama’s aides have crafted a Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a trade pact with Asia-Pacific countries described as a chance to anchor in place a rules-based order for global commerce, rather than let China set terms (though Congress is unlikely to allow TPP to advance before November’s elections). American generals and admirals are exploring or deepening military co-operation with such countries as the Philippines, Vietnam and even Malaysia, long a critic. Mr Kerry, in an interview in Phnom Penh, calls such moves as the return of looted Cambodian sculptures more than just the “decent” thing to do. To show respect for a country and its culture can be “an important part of diplomacy”, says Mr Kerry, a courtly patrician who as a young naval officer fought in the rivers and marshes of Vietnam. To be blunt, dealings with China are not easy. But in the corridors of American power, the case is made that it could be worse. In recent years China has tried to turn relations into a gigantic, unsavoury system of barter. Chinese leaders deliver long lectures about areas of core interest in which they expect no American interference, from policy over Tibet to the South China Sea. China makes clear that it sees the collapse of North Korea’s brutal regime as a greater threat than that country’s nuclear-weapons programme. In return, China dangles the possibility of help on things America wants—assistance in Afghanistan or over the Iranian nuclear deal, or commitments on climate change. Confucius meets Brahmin Team Obama hotly rejects the idea that the way to get along is to let China do what it wants in sensitive areas, trading Chinese good behaviour for American appeasement. Instead, America’s offer is to seek areas of agreement, while holding frequent, candid talks to manage crises. Disagreements marked Mr Kerry’s meetings in Beijing on January 27th. In lengthy remarks at the Great Hall of the People, Mr Xi touted a “new model of major-country relationship” between China and America. Working together, the two powers can achieve “win-win results for both sides,” Mr Xi beamed. Alas the win-win mood was short-lived. As Mr Kerry began to reply, Lexington and the rest of the media were ejected, despite cross remonstrations from American diplomats. Mr Kerry had earlier held tense talks in private with the Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi. Mr Wang resisted suggestions that Chinese leaders could do much more to punish North Korea for its latest test of a nuclear bomb, citing among other things the harm that imposing sanctions might cause to Chinese companies. In the Xi era, the message went, China takes up great-power responsibilities only when it suits it. Team Obama is more clear-eyed about China than its critics allow. Some presidential candidates think the answer is for America itself to throw off the constraints of a rules-based global order and match China for self-interested ruthlessness (Donald Trump fancies punitive trade tariffs of up to 45%). That is a competition that America should not aspire to take part in.
