JANUARY is a languid month in Brazil. Beyond the hullabaloo at samba schools—practising for their bawdy annual face-off during Carnival, which starts on February 5th—business pauses while Brazilians go on holiday in the scorching southern summer. Fewer cars clog streets; more bodies throng the beaches. Politicians customarily switch off along with everyone else. Congressmen return from their Christmas break on February 2nd, but will probably do little until after Mardi Gras a week later. Neither they nor the president, Dilma Rousseff, will be able to relax, though. A frightening mosquito-borne disease has put the health authorities on high alert (see page 42). Meanwhile, Brazil’s political and economic crises are deepening. When politicians return to work they may regret the time they took off from attempting to solve them. The economic slide continues. The number of jobs in the formal sector fell by 1.5m in 2015, the fastest pace of job destruction since comparable records began in 1992. Another 1m could be lost this year, analysts reckon. Sales of vehicles dropped by a fifth last year. The IMF now predicts that GDP will shrink by 3.5% in 2016, more than three times as much as it expected in October. Despite the recession, inflation has risen to nearly 11%, its highest level since 2002 (see chart). Male breadwinners make up a higher proportion of the newly unemployed than in previous downturns, which mainly affected female and young workers, notes Naercio Menezes of Insper, a university in São Paulo. That means that the hardship caused by the current recession will be greater. For the relatively young, joblessness is a novelty. Many entered the formal labour market during the commodity boom of 2003-13. No one knows how they will react to their misfortune, warns Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former Brazilian president who is also a sociologist. As misery grows, the government’s capacity to tackle its causes is diminishing. Prosecutors investigating the vast bribery scandal centred on Petrobras, the state-controlled oil-and-gas giant, are expected to file additional charges against senior figures in Ms Rousseff’s Workers’ Party (PT), which has already been badly tarnished by the affair. An even bigger worry for Ms Rousseff is the threat of impeachment against her on unrelated allegations that she assented to the use of accounting tricks to hide the true size of Brazil’s fiscal deficit. Her weakness makes her more dependent on the goodwill of the PT and trade unions aligned with it, which are viscerally opposed to the reforms needed to steady the economy. This month Ms Rousseff dared to acknowledge that Brazilians retire too early (at 55 for men, on average). In effect she admitted that the government cannot stabilise its finances if it continues to devote 40% of (non-interest) spending to pensions. But she backtracked in the face of resistance from her party and the unions. Raising the retirement age would be unacceptable, declared the PT this week. Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts This will make it much harder for Nelson Barbosa, the newly appointed finance minister, to contain the budget deficit, which is close to 10% of GDP. His main idea is to reintroduce a financial-transactions tax, which is loathed by business but popular among Ms Rousseff’s left-wing allies. But this would raise just 10 billion reais ($2.5 billion) in extra revenue, a fraction of net government borrowing, expected to be 500 billion reais this year. Ms Rousseff wants to summon back a council of wise men and women, which she disbanded during her first term, to suggest reforms. That looks like a delaying tactic.  While fiscal policy wobbles, economists are starting to fret about monetary policy, too. After weeks of hinting that it would raise interest rates to fight inflation, the Central Bank decided on January 20th to hold them steady at 14.25%. The decision may have been justified: higher rates would weaken the economy further and make it still harder to control the fiscal deficit. But it looked like a surrender to political pressure. The Central Bank’s president, Alexandre Tombini, met Ms Rousseff two days before the interest-rate decision. Then he foreshadowed the bank’s U-turn by pointing to the IMF’s gloomier predictions of Brazilian and global growth, which by that point should have been no surprise. Rather than shoring up Brazil’s financial credibility, the Central Bank thus damaged it all the more. There is little prospect that congressmen will take measures to repair it when they return to work. Those who are pushing for Ms Rousseff’s impeachment concede privately that they are unlikely to muster the two-thirds majority needed in the lower house to send the motion to the Senate. But they plan to drag out the proceeding as long as the (vague) legal deadlines permit. That will accomplish their goal of undermining the president. It will do nothing to buck up Brazil.Martelly’s mind is on merengue MICHEL MARTELLY, Haiti’s president, had planned to mark the end of his term in office by going back to his old job as a popular singer of compas, a Haitian form of merengue. The idea was to perform once more as “Sweet Micky” at the Carnival in Port-au-Prince, Haiti’s capital, which begins on February 7th, the day he is due to step down as president. The problem is that there is no one to succeed him. The second round of the presidential election, scheduled for January 24th after two postponements, was called off two days before the vote. Jude Célestin, the runner-up in the first round of voting in October, had condemned the ballot as a “ridiculous farce” and refused to campaign further. Thousands of his supporters, and those of candidates who lost in the first round, took to the streets to demand that the run-off be cancelled. Haiti’s electoral council said the danger of violence was too great for it to go ahead. This leaves Haiti in limbo. Mr Martelly says he will only hand over to an elected successor, which suggests that he may govern a while longer. It is not clear how the next president will be chosen. One option would be to hold a completely new election, though Mr Martelly will fight to avoid that. He backs the winner of the first round, Jovenel Moïse, a banana grower and businessman who, like Mr Martelly before he became president, has no prior political experience. Polls suggest that he would lose if the election started from scratch. Such chaos is typical of politics in Haiti, where parties are weak and candidates often seem to be more interested in dispensing patronage than in implementing policies. In 1990, after 28 years of authoritarian rule by the Duvalier family and four years under transition governments, Jean-Bertrand Aristide won a free and fair election. Since then, “Haiti hasn’t had an election worth calling an election,” says Robert Fatton, a political scientist at the University of Virginia. Last October’s vote was typically messy. A commission appointed by Mr Martelly found evidence of widespread irregularities, though it is not clear that they were the cause of Mr Célestin’s second-place finish. Many Haitians do not share his sense of outrage. They see the protests, with their burning cars and tyres, as theatre staged by losers of a vote that was flawed but not rigged. The protesters “are not thinking about the real problems of Haiti,” says a student in Pétionville, a prosperous suburb of the capital. The most acute of these is inflation, which has risen by six percentage points since last April to 12%. Food prices have been pushed up by a drought and by a ban on 23 imports by road from the neighbouring Dominican Republic, imposed last September in response to the country’s expulsion of Haitian immigrants. Haiti’s currency, the gourde, has lost a quarter of its value in the past year. This adds to the misery caused by poverty, poor education and health care, weak growth and the after-effects of a devastating earthquake six years ago. Those are problems only an effective government can tackle. Choosing any sort of government right now would be a feat. “There is no legal body in this country with the legitimacy to get us out of this mess,” says Jacky Lumarque, the rector of Université Quisqueya in Port-au-Prince, who wanted to run for president himself but was disqualified—on spurious grounds, he says. Legislative elections, held last year after a delay of three years, produced the beginnings of a functioning parliament, which ended a period of 12 months during which Mr Martelly ruled by decree. This might provide the basis of a solution. There is talk of installing a transitional government, perhaps led by the president of the Senate, Jocelerme Privert, which would oversee the delayed presidential run-off vote. For that to work, Haiti would need an electoral council that the main candidates could trust. Mr Martelly would have to step aside. As a consolation, he could be invited back to hand over power formally to his successor—and perhaps to warble a bit of compas.THE mosquito-borne Zika virus, which has spread to 22 countries and territories in the Americas, is terrifying to pregnant women and their partners. The virus may cause birth defects in babies whose mothers were infected during pregnancy. In Brazil more than 4,000 have been born with abnormally small heads since last October, compared with fewer than 200 in a typical year. The response of several governments has triggered a debate about abortion, birth control and sex education which may outlast the outbreak itself. It started after a handful of governments advised women to delay getting pregnant. Colombia, which has the second-highest number of infections after Brazil, advised women to wait six to eight months. Jamaica issued a similar recommendation, even though no cases of Zika have yet been reported there. El Salvador’s government suggested that women should delay pregnancy until 2018. Panama warned women from indigenous communities, in which infection rates are high, not to conceive.   Some women find this advice rather bossy. Others say that governments have done little to help women control their fertility. Paula Avila-Guillen of the Centre for Reproductive Rights, a lobby group in New York, notes that rates of sexual violence and teenage pregnancy in Latin America are among the world’s highest. The Guttmacher Institute, a think-tank, found that 56% of pregnancies in Latin America and the Caribbean are unintended. Rates of accidental pregnancy are high because sex education is inadequate and birth control is hard to come by. Health workers are reluctant to prescribe contraceptives to teenagers or to women who have not yet given birth. If women are to avoid pregnancy, say women’s-rights activists, governments must inform them better and provide more access to contraception for both men and women. Some argue that the Zika crisis should prompt countries to liberalise policies that severely restrict abortion. In El Salvador, which does not allow abortion even if a woman’s life is at risk, activists are stepping up their campaign for a change in the law. An editorial in Folha de São Paulo, a Brazilian newspaper, argued that Brazil should end its ban on most abortions. Rather than calling on women to delay pregnancy, Brazil is sensibly concentrating its efforts on the real culprit, the Aedes aegypti mosquito, which also carries dengue and yellow fever. The country had stamped out the menace by 1958 but let down its guard and allowed it to return. This month the health minister, Marcelo Castro, announced that insect repellent will be distributed to 400,000 expectant mothers who qualify for Bolsa Família, a cash-transfer scheme. Some 310,000 health workers are raising awareness and teaching people how to keep mosquitoes at bay; on February 13th 220,000 soldiers will join them. Following World Health Organisation guidelines, Brazil advises women contemplating pregnancy on how to avoid getting bitten by mosquitoes. Women need facts, not fertility targets.FOR the past couple of years Bello has lived in Lima, Peru’s capital. The other day he had to do some official paperwork. Assured by the head of the office concerned, a personal acquaintance, that it would be fine to pass by the ministry the following day, he turned up only to be told that the secretary who carries out the necessary task was “on holiday”. The boss was “in a meeting”. In other words, come back another day. Fortunately, after a quick e-mail, the boss appeared and affably arranged for another secretary to wield the rubber stamp. This trivial incident is an everyday occurrence in Latin America. Unless a citizen has a contact among the higher-ups, there is normally no happy ending of the sort that Bello enjoyed. The plodding inefficiency and red tape of public bureaucracies has become an unaffordable drag on the region and a source of growing frustration. Despite the economic slowdown, more Latin Americans are middle class than in the past. They are demanding a more sophisticated, efficient and less corrupt state. Decentralisation and the digital revolution pose additional challenges. The region’s civil services suffer many vices. One is an obsession with procedures and hierarchies and a disdain for service and outcomes. Many Latin American civil servants must follow thick procedural codes but are not made accountable through performance targets. Organs of control fail to prevent corruption but instil a terror of initiative. For example, Carolina Trivelli, who set up a new social-development ministry in Peru in 2011-13, says she was subjected to an investigation because she allowed publication of a pamphlet that included data whose release required a formal ministerial resolution. That she, the minister, authorised it was not enough.   Another besetting sin is politicisation. Too often the civil service is staffed with political hangers-on, hired for loyalty rather than merit. Mauricio Macri, Argentina’s new president, is sacking thousands of political hacks rewarded with government jobs by his predecessor, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. Conversely, competent civil servants risk being fired when a new minister or president comes in. And new presidents love to create new agencies without abolishing those they duplicate. Political cronyism may explain why public-sector salaries tend to be higher than those in the private sector for low-level jobs but lower for senior grades, according to a study by CAF, a regional development bank. Typically, civil services lack clear career structures. For populist reasons, presidents have sometimes capped the pay of senior civil servants, making it impossible to recruit good, honest people. Governments have tended to respond to a dysfunctional bureaucracy by creating islands of excellence, such as central banks and finance ministries. More recently, countries such as Brazil and Peru have improved the management of social ministries. Civil servants are far more likely to have a university degree than in the past. Some countries have tried to go beyond such piecemeal improvements to create an integrated professional civil service. Only Chile has had a degree of success. This began with a law, approved with bipartisan support in 2003, which created an elite corps of senior public-sector managers who are chosen in open competition, subject to performance targets and well paid. Elsewhere, progress has been patchy. A study of the region’s civil services by the Inter-American Development Bank found improvement over the decade to 2013 in some of the worst-performing countries, but stagnation in Brazil and Mexico. One of the improvers was Peru. It set up a civil-service agency in 2008, which has created a Chilean-style corps of public-sector managers. Under a law passed in 2013, 560,000 civil servants in national and local government will be transferred to a new professional contract, based on merit, evaluations and rewards for performance. This replaces a muddle of different contracts. But no workers have yet transferred, and many oppose the reform. The next government, to be chosen this year, may well lack the political will and the money to implement it. Many of the most pressing policy tasks facing Latin American governments today, from tackling violent crime or the Zika virus to boosting productivity, require different state agencies at all levels of government to act in a co-ordinated manner. The region’s civil services have typically found this almost impossible. Islands of excellence are no longer enough. Creating a professional civil service is a slow business, and requires political consensus. If the region is to thrive in a harsher world, it is also essential.AS PARTING gestures go, it was a risky one. Taiwan’s president, Ma Ying-jeou, leaves office in May, having lost an election on January 16th. But rather than slink out quietly, this week he visited Itu Aba, known in Chinese as Taiping, the biggest natural island in the Spratly archipelago in the South China Sea, garrisoned by Taiwan but also claimed by China, the Philippines and Vietnam. The Philippines and Vietnam were incensed, China much less so: it appreciates Mr Ma’s adherence to the fiction that there is but “one China”. From its point of view, Taiwan’s territorial claims in the much-disputed sea are its own. Besides reasserting Taiwan’s claim, Mr Ma wanted to rebut arguments made by the Philippines, in a case it has brought before the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague. This argues that under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Itu Aba is a rock that cannot sustain human life. So it is entitled to 12 nautical miles of territorial waters, but not the 200-mile exclusive economic zone accorded to habitable islands. Mr Ma also possibly hoped to advertise his own “South China Sea Peace Initiative”, which he announced last May but which was largely ignored. The risk is that the Philippines and Vietnam may retaliate in some way—perhaps even with high-profile visits to islands they occupy, though this is unlikely—and that this, in turn, provokes China. America is so alarmed that its representative in Taiwan issued an unusually forthright denunciation of Mr Ma’s “extremely unhelpful” day-trip as soon as it was announced. Tensions over the sea have been rising in any case. China has been building frenetically, turning rocks and reefs in the Spratlys into islands, three of them already bigger than Itu Aba, with airstrips. It has recently landed civilian aircraft carrying “tourists” on one (see picture). And China has again moved a large oil rig into waters claimed by Vietnam—as it did in 2014 when it provoked fatal anti-Chinese riots. China derides all criticism. One Chinese official compares rival claimants’ complaints to “smashing the windows of your neighbours’ house and then saying, ‘We are being threatened’.” China believes America is stoking alarm as part of a broader strategy to contain it. It is true that its neighbours are gradually stepping up security co-operation with each other and with America. Just this week Vietnam approved an Indian satellite-tracking centre on its soil to share imagery, including pictures of the South China Sea. The worry is that China is steadily expanding its presence until its dominance of the sea becomes an incontestable fact. This also concerns America: the sea is a vital trade artery, and China threatens 70 years of American naval supremacy in the western Pacific. In a report published in January, commissioned by the Pentagon to look at America’s strategic “rebalance” towards Asia, the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think-tank, projected that by 2030, on current trends, “the South China Sea will be virtually a Chinese lake, as the Caribbean or Gulf of Mexico is for the United States today.” Three approaches are being tried to moderate China’s behaviour—legal, diplomatic and military. The broader aim of the Philippines’ case under UNCLOS is to show that China’s historic claim—a “nine-dash line” on maps encompassing most of the sea—has no legal basis. In October China suffered a setback when the court in The Hague accepted that the case fell within its jurisdiction. But even if the court rules in the Philippines’ favour, China has made clear that it will ignore it. South-East Asian claimants in the sea—the Philippines, Vietnam, Brunei and Malaysia—have hoped that their regional club, ASEAN, can show a united front. But China prefers to negotiate with (and bully) ASEAN members individually. And it skilfully exploits the body’s internal differences. As for military deterrence, a marked increase in defence spending across the region in recent years still leaves America as the only power capable of standing up to China. As a reminder of this, in November the American navy conducted a “freedom of navigation operation” in the South China Sea. These operations, conducted around the world, involve sending warships to challenge excessive maritime claims by sailing through the claimed waters. In the South China Sea, America says it takes no position on the sovereignty disputes but does want international law to apply. In this exercise, the USS Lassen sailed close to Subi reef, where China has built an artificial island on what was once a feature submerged at high tide. Yet the message was muddied. In January Ashton Carter, America’s secretary of defence, explained that the operation had been conducted as “innocent passage”, ie, under a provision of UNCLOS that allows warships to enter even territorial waters so long as they do nothing that might have a military purpose. So it is not clear quite what point America was trying to make. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, was in China this week (see article), after a trip that took in Cambodia and Laos, which holds the chairmanship of ASEAN this year. He spoke of the need to avoid a “destabilising cycle of mistrust or escalation” in the South China Sea. At a gathering on February 15th and 16th at a ranch in Sunnylands, California, Barack Obama will play host to the leaders of all ten ASEAN countries. The unprecedented summit is a symbolic demonstration of American support for ASEAN. China will probably scent another attempt to rally the region against it. But nothing suggests it will be deterred from trying to turn the sea into its own lake.Carry on, Nguyen Phu Trong WHEN Great Grandfather, a revered turtle which had long paddled around Hanoi’s central lake, was found dead on the eve of the Communist Party’s five-yearly congress, many Vietnamese thought it a bad omen for the ruling party. The animal embodied a legend about a 15th-century Vietnamese warrior who presented his sword to a turtle after vanquishing the Chinese. Some wondered whether the party’s leaders, whose dusty Marxism-Leninism feels increasingly out of step with Vietnam’s youthful population of 93m, were also losing their edge. As it happens, the congress, which concluded in pomp on January 28th, ended up backing an only slightly more sprightly reptile. After eight days of unusually fierce politicking, party bigwigs forced the charismatic and pro-business prime minister to leave government after his term expires in a few months. Nguyen Tan Dung had hoped to assume the top party post of general secretary. Instead Mr Dung, along with the state president, Truong Tan Sang, failed to get a seat on the party’s new Central Committee, while the septuagenarian incumbent, Nguyen Phu Trong, was asked to carry on as all-important party chief. Given term limits and mandatory retirement ages, Mr Dung, who is 66, had every reason to be shown the door. Yet analysts thought he might win promotion to general secretary. His patronage network is extensive, and he enjoyed the support of business types backing a more open economy. Younger Vietnamese liked Mr Dung’s friendly stance towards America and his robust defence of Vietnam’s sovereignty in territorial disputes with China. True, whiffs of corruption hung over him, and the bankruptcies of two state firms he championed were a blot. But many Vietnamese could accept these things. Despite the scandals, “he still improved Vietnam’s relations with America”, says Pham Khac Quang, a 33-year-old machine-parts distributor in Hanoi. Had he kept on doing that, all else “would have been forgiven”. In December Mr Dung defended his record in a nine-page memo to colleagues, later leaked to a political blog. In the end an opposing party faction loosely grouped around Mr Trong gained the upper hand, in part through skilful management of voting procedures that baffle even some insiders. This group appears to have emphasised Mr Dung’s economic mishaps. His opponents almost certainly pointed out that his self-promotion and his anti-China populism were incompatible with the Communists’ preference for cautious, consensual rule. Some doubtless worried that his rise would undermine their own power. As for Mr Trong, party chief since 2011, he is a colourless apparatchik in the twilight of his career. His support owes as much to Mr Dung’s divisiveness as to any personal merits; indeed, with the prime minister out of the picture Mr Trong may soon retire himself, to be replaced by a bland successor—a front-runner is the party’s propaganda chief, Dinh The Huynh. More interesting are the officials the congress appears to have chosen for other top jobs. Nguyen Thi Kim Ngan looks likely to become the first woman to chair the National Assembly; she understands economics and is broadly well-regarded. The probable new state president is Tran Dai Quang, the minister for public security. He would be a worrying choice, given the state’s tendency to lock up and occasionally torture dissidents. Human Rights Watch calls its record “dismal”. The next prime minister is expected to be Nguyen Xuan Phuc, who is harder to read. As one of Mr Dung’s deputies he has worked to cut red tape, with the help of some American funding. A foreign businessman calls him a “straight shooter”. Yet Mr Phuc has demonstrated little of Mr Dung’s popularity or vim, and he probably cleaves closer to Mr Trong’s slightly more conservative views. The new leaders may slow the pace of economic liberalisation, but they are unlikely to reverse it. Nor will relations with America be set back. It was Mr Trong, after all, who delighted in calling on President Barack Obama in Washington last summer—a big step in attempts to make Vietnam less vulnerable to Chinese bullying. A party plenum recently reaffirmed its support for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an American-led trade deal which the incoming government will soon have to ratify. Meanwhile, bigwigs at the congress made encouraging noises about shrinking flabby state firms. Investors will welcome this sense of consistency, although the prime minister’s imminent departure has also dashed hopes that grander modernisations might be on the cards. More radical changes may have to wait for the next congress, in 2021. Then a mass of Russian-speaking party members, brought up hating America, are due to retire. Their successors may well be Western-educated technocrats who understand that the party’s best hope of survival lies in making the economy more competitive, and in convincing young Vietnamese such as Mr Quang, the machine-parts distributor, that it has their interests at heart. For the moment, though, hammer-and-sickle banners cover the capital. And most people—like subjects in a 15th-century kingdom—have no say in who rules the roost.Bose made his bed with the baddies IN THE West, regard for the founding fathers of independent India is usually confined to Mohandas Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, the pacifist in a dhoti and the suave Cantabrigian. By contrast Subhas Chandra Bose, or “Netaji” (“revered leader”), took up arms against the British and sided with the Axis powers in the second world war, dying in a plane crash in 1945 in Japanese-occupied Taiwan. The British called him a quisling, but his martial valour still inspires Indians. In his native Bengal most public places seem to be named after him. Yet in India the story of Bose’s life remains partially classified—supposedly on grounds of national security. So it made for good drama on January 23rd, Netaji’s birthday (in 1897), when the government of Narendra Modi declassified 100 of its files on Bose and promised more to come. They shed little light, but that is hardly the point. Bose is one of the few heroes of India’s independence movement that the prime minister’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) can hope to claim—Gandhi and Nehru belong firmly to its arch-rival, the Congress party. In West Bengal the chief minister, Mamata Banerjee, with her own party, declassified all the state’s files in September. Mainly they confirmed that the government spied on Bose’s family in the 1950s and 1960s. By publishing first, she pipped the BJP. Bengalis have been clamouring for more disclosure, many with hopes of solving a mystery about Bose’s death. At one point, he considered disguising himself as a monk in Thailand to evade the Allies. Netaji was already famous for a daring escape in 1941, when he passed as an Afghan to cut a dash from Calcutta to Berlin. He then returned to the Pacific theatre by way of two submarines meeting near Madagascar. In the days after the Japanese surrender, might he have reached China or Russia, plotting a return to India? He could have challenged Nehru for the leadership and changed the course of Indian history. Or maybe he was already in India, hiding as a holy man? Two ashrams claim him. All nonsense, says Krishna Bose, a former MP and the widow of Netaji’s favourite nephew—he drove the Bose getaway car in 1941, a German roadster that sits outside the Netaji Research Bureau she runs in Kolkata. There is no mystery, and no assassination—the plane crash was an accident. So why have successive governments in Delhi kept the Bose files under seal? Presumably they were unflattering to Nehru and thus to Congress. Campaigning in January 2014, the BJP declared it would declassify all the files. So why only a dribble of information now? Rudrangshu Mukherjee, a historian of Bose and Nehru, says another rare hero of the BJP, Vallabhbhai “Sardar” Patel, loathed Bose. Or perhaps it pays to preserve a certain ignorance about Bose himself. One of Mr Modi’s 100 files, from 1976, finds the Indian embassy in Tokyo under pressure to repatriate Bose’s ashes from the Renkoji temple in Tokyo. At the time bureaucrats concluded that “due to possible adverse reactions from…certain sections of the public, who refused to believe in his death in the plane crash”, it would be wiser to do nothing. Mrs Bose has devoted much of her life to collecting and preserving the historical record. She regrets that politicians are still fiddling with the facts. Another historian suspects a third possibility: sheer ineptitude on the part of the archivists.A smuggler cove EVEN without the Terai plain’s winter fogs that cling to the flat borderlands between Nepal and India, the villages on either side of the frontier look much the same: dusty lanes lined with houses made of mud, bamboo and tin. But the fog has its uses. Since protesters against a new Nepali constitution began blocking roads from India in September, enterprising villagers have risen before the rooster crows, slipped on motorbikes across to India, and returned with a jerry can of fuel or a cylinder of cooking gas before the fog disperses.   In just four months the smuggling has encroached on a state monopoly to the point of supplying half the fuel for this poor, landlocked country. It is a parable of the mess Nepal is in. Despite being members of the same lowland ethnic groups, known broadly as Madhesis—who make up about a third of the country’s population of 30m and whose leaders agitate for greater constitutional rights—the smugglers have done more than anything to weaken the Madhesis’ hand. In the Nepali capital, Kathmandu, which nestles in the uplands and whose long domination the lowlanders resent, the price of petrol has slid from $5 a litre at the height of the blockade in November to around $2.50 now. The smugglers are subverting the subverters. Yet the blockade has had an effect. On January 23rd the three main (and largely upland) parties in Nepal’s ruling coalition abruptly pushed through parliament amendments to a constitution promulgated, over Madhesi objections, only in September. The changes go some way to meeting the lowlanders’ demands for the political representation they feel they were promised. Under the new rules, the Terai region will now get around half of the parliamentary seats. The amendments promise (vaguely) to attach greater importance to population than to geography when fixing constituency boundaries. They also ensure a share of state jobs and favours to politically marginalised groups, in place of a fuzzy promise of “inclusion”. A new process for delimiting electoral districts should also help Madhesis. The UN secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, welcomed the changes. So did India, the regional superpower and Nepal’s lifeline. Its government had encouraged the border blockade, partly out of sympathy with Madhesis, many of whom have kin on the Indian side, but also out of fear that Kathmandu’s obstinate elites might tip Nepal into another round of strife—the country is recovering from years of turmoil, including a long insurgency by Maoist guerrillas. Fragmented by caste, religion and language as well as by region, ethnicity, spectacularly rugged terrain and politics, Nepalese society remains fragile. So does its government: C.K. Lal, an acerbic commentator, describes the ruling alliance as a “fascistic formation consisting of malignant monarchists, malicious Maoists and malevolent Marxist-Leninists—each one masquerading as nationalists.” Previous governments have also been inept, but the death and destruction from an earthquake last April have cast the current lot in unflattering relief. Of some $1.9 billion pledged in foreign aid for the current fiscal year, which began last July, the state has not spent even one-twentieth. A special state agency created to organise earthquake relief and reconstruction has yet to choose a logo, let alone begin work. Crucial development projects, including roads and hydroelectric schemes, remain on hold, starved of either bureaucratic approval or supplies. Tourism is at a six-year low, and investment has shrivelled. Small wonder that the government turns a blind eye to the smugglers who have kept Nepal afloat. Some Madhesis are not so happy with them; border protesters have on occasion set smuggled fuel on fire. Nor are the main Madhesi parties content. They say the constitutional changes fail to meet their main demand, which is to divide the region into no more than two provinces and grant them more local power. With the blockade less effective, they are looking for other ways to make their point. And with tempers still running high, Nepal’s troubles are not yet over.
