DOWN a buzzing lane in Bangkok’s Chinatown, a child is being born. Payau, a middle-aged lady perched on a stool, has just finished assembling a plastic doll which she has dressed in silk and adorned with pink lipstick. She will take 4,000 baht ($110) for it, she says, while brushing tangles from its hair. Payau’s doll is not a toy but a luk thep, or “child angel” —a factory-moulded moppet which some believe can be imbued, through a blessing, with the spirit of a child. Luk thep are increasingly being seen out and about in Bangkok, the capital, with their grown-up owners, who feed, water and dress them in the hope of receiving good fortune in return. The fad has not amused Prayuth Chan-ocha, the former general who leads Thailand’s nannying government, which came to power in a coup in May 2014. He implied on January 25th that adults ought not to waste money on plastic kids. Luk thep became fashionable last year, boosted by endorsements from soap stars and other minor celebrities. The trend has burst into the headlines again with Thai Smile, a budget airline, declaring that passengers who object to stewards shoving their little darlings into overhead lockers may now buy them tickets of their own. Child angels are also welcome to their own seats at a forthcoming production of “Disney on Ice”, according to its organiser. A buffet restaurant has announced that luk thep may dine at children’s rates—though patrons must pay for any uneaten food. A backlash is brewing, however. Aviation authorities have realised that nervous travellers may not want to sit next to another passenger’s haunted mannequin. Mental-health officials suggest that Thais who seek spiritual comfort would be better off adhering to established religions. Buddhist bigwigs say they are investigating whether monks who bless dolls are breaking religious codes of conduct. And now police warn that the dolls may be being used to smuggle drugs and contraband (with miscreants betting that security guards will be too tactful—or squeamish—to prod and poke them). Some wonder whether Thailand’s falling fertility rate—at 1.5 children per woman among the lowest in South-East Asia—explains the strong demand for magic dolls. But even if the craze will soon blow over, no government has succeeded in taming rampant superstition in Thailand, where charm-peddling is a lucrative trade and even the royal family uses soothsayers. Child angels are more palatable than necromantic amulets which were once made from bits of stillborn babies and sometimes still turn up in grim emporia. Given a stumbling economy and the coup leaders’ stifling rule, it is no surprise that some Thais think they deserve a little more luck.NOT long ago it all looked so much better: oil prices were high, the middle classes were growing and the autocrat-father of the state, Nursultan Nazarbayev, presided over 17m grateful subjects. Yet today the situation in Kazakhstan looks more troubling than at any time since the country broke free of the Soviet Union to become, against the odds, Central Asia’s most prosperous state. To many, Mr Nazarbayev’s promise of a “Kazakh dream” now seems like a sick joke. An overreliance on oil is what makes the Kazakh economy so fragile. Since the price crashed, export revenues have tumbled. The currency, the tenge, has fallen by half since August. That has squeezed wages and savaged household consumption. An economy that grew by over 5% in 2013 may contract this year, for the first time since 1998. It has not helped that growth is stalling in China, Kazakhstan’s second largest trading partner, while Russia, its largest, is now deep in recession. All this is hurting ordinary folk. In a rare protest in a closely controlled state, two dozen homeowners gathered outside a bank in Almaty, the commercial capital, last week. They were complaining about their mortgages, and they are unlikely to be the last to do so. Many mortgages are denominated in dollars, so the cost of servicing them has soared. The government is dealing with the financial crunch with an odd mix of stimulus and austerity. On the stimulus side is a $9-billion investment package to boost non-oil sectors such as manufacturing, as well as perks for foreign investors as a fire sale of state assets gets under way. Public-sector salaries and pensions have been raised, and schemes introduced to help savers and mortgage holders suffering from the currency’s fall. As for austerity, public spending is to be cut in other areas, though in ways supposed to protect the worst-off. Even a swords-and-stallions TV drama about Kazakh history, intended to create a nobler and more accurate image of Kazakhstan than “Borat”, has lost some of its state funding. The budget deficit is likely to balloon despite some help from the sovereign wealth fund. As grievances mount, political stability comes into question. The president keeps chanting an all-in-it-together mantra, but the calls for austerity by this head of a fabulously wealthy clan may wear thin. The question is how he might react to signs of greater dissatisfaction. Mr Nazarbayev has run Kazakhstan since before the Soviet Union collapsed, wielding a very personal sort of power even as international statesmen and highly paid public-relations firms have helped to polish a veneer of liberalism and democracy. Last year Mr Nazarbayev promised a “modern state apparatus”, and in the past he has talked of creating a resilient political system. But current conditions can hardly seem to him an opportune time for political change. There has been no move towards proper reform. Meanwhile, the regime has kept a heavy lid on dissent ever since dozens of striking oil workers were gunned down by security forces in Zhanaozen in western Kazakhstan in late 2011. An opposition leader, Vladimir Kozlov, is in jail on trumped-up charges of fomenting that turmoil, which prompted a massive crackdown on the political opposition and independent media. Last week two dissidents were jailed on spurious charges of inciting racial hatred, following a Kafkaesque trial sparked by a discussion on Facebook about an unpublished book written two decades ago. “Presidents come and go,” one of those dissidents, Serikzhan Mambetalin, said during his spirited defence, “But the people remain.” Tell that to Mr Nazarbayev. He turns 76 in July, but shows no sign of going. Not least—and this spells trouble for the future—he has signally failed to provide for his succession. Meanwhile, though Mr Nazarbayev would probably win anyway if presidential elections were free and fair, he takes no chances. He won the last election with 98% of the vote; in the past even other presidential candidates voted for the father of the state. In late January Mr Nazarbayev set a date of March 20th for parliamentary elections. Supposedly, they are in order to provide a fresh mandate to boost growth. In practice they will produce another rubber-stamp legislature to do the president’s bidding. However stage-managed the elections, they may fail to mask the cracks likely to emerge as the economy slows.IT WORRIES the volunteer patroller at one of the entrances to Aokigahara forest that the white car with the Osaka number plates has now been there, empty, for five days. This forest of moss-clad trees covers 30 square kilometres (12 square miles) of a lava plateau near the foot of Mount Fuji. As a place to commit suicide, it is said to be second in popularity only to San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge. The car’s owner, the patroller says, is probably already dead somewhere deep inside the forest. His job is to try to spot and turn back those who may be contemplating suicide. Folklore holds that the forest was once a site for ubasute, the (possibly apocryphal) practice of carrying the old or infirm to a remote place and leaving them to die, so that they would not be a burden to their families. A 1960 novel by Seicho Matsumoto popularised Aokigahara as a site for suicides, after the heroine took her own life there. When suicides in Japan rose steeply as the country’s financial bubble burst after 1989, several dozen people a year were killing themselves in Aokigahara, mainly by hanging. Signs stand next to the paths, telling passers-by that their lives are precious, a gift from their parents. The number of a suicide hotline is displayed below. Yet much internet chatter talks of the forest as a site for suicides, and its vastness is a lure to many contemplating death. Mobile-phone reception is poor. The volcanic deposits also wreak havoc with compasses; those with second thoughts might struggle to retrace their steps. Last year over 23,000 people ended their own lives in Japan. The good news is that the number has fallen for six years in a row—a trend elsewhere, too (see chart). Part of the reason for the decline of Japanese suicides is economic: with business and personal insolvencies at a relative low, fewer people are losing their jobs or going bankrupt—a common motivation for Japanese suicides, along with worries about health. But prevention has also improved. Nearly a decade ago the government adopted policies to stop suicides. They include classes at schools, extra municipal staff trained in suicide-prevention, and better training in mental health among medical staff. Those expressing suicidal urges are now more likely to receive attention—though mental illness still has a powerful stigma attached to it in Japan. Most preventive measures are directed at middle-aged men, who are most at risk. Yet the rate at which younger adults kill themselves has not fallen by as much as for older folk—indeed, suicide is the leading cause of death for 15- to 40-year-olds. It is harder to deal with a pervading dejection about the future that prompts many young Japanese to kill themselves than with the practical issues—eg, financial straits—that can push middle-aged people over the edge, says Yasuyuki Shimizu of Life Link, an NGO. Meanwhile, Aokigahara continues to swallow its victims. That takes a mental toll on locals too. Recently, the same patrolman wrestled a young man to the ground to stop him vanishing inside. Such incidents haunt him, and he wants talk about them. But the police have told him not to, for fear of bringing more people looking for a stillness deeper even than the silence of the forest.ON JANUARY 19th China declared that its gross domestic product had grown by 6.9% in 2015, accounting for inflation—the slowest rate in a quarter of a century. It was neatly within the government’s target of “around 7%”, but many economists wondered whether the figure was accurate. Online chatter in China about dodgy GDP numbers was fuelled a week later by the arrest of the man who had announced the data: Wang Baoan, the head of the National Bureau of Statistics. The country’s anti-graft agency accused him of “serious disciplinary violations”, a euphemism for corruption. But beyond all the (justifiable) doubts about the figures lies another important question. That is: why does China have a GDP target at all? It is the only large industrial country that sets one. Normally central banks declare specific goals for things like inflation or unemployment. The idea that a government should aim for a particular rate of output expansion, and steer the economy to achieve that, is unusual. In the case of China, which is trying to wean its economy off excessive reliance on GDP-boosting (but often wasteful and debt-fuelling) investment, it is risky. It is inconsistent with the government’s own oft-repeated mantra that it is the quality of growth that matters, not the quantity. In the past, setting a target may not have made much difference. For all but three of the years between 1992 and 2015, China’s growth was above target, often by a big margin. A rare period when targets seemed to affect the way officials tried to manage the economy was from 2008 to 2009, when growth fell sharply (see chart). It would be hard to argue that targets themselves have been responsible for China’s overall (impressive) record of growth in recent decades. Now, however, the economy is slowing. This is inevitable: double-digit growth is no longer achievable except at dangerous cost (total debt was nearly 250% of GDP in the third quarter of 2015). But the government is worried that the economy may slow too fast, and that this could cause a destabilising surge in unemployment. So it has been ramping up investment again, and goading local governments to do the same by setting a high growth target. For a while there were signs that the leadership itself had doubts about the merits of GDP target-setting. In 2013 Xinhua, an official news agency, decried what it called the country’s “GDP obsession”. By the next year, 70 or so counties and cities had scrapped their targets. In 2015 Shanghai joined them, becoming the first big city to break with orthodoxy (each level of government sets its own GDP target, often higher than the national one). Liu Qiao of the Guanghua School of Management at Peking University says the central government ought to follow suit. Last year there were hints that it might. The prime minister, Li Keqiang, said the government would not “defend [the target for 2015] to the death”. And in October, talking about the government’s work on a new five-year economic plan (which will run from 2016 to 2020), President Xi Jinping avoided mentioning a number. That raised expectations that targets might at least be downplayed, if not abandoned. They have not been, however. An outline of the five-year plan, unveiled in November, contained the usual emphasis on growth. And Mr Xi appeared to change his tune, saying expansion must average at least 6.5% a year until 2020. Many economists believe that will require yet more debt-inducing stimulus. A GDP target for this year is all but certain to be announced, as usual, at the annual session of the legislature in March (when the five-year plan will also be adopted). It will probably be higher than 6%. Speculation that the government might set a target range in order to give itself more policymaking flexibility (as the IMF and the World Bank have urged) has ebbed. In December some national legislators complained that local governments were busting their debt ceilings because there was “still too much emphasis on GDP”. So why is there still a target? The reasons are political. In a country so large, central leaders are always fearful of losing their grip on far-flung bureaucrats: setting GDP targets is one means by which they believe they can evaluate and control those lower down. Local officials are also judged by environmental standards, social policies and what the Communist Party calls “virtue”—that is, being uncorrupt and in tune with the party’s latest interpretation of Marxist doctrine. But GDP is usually the most important criterion, having the attraction of being (roughly) measurable. A study in 2013 by Deng Yongheng of Singapore National University and Wu Jing of Tsinghua University in Beijing looked at the careers of officials who had worked as mayors in 283 cities. It found that those who presided over higher growth rates in their cities, relative to the rates notched up by their predecessors, had got better jobs afterwards. Since the study was conducted, there has been little sign of any change in this pattern. Depressingly, the academics found that the more the mayors had increased investment in environmental protection, the lower their likelihood of being promoted had turned out to be. The government finds environmental targets more difficult to set than growth ones. The environment ministry is trying to create a measure of “green GDP” (roughly, output minus the cost of environmental damage) that could be used to assess the performance of local officials. But it had a stab at this before, in 2004, and got nowhere: the damage proved too tricky to calculate. Daily dispatches: China's market mess At higher levels, promotion is determined in part by which faction an official belongs to. But the lower down the hierarchy a government entity is, the more it is likely to be judged by GDP. When Mr Li, the prime minister, suggested that GDP targets might not be all-important, many people complained. One academic says that without such targets, local officials would not know what they are supposed to be doing. At a time when Mr Xi’s anti-corruption campaign is causing many nervous officials to sit on their hands to avoid graft-busters’ attention, party leaders are all the more unwilling to abandon an appraisal system which—however imperfectly—holds officials to account and can goad them into action. As Chinese leaders see it, the target has another use. It provides numerical evidence for their proclaimed efforts to make China rich. Deng Xiaoping set the trend by declaring in 1980 that China would quadruple its GDP of that year by the end of the century (it achieved that goal several years early). Andrew Batson of Gavekal Dragonomics, a research and advisory firm, points out that when Mr Xi unveiled his 6.5% target, he set it in the context of a broader (Deng-like) objective: that of doubling the level of GDP attained in 2010 by the end of the decade. Mr Xi apparently believes that a growth target is necessary in order for China to become a “moderately prosperous society” by 2021, the 100th anniversary of the party’s founding. That is one of what the party calls its two “centenary goals” (the other is for China to become “prosperous and strong” by 2049, the 100th anniversary of Communist rule). These aims were first proclaimed by Jiang Zemin, who was then president, in 1997—inspired, it appeared, by Deng, who was the first to speak of a need to make China “moderately prosperous”. The paradox is that by fixating on growth targets China may end up badly damaging its economy, rather than fulfilling its goals.CHINA is so vast, it quickly becomes the largest market for almost anything it consumes. Such is the case with bottled water. Chinese drink 40 billion litres (70 billion pints) of the stuff each year, up over 13-fold since 1998. That growth has a long way to go if China ever consumes as much per person as Mexico (see chart). But finding clean supplies is difficult; rivers, lakes and even groundwater in China are often foul. Hence the huge demand for a seemingly inexhaustible source of pristine water that is cheap to extract, sells at a premium and can now, thanks to massive investment in infrastructure, be taken to coastal cities: Tibetan glaciers. Tibet already sells Qomolangma Glacier water, named after the Tibetan word for Mount Everest. Last year Sinopec, a state-owned energy group, put another brand on sale at its petrol stations: Tibet 5100. It is bottled 5,100 metres (16,700 feet) up in the Nyenchen Tanglha range. The Tibetan government has licensed 28 more companies to increase the province’s bottling capacity 50-fold by 2020. Assuming companies do not mine the glacier ice itself, they will bottle only the meltwater that flows out of glaciers in summer. It is true that Himalayan glaciers on the Tibet-Qinghai plateau have retreated over the past 30 years by about 15%. But this is because of climate change. Bottling will not cause them to lose mass any quicker. Nor will the bottled-water industry have much impact on the volume of water that flows from Tibet—a crucial source for neighbouring countries as well as China itself. About 1 billion people depend on the giant rivers—the Yellow river, the Brahmaputra, the Indus, the Ganges, the Yangzi, the Mekong and the Salween—that rise in the Himalayas, a region with the largest reserves of fresh water after the north and south poles. The manufacturing of bottled water consumes three times more water than ends up being sold. Yet even the projected expansion of Tibet’s bottled-water output would amount to only a tiny fraction of the region’s runoff. More worrying is the possible threat that the industry will pose to the Tibetan environment. China has an atrocious record of looking after its pristine areas. Liu Hongqiao of China Water Risk, an NGO, says no water company has published any environmental-impact study in Tibet. The bottling industry may spawn other, heavy-polluting ones, on the plateau, for the production of bottles and the plastic they use. Tibet’s government is bribing bottlers with tax cuts, tax holidays and cheap loans. It charges companies only 3 yuan (50 cents) to extract a cubic metre of water, compared with up to 50 yuan elsewhere. But the government in Beijing may have other plans. Alarmed by water scarcity, it wants to reduce groundwater extraction. It has plans for a nationwide cap in 2020 and wants all provinces—even water-rich ones like Tibet—to set quotas for water use. This may make Tibet’s policies unsustainable (which may be no bad thing). In Jilin province in the north-east, the local government had even more ambitious plans than Tibet’s for ramping up mineral-water production. But it was forced to cut them by half because of mandated quotas. Bubbles, it seems, are an integral part of China’s bottled-water business.LOVE, as Ali MacGraw once sobbed, means never having to say you’re sorry. Working in China is the opposite: you have to say sorry quite often. A handwritten sheet of paper, ideally smudged by contrite teardrops, used to do the trick. But these days, it sometimes seems, an apology is worth anything only if it is made on national television. In recent months all sorts of people have unburdened themselves in this way: a leading financial journalist distressed at having helped create the “panic and disorder” in China’s markets; a Hong Kong publisher of muckraking books about Chinese politics, who disappeared from a beach resort in Thailand; a Swede who had for seven years run a group in Beijing offering legal help to Chinese citizens. They and many others have confessed their “crimes” to the cameras and apologised for the trouble they have caused. Westerners, even those addicted to reality TV, find these displays on prime-time news shows appalling. America’s State Department expressed concern this month about the growing number who “appear to have been coerced to confess to alleged crimes on state media”. It does indeed look bad—an echo of Mao’s tyranny, when those accused of wronging the Great Helmsman were forced to kneel in dunces’ caps before braying mobs. So it is worth pondering why the Chinese authorities do it. Two possible answers can be quickly dismissed: these confessions have nothing to do with justice or truth. The judicial process does not require a public apology or admission of guilt. Indeed, any chance of a fair trial is jeopardised by a verdict decided in advance, delivered by the accused himself and widely broadcast.    If the concern were to inform viewers of the true facts of a controversial case, then the confessions would be more credible. Instead, however, people are told, for example, a far-fetched story about Gui Minhai, the Hong Kong bookseller who vanished in October from Pattaya in Thailand. In his televised statement Mr Gui said that he had returned to China voluntarily, to answer questions about a hit-and-run road accident in 2003 in the Chinese port of Ningbo in which a young woman had been killed. So viewers are asked to believe that Mr Gui, who is a Swedish citizen, was smitten by remorse for an accident that happened 12 years earlier. Perhaps, when the lightning bolt struck, he was parasailing, or merely enjoying his beachfront view over a mai tai. Either way, he abruptly forsook the good life to face the music, apparently smuggling himself out of Thailand without troubling the Thai border authorities. Similarly, Peter Dahlin, another apologetic Swede, this month belatedly realised that his legal-aid activities had broken the law and hurt the feelings of the Chinese people. His apology was followed by expulsion from China. A third red herring is the notion that public confession and contrition is something that Chinese, or East Asian, culture demands. Seven decades ago, writing about Japan, Ruth Benedict, an American anthropologist, posited a distinction between “shame” cultures, where the fear of public humiliation helps regulate behaviour, and those, like America and Europe, ruled by “guilt”, and so constrained by the power of individual consciences. The idea is controversial, and in many circles dismissed; but it is true that, across East Asia, public shaming seems an important part of political and even corporate life. Take a Japanese company, Takata, which makes car airbags. After these turned out last year to be defective, its executives faced the press to say sorry, and bowed deeply. Similar rules apply in South Korea: witness the way Chou Tzu-yu, a Taiwanese member of Twice, a Korean pop group, was this month hauled in front of the cameras to apologise for having waved a Taiwanese flag on Korean television—an act her managers fear may damage Twice’s sales in China. Some academics have suggested that shame works better in a system, such as China’s, where maintaining harmony is seen as more important than adherence to a notionally objective idea of right and wrong. But the stocks and the pillory were used in Europe for centuries; in Britain they were abolished only in 1837. And today, in much of the West, the most successful part of the media is that specialising in the shaming of public figures. Similarly, nobody suggests East Asians are immune from guilt. It is the theme, for example, of some of the greatest Japanese films. The main reason for the spate of confessional television in China is, in fact, political: it is a conscious policy of the regime of Xi Jinping, China’s ruler for the past three years. In an illuminating essay last March, David Bandurski of the China Media Project at the University of Hong Kong pointed out that what he called “China’s confessional politics of dominance” has its roots in the Communist Party’s own history, and in the Soviet influences that helped shape it before it took power. Confession and self-criticism have been part of its ruling strategy since its revolutionary leaders lived in caves in Yan’an and plotted against their neighbouring cavemen. Virtually everybody in China—even Deng Xiaoping and, almost certainly during Mao’s rule, Mr Xi himself—has written at least one piece of self-criticism. At the other end of the scale, even Banyan has done it, when he was a student and later reporter in China, with a few eloquent self-flagellations—now (he hopes) gathering dust in some forgotten archive. Imagine a boot stamping on a human face–for ever In writing self-criticism, the secret is to ponder not truth, justice or cultural norms, but what your reader wants. As Mr Bandurski put it: “As in the past, today’s culture of confession is not about accountability, clean government or a rules-based system. It is about dominance and submission.” Mr Xi’s revival of this culture is not accidental. It is a reminder that his party’s tolerance for dissent is lower now than at any time since the early 1990s. One symptom of this is its insistence that China’s people—and foreigners working in the country—must accept that, even if they cannot love him, Big Brother is right.A GROUP of girls are playing catch. They could be ordinary children; but some are cradling babies, and they are surrounded by high walls topped with barbed wire. They are in a refuge, in the city of Meru near Mount Kenya, which houses survivors of sexual abuse. Nearly a third of girls and 18% of boys in Kenya suffer some form of sexual violence before they are 18, according to a study published in 2010 by the UN Children’s Fund (Unicef). Though data barely exist in many poor countries and researchers rarely use comparable methodology, surveys in other African countries, including Tanzania and Swaziland, have found similarly high rates. The World Health Organisation (WHO) puts the global prevalence at 20% among girls and 5-10% for boys. Assuming the data are correct, why is the problem worse in Africa? In the wake of the HIV/AIDS epidemic that swept across the continent in the 2000s, many researchers at first thought child rape was perpetrated by men who believed the myth that sex with a virgin would cure them. But the evidence suggests otherwise. A more chilling effect of HIV/AIDS was to leave many children orphaned and vulnerable to predatory adults, a problem exacerbated in many African societies by the strict obedience expected of children. All around the world, poor children are more likely to be physically or sexually abused, says Christopher Mikton of the WHO. Unemployed, uprooted men are also more likely to violate children. In South Africa, where more than half of young adults are jobless, a survey of 15- to 17-year-olds found that 19% of girls and 20% of boys had been sexually abused. “Periods of rapid social and economic change…appear to be at least correlated” with violence against women and children, says Cynthia Bowman of Cornell University. As in most of the world, a huge stigma is attached to such crimes in Kenya. But even when children plucked up the courage to tell an adult or go to the police, rather than let their parents take the traditional route of resolving things behind closed doors, the crimes were never investigated properly, says Mercy Chidi, who set up the Meru shelter in 2006. “You had to give them money to even leave their desks,” she says. In 2012, helped by a Canadian NGO called the Equality Effect, Ms Chidi filed claims against police in Meru for violating the rights of more than 240 children by not investigating their allegations properly. The high court ruled in the girls’ favour in 2013. Since then, more than 80% of their cases have been successfully prosecuted. Others are still in the courts, or the suspects have fled. But in most Kenyan communities where the NGOs operate, people were “somewhat resigned” to having paedophiles in their midst, says Fiona Sampson of the Equality Effect. They wanted to protect the children, but they did not know how. So the two organisations have expanded their training of police in Kenya as part of a six-month pilot programme. During one school session 140 children danced on tables, singing “No, no, no to children rape.”
