No one at home PITY poor Staffan de Mistura, the UN’s special envoy for Syria. Talks aimed at ending the five-year civil war that has claimed more than 250,000 lives and displaced 12m people should have started on January 25th in Geneva. But disagreements over who should come and on what terms could not be resolved in time. As The Economist went to press, it looked as if the talks could at last get under way on January 29th. But as the veteran diplomat ruefully conceded on Monday, threats to pull out should be expected: “Don’t be surprised: there will be a lot of posturing, a lot of walkouts and walk-ins…you should neither be depressed [nor] impressed…the important thing is to keep momentum.” Even that limited goal may prove dauntingly hard to achieve. Both of Mr de Mistura’s predecessors gave up after peace conferences they had convened got nowhere. Hopes of some progress this time were raised after a meeting of the 17-country International Syria Support Group (ISSG) in Vienna in November, which was followed by a UN Security Council resolution calling for talks to start in January that would lead to a “credible” transitional government in place by July this year. Fair elections based on a new constitution would be held by the middle of 2017. Besides the start of the talks, it will be a miracle if any of those other milestones are met. Mr de Mistura admits that the participants are united only by mutual loathing. At the beginning of what he sees as a six-month process the groups will be kept in separate rooms, while he shuttles between them in a search for something they can agree on. The immediate cause of the postponement of the talks was a failure to agree on which groups should be invited as representatives of the Syrian opposition. Gamely, Mr de Mistura sent out formal invitations to his diplomatic dance on January 26th. Hotel bookings have been made and a few TV camera crews have turned up in Geneva, but confusion reigns. Under the auspices of Saudi Arabia, a High Negotiations Committee (HNC) has been established to represent the many rebel factions at the talks. But although it excludes both Islamic State and Jabhat Al-Nusra, al-Qaeda’s Syrian affiliate, it includes hard-line Salafist outfits, such as Jaish al-Islam and Ahrar al-Sham, which collaborate with Jabhat Al-Nusra and which explicitly rule out the principles of democratic pluralism outlined in the ISSG’s Vienna communiqué. The military commander of Jaish al-Islam, Zahran Alloush, was killed by an air strike on December 25th, but the group’s political leader, Muhammad Alloush, has been chosen as the HNC’s chief negotiator in Geneva. The Syrian government tends to regard any opposition figure who has ever carried an AK47 as a “terrorist”, but it is supported by its allies Iran and Russia in wanting Ahrar and Jaish kept out of the talks. However, Russia is demanding the inclusion of other individuals and groups, such as the Kurdish Democratic Union Party, whose YPG militias are fighting both the regime and Islamic State to carve out an autonomous region in the north-east of the country along the Turkish border. Turkey says it will pull out if the Kurds are at the table because they are allied with a Turkish terrorist group, the Kurdistan Workers’ Party. Bowing to pressure, Mr de Mistura did not invite the Kurds. A further problem is that parts of the Sunni Arab coalition say they will not attend unless there is a halt to air strikes by the regime and the Russians and the lifting of sieges in rebel-held territory where civilians are starving. They point out that these are confidence-building measures required by the UN resolution. But although Mr de Mistura bemoans the squabbles over participation as a distraction from more important issues, he is pleading for people to turn up in Geneva without preconditions. Hopes for anything more than sporadic local ceasefires are faint, especially since Russia’s air campaign has strengthened the regime of Bashar al-Assad. Russian planes have carried out nearly 7,000 sorties in the four months since they entered the fray, killing many of Mr Assad’s enemies. Government forces last week seized control of Rabiaa, the last big town in western Latakia province held by the rebels, and crucial for their supply lines from Turkey. Intransigent even when faced with imminent defeat last summer, Mr Assad now believes he is winning.Sweaty in Soweto WHEN South Africa’s biggest fitness chain opened its second gym in Soweto last year, residents of the bustling black township signed up in droves. Within months the Jabulani gym had become the most successful of more than 120 Virgin Active clubs to launch in South Africa, drawing Sowetans for squats, lunges and lifts to DJ beats. Virgin Active, a global brand mostly owned by Brait, a South African investment firm, thinks it can replicate this success elsewhere on the continent. It has two gyms in Namibia and has just opened its first in Botswana. A gym in Kenya is due to open later this year, and the firm is looking at Ghana and Zambia as possible future sites. Africans are getting fatter, a side-effect of economic growth. The number of obese and overweight children has nearly doubled since 1990, from 5.4m to 10.3m, says the World Health Organisation. Mass migration to cities has allowed some Africans to go from malnourished to overweight in a generation, thanks to sedentary lifestyles and fatty diets. Many Africans still see a fuller figure as a sign of success, not to mention sexy. South Africa is the plumpest country on the continent, with a whopping 61% of its people overweight or obese, says the South African Medical Research Council. Other middle-income countries such as the Seychelles and Botswana are close behind. African women are especially prone to putting on extra pounds. Diseases such as diabetes follow.   As Africa’s economic growth slows, gyms are adjusting. While Virgin Active runs swanky health clubs with fluffy towels and shoeshine services, its popular Jabulani gym is a no-frills branch with lower fees. A rival chain, Planet Fitness, has found success with a similar lower-cost model. In places such as Dakar, where gyms are few and expensive, residents take to the beach for group workout sessions. Part of the draw is aspirational: having a gym membership is a token of urban life, like a car and a smartphone. For South Africans posting gym selfies, there is even a hashtag: #MkhabaMustFall, using a slang word for a beer belly, and riffing off the “must fall” hashtags seen in campaigns calling for colonial-era statues to tumble and university tuition fees to be axed. Joy Mokoena, 38, who works in marketing, joined a gym after a friend told her she was looking too chubby. Now she brings her two children along while she takes Zumba classes, explaining: “I don’t want them to be fat like me.”The ultimate protest LIKE his fellow Tunisian, Muhammad Bouazizi, who set himself ablaze to protest against harassment by local officials in 2010, Ridha Yahyaoui was acting impulsively when he died on January 16th. Having just been refused a government job, the unemployed 28-year-old scaled a utility pole in Kasserine, an impoverished town in western Tunisia. He reportedly threatened suicide. Perched in the air, consumed by his grievances, Mr Yahyaoui touched the wires and was electrocuted. Bouazizi’s death ignited protests that ended the dictatorship of Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and inspired the Arab spring. Mr Yahyaoui’s is a reminder that democracy has yet to solve many of Tunisia’s problems. The government has struggled to kick-start an economy that still suffers from past abuse and persistent corruption. Islamist rebels in the west and several big terrorist attacks have added to its woes in the past year. Nidaa Tounes, the dominant political party, has recently fractured. But a lack of jobs is the main reason that thousands of Tunisians have returned to the streets. The unemployment rate is over 15%, worse than before the revolution. Around a third of young people are out of work. In rural areas like Kasserine, jobs are extremely scarce. Much of the work available is suitable for low-skilled labourers; it takes graduates, such as Mr Yahyaoui, an average of six years to find a steady job. Half of all graduates are still unemployed at 35, according to the World Bank. The unrest has only made things worse. Three British tour operators have cancelled all bookings to Tunisia until November. Tourism, which (directly and indirectly) accounts for about 15% of GDP and 14% of jobs, was already down due to two deadly attacks on foreign tourists last year. Dozens of hotels have closed for lack of guests. The government has stepped in as the employer of last resort. Tens of thousands of workers have joined the public sector since 2010, raising the number employed by the government to over 600,000. Another 180,000 or so work for public companies, which have also been on a hiring spree. To placate Tunisia’s powerful unions, the government has raised salaries. The public-sector wage bill almost doubled between 2010 and 2014. It now accounts for over 13% of GDP, one of the highest shares in the world. Not only is Tunisia’s public sector big, it is poorly run. A World Bank report notes that “the link between a public employee’s performance and her evaluation, compensation and promotion is weak, particularly since the revolution.” The wounded and other “martyrs of the revolution” are favoured for jobs. So are the unemployed, leading some Tunisians to shun work in the private sector. Public firms, meanwhile, are models of inefficiency. The Tunisian Chemical Group, cited in the report, increased its head count from 5,000 in 2010 to 16,000 in 2012, while production fell from 8m to 2.5m tonnes. Despite its wage bill, the government expects the budget deficit to fall to 3.9% this year. That is optimistic. Moody’s, a credit-rating agency, recently cut its growth forecast for Tunisia to 1.5%, and expects a deficit closer to 5%. International donors want Tunisia to prune the public sector and spend its money more wisely. The government is already cutting subsidies on items such as fuel. But there is also concern about the stability of this lone Arab-spring success story. France recently promised €1 billion ($1.1 billion) in aid over the next five years. To appease protesters, the government announced on January 20th that it would hire 5,000 young people in Kasserine, though it is actually only offering job training. “We do not have a magic wand to give a job to everyone at the same time,” says Habib Essid, the prime minister. That hard truth has not gone down well in Tunisia.THE skyscrapers of the King Abdullah Financial District (KAFD) rise out of Riyadh’s urban sprawl like an emerald city. Pointed glass spears compete for prominence with vast staggered lean-tos, streaked black-and-white like the back of a rearing zebra. A monorail curves past a butterfly dome. Blissfully vehicle-free in a city otherwise designed for cars, not people, KAFD is built around pedestrian precincts shaded by palm trees. Even the rubbish is collected on an underground conveyor belt. After seven years, the first phase of a futuristic financial hub for the Arab world’s largest economy is nearly complete. It has cost more than $10 billion and the lives of 11 building workers. Something is missing, however. While decorators install tropical plants in the conference hall, the legal, fiscal and cultural architecture is still on the drawing board. Waleed Aleisa, the CEO, says he is still waiting to hear whether the zone will be free of corporation tax and under what jurisdiction it will operate. At the outset, the project managers imagined a city which would be both in Saudi Arabia and apart from it. Visas would be issued at the airport, sidestepping the kingdom’s red tape. They had visions of a big gated community, largely off-limits to the religious police. Anticipating a mixed workplace in a society where segregation is otherwise de rigueur, male and female toilets were installed on all floors. Brochures portrayed men and unveiled women chatting together. “You have to have different rules for KAFD,” pleads Mr Aleisa. But last year the kingdom changed rulers, and King Salman and his son, Muhammad, seem loth to upset the religious establishment while they find their feet. The Saudi central bank, its stock exchange and its sovereign-wealth fund have all assured Mr Aleisa that they are moving in; but international finance houses are proving harder to pin down without clarity on the basics, such as whether women can work with men or what jurisdiction it will operate under. “We should hear sometime in 2016,” says Mr Aleisa. Saudi Arabia’s loss will be Dubai’s gain. Though its economy is smaller than the Saudi one and bereft of oil, Dubai claims to have attracted 21 of the world’s top 25 banks, drawn by its barely taxed, lightly regulated “free zone” for foreign firms. “It’s about getting the right legal system, not the right architecture,” says a Gulf investment banker, welcoming Dubai’s introduction of English judges handing down English law. Riyadh’s new buildings look good; investors hope they are not built on sand.WHEN Middle Eastern refugees began arriving in Europe last year, Martina Scheibova, a consultant in Prague, felt sympathy for them. Now she is less sure. They create a “clash of cultures”, she says anxiously. Such fears are shared by many Europeans. But unlike Germans or Swedes, Ms Scheibova is unlikely to encounter many refugees. Czech public opinion is solidly against taking in asylum-seekers; Milos Zeman, the Czech Republic’s populist president, calls Muslim refugees “practically impossible” to integrate. In the past year, the country has accepted just 520. The backlash against refugees can be felt across Europe. Xenophobic parties are at record levels in polls in Sweden and the Netherlands, and even in Germany the Eurosceptic, far-right Alternative für Deutschland party is polling in double digits. But central Europe’s response has been particularly strong. Anti-migrant sentiment has unified the “Visegrad group” of Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and the Czech Republic—normally a disparate bunch who agree on some subjects (like opposing Europe’s climate policies) but are divided on others (like Russia). Rather than noisy opposition groups, it is governments in these countries who trumpet some of the most extreme views. And they are taking advantage of anti-migrant fervour to implement an illiberal agenda on other fronts, too. Viktor Orban, Hungary’s prime minister, has been the loudest of the anti-immigrant voices. Mr Orban began inveighing against migrants early in 2015, after the Charlie Hebdo attacks in Paris, when the numbers arriving in Europe were still relatively low. His government now wants to introduce anti-terror laws that worry civil libertarians, though the details are vague. Fidesz, Mr Orban’s party, pioneered Europe’s illiberal wave: when it came to power in 2010 it limited the constitutional court’s powers, packed it with cronies and introduced a new constitution. Fidesz changed the electoral system, helping it win again in 2014, says Andras Biro-Nagy of Policy Solutions, a think-tank. A new media regulator was set up, headed by a Fidesz stalwart. Public television channels were stuffed with pro-Fidesz journalists, while foreign media were taxed more heavily than domestic ones. (The tax was rescinded after criticism from the main foreign channel, RTL Klub.) For Visegrad, the game-changer was the November election victory in Poland of the nationalist conservative Law and Justice party (PiS). Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the party leader, has admired Mr Orban for years. Konrad Szymanski, the deputy foreign minister for European affairs, says Poland now plans to beef up its co-operation with the Visegrad group. The government is dead against any further European deals to allocate refugees among member states. Meanwhile, since taking power in November, PiS has sacked the heads of the security and intelligence services, weakened the constitutional tribunal (and packed it with its own supporters), and passed a new media law that lets it install loyalists to head the public radio and TV channels. The European Commission is examining whether all this violates Poland’s commitments to the rule of law. Politics in Slovakia and the Czech Republic are a bit different, but in both countries politicians have jumped on the issue of refugees. In December Robert Fico, the prime minister of Slovakia (who is seeking re-election in March), launched a legal challenge to the EU’s migration policy, which he describes as “ritual suicide”. (Hungary filed a challenge soon after.) Bohuslav Sobotka, the Czech prime minister, is less bombastic than Mr Zeman, but he too rejects refugee quotas. Conditions for those already in the country are shoddy. INTERACTIVE: Explore border fences between countries around the world These populist politics have been a hit with voters. Last spring Fidesz was falling in the polls, while support for Jobbik, a far-right party, was surging. Today Fidesz would win a majority again. Support for Mr Fico’s Smer party had stalled last year, but since the refugee crisis erupted it has been rising. PiS’s support base is among disgruntled older voters, who are particularly fearful of immigration. This week, at a meeting staged by a conservative group in Warsaw on whether Poland was threatened by a “colour revolution”, the question of what to call refugees came up. A woman in the audience suggested “invaders”. A speaker opted for “Islamists”. The newfound unity between the four countries delights populist politicians. “Probably the only good thing in the whole migration crisis is that the V4 [Visegrad group] has found a common voice and strategy,” says Marton Gyongyosi of Jobbik. The group “allows three small countries to punch above their weight”, says Gyorgy Schopflin, a Fidesz MEP. The Visegrad group once aimed to accelerate its members’ integration into the EU. Its turn towards illiberalism presents Europe with a problem. Since new rules came into force in 2014, the group no longer has a blocking minority in the European Council. But it can cause headaches, particularly if it influences neighbours such as Romania or Bulgaria. Meanwhile, polls show trust in the EU has fallen in all four countries. In fact, Visegrad countries rely heavily on EU funding—it amounted to 6% of GDP in Hungary in 2013. Yet many are disappointed in Europe. “People thought we would have the same living standards as Austrians or Britons,” says Ferenc Gyurcsany, who served as Hungary’s prime minister from 2004 to 2009. Rising Euroscepticism could backfire on the group. Informal talks on the next multi-year EU budget have begun, and Germany has hinted that it will favour countries that share the burden of refugees. Already many European officials are growing impatient with the group. Milan Nic of the Central European Policy Institute recalls the days when Austrian politicians, for example, used to talk about the Visegrad group with respect. “Nowadays”, he says, “Visegrad is like a bad word.”CHANTS of “Russia without Putin!” echoed through Moscow four years ago. Vladimir Putin’s choreographed return to the presidency and vote tampering in parliamentary elections brought thousands to the streets; his approval ratings fell to 63%. But after the annexation of Crimea in 2014, those ratings soared to nearly 90% and have not come back to earth since. Mr Putin became “a charismatic leader of the Promethean type: a demigod, a Titan, who brought the people fire,” says Valery Fedorov, head of the state-financed Russian Public Opinion Research Centre (VCIOM). Even a recession, falling real wages and rampant inflation have barely dented Mr Putin’s numbers. For Mr Putin’s fans, his untouchable ratings serve as proof of his righteousness. To some Russian liberals and Western observers, they are evidence that something is wrong with the polling. The practices of state-backed sociologists have been questioned. A fear of sharing political opinions, a legacy of Russia’s totalitarian past, may taint results. But the independent Levada Centre records approval levels for Mr Putin similar to those of state pollsters; so does the in-house sociological service of Alexei Navalny, an opposition leader. In fact, the issue is more complicated. In today’s Russia, where the Kremlin controls most media and politics offers no alternative, polls are more ambiguous than in countries where they measure the support of competing politicians. Instead of offering an assessment of Mr Putin’s actions, ratings reflect “the condition of a complex of collective expectations, hopes, and illusions connected with him”, as the late sociologist Yuri Levada said in 2005. Oil price and Russian politics: a history In the long shadow of the Soviet collapse, the desire of Russians for self-respect is just as powerful as their desire to live well, says Lev Gudkov, the Levada Centre’s director. Mr Putin’s overseas adventurism has satisfied this desire. The president has come to embody Russia (as his deputy chief of staff put it, “No Putin—no Russia”); disapproving of him verges on repudiating the country. His approval ratings measure “the respect, trust and pride Russians have in themselves and their country”, says Mr Fedorov. “Putin is just a symbol.” Nonetheless, discontent is starting to well up. This month protests forced the Krasnodar region to roll back cuts in travel benefits for pensioners. In Moscow, foreign-currency loan holders have stormed bank branches demanding refinancing in roubles. So far, such protests remain diffuse and apolitical. Russians are more likely to blame the prime minister or local officials than Mr Putin, in keeping with the age-old Russian political myth of the good tsar betrayed by evil boyars. Yet as parliamentary elections loom this autumn, Mr Putin has been quietly distancing himself from his party, United Russia, which enjoys considerably less support than he does. Eventually, the frustration may begin to catch up with Mr Putin too. Mr Fedorov forecasts a 10% dip in his ratings this year: “Everything in this life is finite.” Even Prometheus got tied down eventually.If I had a hammer IN 1918 the then three-month-old Moldovan republic gave up the struggle for survival and united with neighbouring Romania. It is a sign of how dire things are today, says Iulian Fota, a Romanian analyst, that people are talking about doing so again. Ever since 2014, when the embezzlement of about $1 billion from three banks forced a taxpayer bail-out that has crippled the economy, the country has been lurching towards collapse. Opposition supporters are permanently encamped in front of the government building. Maia Sandu, a former education minister who is rushing to build a new party, says the situation could lead to violence. No one seems to disagree. On January 20th Pavel Filip, a close associate of Vlad Plahotniuc, the most powerful of the businessman-politicians who dominate Moldova, was voted in as prime minister. His administration is the eighth since 2013. Mr Plahotniuc had wanted the job; the president rejected him, saying there were doubts about his integrity. Mr Plahotniuc’s arch-rival in business and politics, meanwhile, was arrested in October after accusations that he had received $260m in bribes. He denies wrongdoing. As Mr Filip was voted in, protesters stormed into parliament, trying to block him from taking office. They failed. On January 24th tens of thousands demonstrated against the new government. Opposition leaders have demanded a new vote. Western leaders, however, fear that elections would be won by pro-Russian parties and return the country, which has an association agreement with the European Union, to the Russian sphere of influence. Many Moldovans are incensed by reports in the Western press that the current struggle is one between pro-Russian and pro-European parties. For most protesters, the conflict has nothing to do with geopolitics. As Victoria Bucataru of the Foreign Policy Association of Moldova puts it, they are fed up with elites fighting for power while they grow poorer.   Still, if a poll were held today, the two parties generally seen as pro-Russian would together get the biggest share. The Socialists’ election posters feature pictures of Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. Renato Usatii, the leader of the other opposition party, owns a business in Russia. But he says calling him pro-Russian is a slur. “I am pro-Moldovan,” he insists, adding that if he led the country he would not rescind its agreement with the EU. One source close to Mr Plahotniuc says he wants to retire from politics. Others say they have heard this before; they believe he wants to succeed the current president when his term expires in March. Meanwhile Moldova is cut off from the external financing that it needs. Since the theft of the $1 billion, diagnostic audits are supposed to have been done on the country’s three largest remaining banks. Alex Kremer, the World Bank’s representative in Moldova, says he is concerned about delays in the completion of the reports. If it turns out that yet more money has been stolen from the banks, the anger of Moldova’s 3m exasperated citizens may at last boil over.ON A quiet bend of the River Oise, beside a wooded lake, the Ile de Loisirs activity centre usually runs sailing schools and high-wire tree-climbing adventures. Last autumn its dormitories were briefly turned into an emergency welcome centre for 98 Syrian and Iraqi refugees. Today, however, the gardens outside the residential block are empty again, the wooden picnic benches deserted. The refugee families are already gone. Their speedy resettlement shows that France has plenty of capacity to absorb migrants. It also raises the question of why it is that while Germany is coping with a vast flood of Syrian refugees, France is attracting only a trickle. The refugees who turned up in this new town, some 40km (25 miles) north-west of Paris, travelled in specially chartered coaches from Munich last September. Officials from the French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons (OFPRA) had gone to Munich in a gesture of solidarity to persuade refugees to settle in France, to help relieve the pressure on the Germans. Less than 48 hours after Cergy offered to take them in, the first coach pulled up outside the activity centre. “The welcome in Cergy was really great,” says Ali Tarabein, a former seed trader, who fled Syria via Turkey and the Greek island of Lesbos before making a four-day journey overland to Germany. Dozens of locals brought clothes and toys. “Cergy has always been very welcoming to people who come from elsewhere,” says Jean-Paul Jeandon, the Socialist mayor of the town, which is informally twinned with a village in Palestine and another in Senegal. Within two weeks, all primary-aged refugee children were in a local school. Adults, none of whom spoke French, were given language classes while they awaited official papers. By mid-December all the original refugees had been offered housing, five of them in Cergy and others elsewhere in France. Asylum applications in France take an average of two years to process, but officials in Cergy cut through the bureaucratic thicket and speeded things up. It helped that the town is no stranger to new arrivals, with a mix of 130 nationalities. Many refugees were skilled, among them a dentist and an engineering student, and the numbers were manageable. “If we’d had hundreds or even thousands it would have been more complex,” says Mr Jeandon. Yet it is precisely those low numbers that are puzzling, not just in Cergy but in France as a whole. Overall asylum applications rose last year by 22%, but to just 79,000—nothing remotely close to the million-plus who registered in Germany. In 2015, 158,657 Syrians completed asylum applications in Germany, compared with only 3,553 in France. Last year the European Union agreed on a relocation programme to share 160,000 refugees from Italy and Greece. By mid-January France had taken in only 19; another 43 arrived this week. The explanation seems to be a mix of migrants’ relatively weak ties to France, and the limited opportunities in a country with 10% unemployment. “I wanted to go to Sweden, then Germany or England,” says Mr Tarabein, who had friends in those countries and spoke English but not French. He ruled out Britain after friends warned him on Facebook and WhatsApp about the perils of trying to cross from the French port of Calais: “It was too dangerous, I don’t want to die.” As for France, he says he had heard it took months to get papers (France does not allow refugees to work for nine months) and that Syrian refugees there “live on the streets”. It was only when the OFPRA officials promised fast-track settlement that he agreed to take his seat on the coach. Now, relocated to Narbonne, he is trying to bring his wife and three small children from Syria. “It’s Germany that is in an extraordinary situation, not France,” says Pascal Brice, director of OFPRA. If the EU redistribution scheme is not yet working, he says, this is simply because refugees prefer to go to Germany. Yet there is no French political appetite to speed matters up. The xenophobic National Front continues to shape the debate. In a recent poll, 60% of French said they do not want more refugees, and terrorism has hardened sentiment. (Two of those behind the November 13th attacks in Paris posed as asylum-seekers.) Manuel Valls, the prime minister, put it bluntly last week: “The first message we need to send now, with the greatest of firmness, is to say that we will not welcome all the refugees in Europe.” Cergy may turn out to be the exception, not the makings of a solution to ease Europe’s migrant crisis.NOTHING excites the febrile intellects of Brussels more than analysing the theoretical underpinnings of European foreign policy. Entire tracts are devoted to the security strategy of the European Union, its neighbourhood policy, the countless “tools”, “instruments” and “levers” it has designed to help it advance its global concerns. A keen student can lose himself for hours in strategy papers and advisory memos to the policymakers supposedly shaping Europe’s place in the world. When the EU signed a German-inspired deal with Turkey to help stem the flow of refugees late last year, none of this mattered a jot. Presented by European officials as a hard-nosed piece of statecraft, the “action plan” offers Turkey money, the prospect of visa-free travel inside the EU and an acceleration of its membership bid so long as the Turks keep the migrants away. It was one of the most important European foreign-policy initiatives in years, but there was not a sniff of strategy to it. It reeked of desperation. Turkey-watchers in Europe and liberals inside Turkey were united in outrage. The Europeans were averting their gaze as Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, was locking up journalists, harassing the opposition and prosecuting a bloody war against unruly Kurds—in an official EU candidate country, no less. The European Commission even postponed publication of its highly critical annual report on Turkey’s membership bid while Mr Erdogan’s party campaigned in national elections. The deal seemed emblematic of a “realist” turn in European foreign policy. Ideas such as slashing aid to countries that refuse to accept the return of failed asylum-seekers are doing the rounds. Officials in international-development agencies tear their hair out as carefully nurtured relationships in Africa are tossed aside to make way for quick-and-dirty deals to ship back rejected migrants. Southern European countries fret that a plan to open EU markets to Middle Eastern exports (to create jobs for refugees) will crowd out their manufacturers. This is not the Weltinnenpolitik (global domestic policy) that grand thinkers like Jürgen Habermas thought regional clubs such as the EU were well placed to cultivate. Instead, to borrow from the late American neoconservative Irving Kristol, Europeans have started to resemble liberals mugged by reality. It is easy to bleat about human rights when you are living in a peaceful, postmodern paradise; less so when you have millions of illegal migrants barging through your back door. Europeans are hardly new to Realpolitik (the clue is in the word). There has long been a division of foreign-policy labour within the EU, says Michael Leigh of the German Marshall Fund, a think-tank. Larger countries delegated values-based policy to Brussels while they got on with the hard stuff, such as security or access to oil. For every pious expression of support for international justice or condemnation of capital punishment, there was a shabby energy deal or quiet support for a useful dictator. Some feel this category includes the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, which would run directly from Russia to Germany under the Baltic Sea and could undermine the EU’s energy policy, but which has the support of Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor. Tougher than they look Even in its soft and fuzzy days, the EU was not toothless. Its strongest tool—the attraction of membership—combined European interests and values in one package. Enlargement to the east brought stability to the region while strengthening the rule of law and democratic institutions inside candidate countries. (Maintaining them once countries have joined has proved harder, as the recent examples of Hungary and Poland demonstrate.) Globally, Europeans have, in their gentle way, sought to bolster a rules-based order that has enabled their exporters to flourish. That looked like the future, once. But today’s threats lead down a different path. Europe’s power no longer extends outward; instead, the surrounding countries have turned their pathologies on Europe. Enlargement is off the table—even in the Balkans the EU’s main interest is in keeping order, as millions of migrants tramp through a historically unstable region. Russia’s bloody intervention in Ukraine tore up the European belief that borders may not be changed by force—and Europe initially struggled to respond. It dithered again last year as the stream of migrants coming through Greece swelled, eventually leaving Mrs Merkel with little choice but to shower gifts upon Mr Erdogan in the hope of an agreement to stanch the flow. The Turkey deal may yet work (although Charlemagne is struggling to find anyone who believes that it will). If it cuts the number of refugees and the borderless Schengen area survives, a European ideal will have been saved. Optimists think that, even if it flops, the EU’s relations with an important neighbour will have emerged from the deep freeze. Denouncing Mr Erdogan’s power grabs through bloodless progress reports had little effect; now EU politicians can slip their concerns into exchanges on refugees, as some visiting commissioners did this week in Ankara. The crisis may also force the EU to look outward again. Tunisia, notes Jan Techau of Carnegie Europe, another think-tank, is crawling with European diplomats and money, testament to the EU’s desperation to preserve a rare success from the Arab spring. But these are slim hopes. Europe’s vulnerabilities are on full display. Some future Qaddafi will be alert to the concessions he might win by threatening to unleash hordes of migrants upon European shores. Finland and Norway fear that Vladimir Putin may decide to do precisely that by waving through a host of Syrians and Afghans. As for Turkey, had the Europeans woken up to the coming danger last spring, they might not have found themselves compromising their values so grubbily in the autumn. That would have been the strategic thing to do. Time to dust off some of those far-sighted think-tank reports.
