BLACK British history did not begin in the 20th century. In 1578 George Best, a travelling diarist, wrote of meeting “an Ethiopian as blacke as a cole brought into England”. But it was after the 1940s that Britain’s black population really began to grow, with two waves of immigration. The first, from the 1940s to the 1960s, carried poor Caribbeans to British shores. The second, beginning in the late 1980s, came from Africa, as wealthy Nigerians and Ghanaians arrived alongside rural migrants and refugees from Somalia and Zimbabwe. Britain’s black population is now about 2m, or just over 3% of the total. The census divides it into two main categories: “black African” and “black Caribbean”. Until the turn of the century, Caribbeans were in the majority. But in the ten years to 2011, the African population doubled. And that is not the end of the changes: although Caribbean Britons are substantially better off than their African neighbours, demographic and educational trends suggest that the tables may soon be turned. Thamesmead, an east-London suburb that is home to Britain’s most-concentrated African population, illustrates the group’s struggles. Its bleak residential towers, where Stanley Kubrick shot “A Clockwork Orange”, are overcrowded, says Mabel Ogundayo, a 24-year-old local councillor. Most of its crammed-in residents are tenants; nationwide, less than one-quarter of Africans are owner-occupiers, compared with nearly one-half of Caribbeans. That is partly why Caribbean households are, on average, much better off: in 2009 the Office for National Statistics (ONS) found that the average one had £76,000 ($109,000) in assets, against £15,000 among Africans. Caribbeans also fare better at work. Africans are less likely to be employed, and more likely to toil in low-skilled occupations. Much of this is down to their more recent arrival: although four out of ten have degrees—more than any ethnic group other than Chinese and Indians—many studied at unrecognised foreign universities, and some speak little English. As a result, 41% of African graduates work in non-graduate jobs, compared with 28% of Caribbeans. Their employment rate is dragged down by some groups that have particularly struggled: few from the mainly refugee Congolese or Somali communities are in work, for example. Yet the fact that much of their disadvantage is owing to their recentness suggests that, with time, it will be overcome. Many are richer than the first wave of Caribbeans. New Nigerian immigrants are less likely to be employed than new Jamaicans, but this stops being the case after five years in the country, according to the ONS. And although Africans are more likely than whites to be in low-paid work, the gap disappears once factors such as age, occupation and language have been controlled for. As new generations are minted and old ones learn English, earnings can be expected to rise. There is already progress in schools and universities. In 2014, 68% of Africans got five good grades in their GCSEs, the exams taken at 16, compared with 65% of whites and 59% of Caribbeans. They are far more likely to continue their education—indeed, the poorest Africans are as likely to go to university as the wealthiest Caribbeans. Although there is little difference in performance at primary school, Caribbean children “lack the support that’s needed to deal with the choppy waters of secondary school,” says Tony Sewell, the founder of Generating Genius, a charity. Africans, as newer arrivals, “have the mindset that there’s always something worse [than schoolwork] out there,” he adds. And although discrimination remains real, it is less pervasive than when Caribbeans first arrived in Britain. Archived government papers released last month showed that in 1985 Margaret Thatcher was warned by advisers that grants to black entrepreneurs would end up in the “disco and drug trade”. Back then, 50% of Britons admitted to NatCen, a research organisation, that they would mind if a close relative married a black person. Now, the figure is 22%. (Prejudice has found new targets: 44% say they would be bothered by a relation marrying a Muslim.) Africans remain less integrated than Caribbeans. Eight out of ten Africans choose an African partner, whereas by comparison less than half of Caribbeans settle down with a fellow Caribbean. A child under ten who has a Caribbean parent is more than twice as likely as not to have a white parent. Some believe that Africans’ delay in integrating may actually help to explain their success. West Africans, in particular, have a “separateness and social distance” in areas such as language, dress and religious worship “which seems to carry a protective effect”, says Trevor Phillips, a former head of the statutory Equality and Human Rights Commission. Caribbeans, by contrast, resemble whites in their performance at school—that is, both do pretty badly, after controlling for income. Others dispute the value of “separateness”, arguing that minorities benefit more from mixing. That is where official efforts focus. With second-generation Africans already starting to integrate more quickly, the theory will soon be put to the test.The 40-year journey from anarchy to tourist attraction is almost complete. The place of punk rock’s birth in 1976, the King’s Road in London, is now filled with designer shoe shops; its principal ambassador, John Lydon (aka Johnny Rotten), fronts advertisements for Country Life butter. Nonetheless its “attitude and spirit” survive untouched, insists the mayor of London’s office, which is helping to co-ordinate a year-long punk festival in conjunction with such anti-establishment institutions as the British Library and the Museum of London. God save the queen.  THE recent messages from Downing Street have been optimistic. Careful diplomacy is paving the way for David Cameron to renegotiate Britain’s European Union membership at a summit in Brussels on February 18th-19th. That should enable the prime minister to call (and win) his EU referendum in late June. Yet the outcome of mock “war games” staged on January 25th by Open Europe, a London-based Eurosceptic think-tank, was less reassuring. The games brought together former EU leaders to test what deal Britain might secure. Sir Malcolm Rifkind, a former Tory foreign secretary representing the British side, noted that nobody wanted Brexit. Yet even reforms that had seemed uncontroversial proved less so in debate. Responding to Sir Malcolm’s demand for legal safeguards for countries not in the euro, several ministers said it would be absurd to give Britain a veto over euro-zone countries’ policies. Others called such concerns hypothetical: Aart Jan de Geus, a former Dutch employment minister, said Sir Malcolm was seeking an umbrella when there was no rain. Even Britain’s desire for an exemption from the EU’s goal of “ever closer union” caused some resentment. Yet this was mild compared with the response to Sir Malcolm’s demand, echoing Mr Cameron’s, for the right to block in-work welfare benefits for EU migrants for four years. Such discrimination was contrary to the treaty principle of free movement of labour, fumed Karel de Gucht, a former trade commissioner who represented the EU institutions. It would require treaty change that France was not ready for, said Noelle Lenoir, a former French EU minister. There was little hint of compromise, even though Sir Malcolm suggested that as many as 9% of British voters would switch from In to Out without a deal limiting migrants’ benefits. The audience’s conclusion was that it may be harder to complete the negotiations in Brussels than Mr Cameron hopes. Many thought his prospective deal could therefore slip beyond February, with the referendum taking place in September or later. Enrico Letta, a former prime minister representing Italy, warned that holding a referendum during the summer, when Europe’s migration crisis will be at its most acute, would help the Out side. If this was bad enough, the second part of the war games, a mock-up of how the EU would respond to a vote for Brexit, was worse. Lord Lamont, a former Tory chancellor of the exchequer representing Britain, argued that an “amicable divorce” was in everybody’s interests. Britain could negotiate a trade deal similar to Canada’s, liberating it from EU rules, including free movement of people. He even volunteered to pay something into the EU budget. Yet other countries were unimpressed. John Bruton, a former prime minister representing Ireland, said Brexit would be seen as an “unfriendly act” and would threaten the peace process in Northern Ireland (Enda Kenny, Ireland’s real prime minister, made a similar point after meeting Mr Cameron on the same day). Steffen Kampeter, a former deputy finance minister representing Germany, said Britain would not be allowed to cherry-pick the benefits of membership without the costs. Mr de Gucht noted that a new trade deal would be negotiated by the European Commission and national governments with minimal British input. He and others added that they would try to shift Europe’s financial centre from London. The starkest warning came from Leszek Balcerowicz, a former deputy prime minister representing Poland. He said the priority would be to deter populists in other countries who wanted to copy Brexit. For this reason Britain would be punished by its partners even if that seemed to be against their interests. Mr Cameron’s negotiations may be hard, but they are a picnic compared with what he would face were he to lose his referendum.A shot of Baileys for the banks A SAFE pair of hands. That was the City’s reaction to news that Andrew Bailey, a veteran of more than 30 years at the Bank of England, had been appointed chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which oversees the relationship between banks and their customers. His task will be to walk the fine line between rooting out bad practices in the industry and making sure that multinational banks—vital sources of tax for the government—do not take offence and head overseas. HSBC, one of the world’s biggest, is reviewing whether to stay in London or move to Hong Kong. Martin Wheatley, Mr Bailey’s predecessor, was forced out of his job last year by George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer. Mr Wheatley was perceived as too hostile to the banks and also carried the can for a botched announcement of a review of the life-insurance industry; a parliamentary report said the FCA made a “serious error” and “created a false market in life insurance shares”. The FCA’s new head is no stranger to bank regulation. As well as being a deputy governor of the Bank of England, Mr Bailey ran the Prudential Regulatory Authority (PRA), which supervises the health of the financial industry. In layman’s terms, he has moved from making sure that banks don’t go bust to ensuring they don’t rip off their customers. David Buik, a market commentator at Panmure Gordon, a stockbroker, described Mr Bailey as “very steely and a very good listener. I don’t think he will be pushed around.” The selection process, which lasted six months, was tricky, with suggestions that Mr Bailey had to be drafted into the job. In a sign of the last-minute nature of the appointment, his successor at the PRA has yet to be found. Britain has struggled to create a stable regulatory regime for its banks, stirring the alphabet soup of watchdogs every decade or so. As part of the “Big Bang” reforms of the mid-1980s, the Thatcher government set up the Securities and Investment Board, with sub-regulators covering business activities like life insurance and financial advice. Gordon Brown swept that system away when Labour came to power in 1997, replacing all the old bodies with the Financial Services Authority (FSA), which also took over the Bank of England’s role as bank regulator. The FSA’s “light touch” was much trumpeted during the financial boom of the early 2000s but proved wanting when a host of banks ran into trouble in 2007 and 2008. So Mr Osborne rearranged the deckchairs again in 2012, replacing the FSA with the FCA and PRA. The banks have continued to attract scandals, including the fixing of a key interest rate known as LIBOR (five brokers were found not guilty of rigging LIBOR on January 27th; Tom Hayes, a former UBS and Citigroup trader, was convicted of the offence last year). Another long-running saga involves the mis-selling of payment-protection insurance, the fiasco that launched a million unwanted phone-calls. Mr Bailey will hope that no new snafus emerge on his watch. Like good football referees, the best regulators keep out of the headlines. If things go well, Mr Bailey might even be in line for a bigger role: Mark Carney’s successor as Bank governor.“THE Labour Party is a bit like an old stagecoach. If you drive it along at a rapid rate everyone aboard is either so exhilarated or seasick that you do not have a lot of difficulty.” So argued Harold Wilson, a Labour prime minister, adding: “But if you stop, everybody gets out and argues about where to go next.” The mantra has held for much of the party’s history. Yet today, when it is in peril as almost never before, Labour’s problem is not that everyone is arguing but that they are rallying around a flawed consensus. That much was made clear by the official account of Labour’s unexpectedly poor result in the general election in May. Written by Margaret Beckett, a former foreign secretary, the report of the Learning the Lessons from Defeat Taskforce (nothing is taken seriously in Labour unless lots of capital letters are involved) pointed to various causes. Party bigwigs duly praised the document. Among the factors it cited were a hostile media and the Conservative Party’s accusation that Labour might do a coalition deal with the secessionist Scottish National Party. Both were valid points, yet the report appeared to minimise the two most convincing explanations for Labour’s defeat: the unpopularity of its then-leader, Ed Miliband, and the lack of trust in the party on the economy. The impression of selective accounting was strengthened when Deborah Mattinson, a former Labour pollster, accused Dame Margaret of overlooking polling from marginal seats like Croydon and Nuneaton. These polls made it clear that Labour failed to disabuse voters of the notion that the party had caused the financial crash, could not run the economy and had a leader incapable of being prime minister. They stressed that Labour needed to appeal to “middle-class voters, not just down-and-outs”, and that having an apparently “weak and bumbling leader” did not help. Ms Mattinson called the final report, in which such concerns were skated over, a “whitewash”. In Jeremy Corbyn the party now has a leader who accentuates both of the weaknesses which, evidence suggests, lost the party the election. Yet it is acting as if Dame Margaret’s ruling was, in fact, rather harsh. MPs remain nominally loyal to Mr Corbyn. Even those who wax suicidal about their predicament refuse to act (for now, at least). Talk of a leadership bid by Michael Dugher, a former shadow cabinet minister, was recently greeted with derision. Labour is a party in denial. Lucky David Cameron.Time to celebrate LOCALS complain that Slough, a town of some 140,000 people just west of London, is known for two things, both miserable. One is John Betjeman’s 1937 poem, “Slough”, which bemoaned the town’s industrialisation: “Come, friendly bombs, and fall on Slough! / It isn’t fit for humans now.” The other is as the setting for “The Office”, an early 2000s television sitcom which portrayed the mindless drudgery of the modern workplace. In the January drizzle, the view from Slough train station does little to dispel such negative impressions. Pedestrians are largely absent; the buildings drab and sometimes dilapidated. An empty construction site serves as a reminder that a plan to develop part of the town centre, first outlined five years ago, has not yet begun. But there are also signs of progress. A jazzy new bus station juts out from the terminal, an incongruous dash of silver. The Curve, a large arts centre due to open (belatedly) this year, stands as a promise of more to come. And there is reason to think more will come. According to a report by the Centre for Cities, a think-tank, which surveyed Britain’s 63 largest urban areas, over the past five years none has seen faster growth in the number of businesses. Indeed, despite its apparent decrepitude, Slough is a remarkably successful place. The report also found that it had the lowest proportion of young benefit claimants, the best school grades and the third-highest wages. Crossrail, a planned high-speed railway service, will arrive in 2019, making Slough easier to reach from central London. Big property firms are beginning to invest there. House prices have grown by nearly 50% since 2009, according to Knight Frank, an estate agent, albeit from a low base. Slough is a town that gets the basics right, says Neil Lee of the London School of Economics. “Lots of people talk about tech cities and creative cities, with entrepreneurs attracted by hipster coffee shops,” he says, “when actually many businesses just need good parking, cheap offices and skilled workers.” Big firms have long been attracted by the town’s rail and road links, as well as its proximity to Heathrow airport. Good local universities and schools provide a skilled labour force; pleasant nearby villages and countryside somewhere unconcreted for senior executives to live. The real shift began around 20 years ago, says Ruth Bagley, chief executive of the local council, when multinational firms began to come to the town in large numbers. Many now have their headquarters in Slough, including the British division of Fiat, a carmaker, which is based in a trading estate that houses some 500 businesses. There are also clusters of pharmaceutical and technology firms. “Large American businesses tend to see Slough as part of West London but with much cheaper real-estate costs,” says Jon Gardiner of Savills, a property consultancy. Data centres and high-frequency traders are attracted by good fibre-optic connections, an existing pool of IT firms and an extremely reliable power supply. Large companies beget smaller ones, many started by Slough’s immigrant population. In the 2011 census, only 35% of its residents classified themselves as white-British. Slough has been refreshed by each major wave of British immigration—most recently from eastern Europe—as well as a small arrival of Poles and Italians after the second world war. Locals are “very welcoming to migrants,” says Ms Bagley, “but the main drive has always been that Slough is an easy place to get a job.” References to Betjeman and “The Office” may bore locals, but a dour reputation has hardly held Slough back. It may even have its benefits: rents are cheaper and more central land is available to develop than in neighbouring towns. Crossrail will probably urbanise the town’s core. One developer reckons he may be able to attract financial-services firms looking to save rent. Moving to Manchester or Birmingham forces staff to relocate, he points out; moving to Slough doesn’t. If he gets his way, local wages could rise yet further.THE city of Cambridge claims to be one of Britain’s most successful. With near-full employment, a renowned university and the largest biotech cluster outside America, its economy is flourishing. Yet the city’s good fortunes have not helped its airport, which from January 31st will be closing down its last scheduled flights. It is the latest in a line of regional airports to do so, including Plymouth in 2011 and Manston and Blackpool in 2014. In spite of a growing economy, smaller regional airports are having a tougher time than ever before. This is not because Britons are staying on the ground. Since the recession, air-passenger numbers have risen by 10% in Britain. A shortage of airport capacity in the London area has forced the government to set up a commission to decide where to build a new runway. But the two front-runners—Heathrow and Gatwick—are unlikely to get theirs ready before 2030 at the earliest. That has given some the idea that regional airports could take some of the extra traffic in the meantime. The government has also been trying to promote regional air travel, to help share the proceeds of growth outside London. It set up the Regional Air Connectivity Fund in 2013 to subsidise new domestic and international routes to airports outside the capital to the tune of £56m ($80m) over three years. But larger airports have disproportionally benefited. The number of passengers using Manchester airport, Britain’s busiest outside London, has risen by more than one-fifth since 2010, to 23m a year. That level of growth has also been seen at other regional airports carrying 6m passengers a year or more, including Birmingham, Edinburgh and Glasgow International. Those carrying fewer than 1m are struggling. Some, like Cambridge and Blackpool, are closing to commercial traffic. Others, like Cardiff and Glasgow Prestwick, have been nationalised by the Welsh and Scottish governments to keep them open. That is because their business models often no longer make sense, says Tim Coombs at Aviation Economics, a consultancy. Airports have high fixed costs, such as air-traffic control and security. They therefore benefit greatly from economies of scale, meaning large ones can undercut smaller rivals by offering airlines lower landing charges. Fast-growing low-cost carriers, such as Ryanair and easyJet, are moving to these larger hubs. Both plan to base more flights at bigger airports in the next few years, worsening the minnows’ woes. Britons’ changing travel habits have also hit small airports. Whereas international passenger numbers have soared by 20% over the past decade, domestic travel (small airports’ mainstay) has dropped by one-sixth. That has helped the likes of Manchester, with flights to over 200 foreign destinations including Dubai, its most popular. But it has hurt airports that act as feeders for Heathrow, where the number of domestic connections has fallen by half since the 1990s, owing to its lack of runway capacity. On January 22nd the government announced another delay to the decision on whether to expand Heathrow or Gatwick. That will not help London’s economy—nor Britain’s small airports.Till minimum-income threshold do us part THE Conservative Party promised ahead of its election victory in 2010 that it would bring annual net migration below 100,000 a year. As the economy has grown, sucking in foreign workers, the government has conspicuously failed to meet this goal: net migration in the year to June 2015 was 336,000, a record. However, one small but socially significant subsection has declined and remained low: immigration by Britons’ foreign spouses. In 2012 the government introduced a new requirement that British citizens and permanent residents meet an income threshold before being allowed to bring in a partner from outside the European Union. The threshold is £18,600 ($26,500), or higher if children are to come too. This gives Britain the strictest policy on family unification of 38 rich countries, according to the Migration Policy Group, an NGO. The rules have been challenged in a case that will be heard by the Supreme Court next month. The income threshold is high: the Migration Observatory at Oxford University calculates that 41% of British citizens would not meet it. And its reach is uneven: whereas almost three-quarters of men clear it, most women do not. In poor parts of the country, such as the North East, twice as many are ruled out as in the wealthy capital. And in London white people are twice as likely to be able to import a partner as non-whites. So far the new rules are reckoned to have affected up to 15,000 children, many kept apart from a parent. The government projected in 2012 that 13,600-17,800 people per year would be prevented from coming to Britain as a result of the changes. Though the true figure is unknowable, the number of spousal visas granted fell by nearly one-third following the rule’s introduction (see chart). Those most affected are Pakistanis, who account for almost one-fifth of such visas. The government has not trumpeted it, but the new policy has an additional motive. Some believe that the ability to bring in spouses from overseas has put a brake on integration, especially among Pakistanis. About three-quarters of spousal visas are issued to women. David Goodhart of Policy Exchange, a think-tank, says that the constant replenishment of first-generation wives has been a bar to integration with British society. Saira Grant of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, which is supporting the appellants at the Supreme Court, argues that “integration is not achieved by an artificial financial threshold”. She says there is no evidence that migrant spouses are a burden to the state. Yet studies suggest family migrants do have lower employment rates than the British average, though more than half work after their arrival. A quirk of the income threshold is that it does not apply to citizens of other EU countries, meaning they can bring their non-EU spouses to Britain without satisfying any income requirement. Some Britons get around the rules by moving to a European country where they meet up with their spouse and, after living there for a short period, returning together to Britain under the EU’s free-movement laws. One of the issues the Supreme Court may examine is whether the foreign spouse’s income might count towards the threshold. At present, some low-earning British expatriates have trouble moving back from abroad with their foreign spouse, even if that partner is a high earner. The court has the power to declare these rules unlawful, though that is unlikely, believes Ms Grant. In the absence of many other ways of reducing immigration, the government will want to cling on to the strict new rules, for better or worse.ON NOVEMBER 1st 2006 Marina Litvinenko cooked a special dinner for her husband, Alexander, to mark the sixth anniversary of their arrival in Britain from Russia (and their first since becoming citizens). In the early hours of November 2nd the spy-turned-dissident started vomiting. In hospital his condition deteriorated: his hair fell out, his skin turned yellow and he threw up parts of his stomach. After 20 days of agony he composed a statement blaming his poisoning on Vladimir Putin. He died of heart failure shortly afterwards. Almost a decade later, on January 21st, a judge-led inquiry concluded that two Russian agents had most likely spiked Litvinenko’s tea with polonium-210, a radioactive isotope, at a meeting in London. They were “probably” acting on Mr Putin’s orders. Sir Robert Owen’s report also indicates that the murder was about more than bumping off an enemy. Its particulars—from the use of a slow-working poison to the trail of radiation through London and the decoration awarded to one of the suspects last year—amounted to an ostentatious sneer at the British state. They sent a message to other opponents: don’t think that Moscow’s jurisdiction is limited to Russia’s borders, or its citizenry. In a statement following the report’s publication, Theresa May, the home secretary, told MPs that she had suspended both men’s assets. Ministers are now deliberating over further asset freezes, visa refusals and diplomatic expulsions. Naming those affected is “very much on the table”, says one senior source. Others, including Mrs Litvinenko, call for more: a comprehensive travel ban on Mr Putin’s coterie of politicians, spooks and oligarchs; a boycott of Russia’s football World Cup in 2018; a public inquiry into the mysterious death of Alexander Perepilichny, a Russian whistleblower who collapsed near his home in Surrey in 2012. If the decision were just about doing right by the Litvinenko family, the government would do the lot. But the wider national interest is a rival consideration. The Foreign Office is cautious about jeopardising relations with the Kremlin on the cusp of Syrian talks in Geneva, whose outcome will affect both the refugee crisis and the threat from Islamic State terrorism, and which may turn on Russia’s influence over its vassal in Damascus. Meanwhile, as of 2014 rich Russians had some £27 billion ($39 billion) invested in London, where they come to bank, shop, educate their children and sue each other. Such interests are well-represented in Conservative circles; at a pre-election fundraising ball Lubov Chernukhin, the wife of Mr Putin’s ex-finance minister, successfully bid £160,000 for a tennis match with David Cameron (in a moment of exuberance the auctioneer threw in the party chairman as a ball boy). Politics is politics. The hard truth is that voters put jobs, investment and counter-terrorist co-operation before the welfare of Russian dissidents. So arguments for a self-interested realpolitik have often prevailed. The government has repeatedly rejected calls by MPs for Britain to emulate America’s “Magnitsky Act”, a public travel ban on Moscow officials connected with the violent death in custody of an anti-corruption lawyer. In 2013 Ms May initially refused a public inquiry into the Litvinenko case, citing “international relations”. The Ukraine crisis, it is true, put some lead in Mr Cameron’s pencil—he was relatively hawkish on the matter of sanctions—but even in 2014 an adviser in Downing Street was snapped holding notes fretting about their effect on the City. Today murky, Kremlin-linked money still sloshes through London’s housing, financial and energy markets, all with the connivance of British bankers, lawyers and estate agents (a government report published in October highlighted “significant” gaps in the country’s offensive against money laundering). Yet the trade-off between principle and realism is more illusory than the government’s actions or words allow. Take the fight against Islamic State. Russia has an entirely different agenda in Syria from that of Britain—indeed, it has allegedly been aggravating the fallout in Europe by sponsoring hard-right, anti-refugee parties—and its intelligence agencies are not in the habit of sharing information with foreign counterparts. Where they perceive a shared interest (over security at the World Cup, for example) they will co-operate with Britain regardless of the health of the diplomatic relationship. And even if none of this were the case, tip-toeing around Litvinenko’s murder would not be the answer; as one minister points out, Mr Putin routinely defies international norms not because he is offended by the West’s assertiveness, but because he thinks it weak. London or Londongrad? The hard-nosed case for tough sanctions is even stronger when it comes to the economy. London’s status as a leading financial hub is not reliant on Russian dosh, which according to a study in 2014 by Open Europe, a think-tank, represents 0.5% of international investments there. Moreover, a cynical failure to respond adequately to the killing would damage that status, which depends on Britain’s reputation for straight dealing and rule of law. For this reason the proliferation of obscure holdings and stolen money in London so concerns the government that it has launched an anti-corruption drive (including a new company-ownership register), boosted the budget of the Serious Fraud Office and is considering making “failure to prevent economic crime” an offence. Whether Britain now does something to dent the Kremlin’s sense of impunity is thus a measure of whether it believes its own schtick. Panjandrums in Westminster are forever asserting that the country’s role as a global entrepôt gives it hard geopolitical influence; that its “soft power” and knack for fair play are among its greatest assets; that trade and the rule of law go hand in hand. How it responds to Sir Robert’s finding—that a thuggish foreign state seemingly murdered a British citizen on the streets of the capital—is a fine test of how much any of this really means. Economist.com/blogs/bagehot
