They have choices, you know MONTANA HIRSCHOWITZ remembers exactly when she decided she would seek her higher education abroad: one night when she was ten, and armed robbers broke in and terrorised her family in Johannesburg. Quang Nguyen dates his decision to no particular moment: he simply did not want to spend a big chunk of his classroom time on communist ideology, as is standard in his native Vietnam. Jehanne Aghzadi, from Morocco, had attended American schools all through her childhood; she wanted to continue her studies in English. Joy Lin was looking for a better course than she could find in China, with more social activities on campus and the chance to gain foreign work experience after graduating. All four students ended up at the University of Miami in Florida, for reasons that varied as much as those that pushed them to leave home in the first place: good weather, highly regarded courses in subjects they liked, student aid and in one case a scholarship. But beyond the specifics, they are part of a mass trend. More university and college students than ever are studying outside their home countries. Foreigners now make up a sizeable share of students in some countries and courses—a quarter of all those in Australia, for example, and around a million of those on American campuses. There are 4.5m international students globally, up from 2m in 2000, and that is expected to swell to 7m-8m by 2025, driven by population and income growth in developing countries where local provision is poor. Some places that have not traditionally hosted many foreign students are trying to grab market share. Japan has a goal of 300,000 foreign students by 2020, 60% more than now; Malaysia, of almost doubling numbers to 250,000 by 2025. Foreign study took off in the 1980s, when several rich countries started to offer large numbers of scholarships as part of their aid programmes. Rising incomes in poorer countries added a financial motive. Universities in rich countries are often constrained by their governments in how many locals they can recruit and how much they can charge them. Foreigners, who can be charged more, help pad out budgets and subsidise local students. But not every country lucky enough to have lots of foreign students is doing what is needed to keep them coming.   Today Anglophone countries take the biggest share, since English is quite a useful language to acquire. France is popular with bits of its former empire and pupils from the French-language schools around the world that France’s government subsidises. Germany, which has started to offer postgraduate courses in English and has abolished all tuition fees, even for foreigners, also takes large numbers. America leads in absolute terms, with 975,000 foreign students in 2014-15. Its best universities have long attracted the very brightest foreign minds, especially in the sciences, often luring them with generous scholarships. But for its size its performance is less impressive: just 5% of all students on its campuses are from abroad. One reason is tighter visa rules imposed after the terrorist attacks of 2001; another is that students must seek special permission to work off-campus while studying, and it is hard to stay and work for long after graduating. Longer-term employment visas are also hard to get, so many students without deep pockets choose to go elsewhere so they can defray some of the cost. And most American institutes refuse to pay education agents—consultants who help youngsters, particularly in Asia, to choose institutions and apply to them. According to i-graduate, a consultancy, agents rank America as the most attractive destination, but are less likely to recommend American institutions, as they mostly work on commission. Students usually choose their target country first and then decide which college to apply to. That means national advertising strategies matter, says Mark Reid of the University of Miami. But America has none, leaving individual institutions to promote themselves overseas. Mr Reid and his staff give presentations at international schools and attend trade fairs in around 65 countries each year. This has paid off: the proportion of Miami’s students who are foreign is three times the national average. Latin Americans like living in a Hispanic-majority city. Chinese students became interested in 2009, when Miami broke into the top 50 of the ranking of American universities produced by US News and World Report. Higher learning, down under Australia, by contrast, has long seen international students—and their fees—as a national priority. Education is the country’s second-biggest export industry, behind only mining, worth A$18 billion ($15 billion) in 2015. A quarter of all its students—and in business and management courses, close to half—are from abroad. At a couple of particularly enterprising institutions, Australian-born students are a minority. Australia’s allure faded between 2009 and 2012, partly because of a strong currency but also because racist attacks against Indian students in Melbourne, and the collapse of some poorly run private colleges, tarnished its image overseas. A government crackdown on visa scams and low-quality courses drew attention to uneven provision and slowed visa-processing times for all students, even those applying to elite institutions. As the currency has fallen and visa rules have been relaxed again, applications have rebounded. The tale offers two morals, says David Hetherington of Per Capita, a think-tank in Sydney. First, foreign students need clear visa rules and the right to work while they study. Second, the national brand matters. Canada, where universities until recently had few foreign students, has learned from Australia’s experience. About a decade ago its government decided that universities could bolster their finances by admitting more foreign students paying higher fees, and that after graduation those students would be a valuable source of well-qualified young workers. Immigration rules were always quite favourable, says Paul Brennan of Colleges and Institutes Canada, an industry organisation, but until recently there was no clear path from study to work and then permanent residence. Now, if new graduates can find a job they can automatically stay in Canada for up to three years, depending on the length of their courses. That work experience is then taken into account if they apply for permanent residency. A collaboration between colleges, universities and Canada’s immigration office has brought down visa-rejection rates for Indian students, a target market. A quarter of all foreign students—and half of those from India and China—end up being granted permanent residence. Recent growth in international-student numbers has largely come in shorter college and polytechnic courses, says Mr Brennan. These are popular with Indians who already have degrees but cannot find work—and with youngsters from unemployment-plagued Italy and Spain. The number of Indian students arriving for such courses rose from 1,200 in 2008 to 14,000 last year. Britain, too, sees policy on international students as intertwined with immigration policy, but has taken the opposite tack. Its universities have a cachet among foreigners. Overall, 14% of students on its campuses come from outside the European Union. Another 5% come from other EU countries (under EU rules they are admitted on the same basis as locals, and pay the same fees). In 2013-14 English universities took in £3.3 billion of non-EU student fees, which are not capped by the government, 13% of revenue. Half of those studying full-time for work-focused master’s degrees are from outside the EU, and research by the British Council shows that in some scientific fields, such as electronic engineering and biosciences, the share is over 80%. But in recent years this success story has been threatened by a populist pledge made in 2010 by the Conservative Party, then in opposition, to cut net immigration to 100,000 people a year. With many immigrants entering Britain from bits of its former empire under family-reunion laws, and free movement within the EU, most immigration is outside the government’s power to stop. Non-EU students are the main exception. In power the Conservatives have sought to keep them out by tightening visa rules, raising application costs, restricting students’ right to work part-time during their courses and making it far harder to stay after graduation. They have choices, you know The result is visible in the figures. In 2014-15 the number of new students from outside the EU fell by 3%, even as the number of foreign students worldwide rose strongly. Britain’s three big English-speaking competitors all saw strong growth. Chinese students, who are often leaving to escape the gaokao, China’s vicious university-entrance exam, rather than because they want to earn money in a richer country or emigrate, are still coming. But applications from Indians and Pakistanis, who typically need to work while studying and for a year or two afterwards to afford the fees, have fallen by half. Britain is dangerously exposed to a slackening of demand from China, says Will Archer of i-graduate. He also notes that education agents have become less likely to regard Britain as an attractive destination—even though more of its international students rate their education highly, and more say they are satisfied with their experience and would recommend Britain to other students, than anywhere else. Learning’s allure The quality of education in some countries that have long sent many students abroad is improving. Local hubs such as Singapore and Hong Kong are growing more popular: of Asians who study abroad, the proportion who do so in Asia rose from 36% in 1999 to 42% in 2007. And more students are plumping for “transnational” rather than international study, says Michael Peak of the British Council: mixing and matching local and foreign provision, for example by starting degrees at home and taking just a final year abroad. The trend is most evident in executive education, which is less about the chance to work in a rich country and more about gaining international experience, says Andrew Crisp of CarringtonCrisp, an education-marketing firm. A growing share of MBAs and executive master’s courses are now offered by partnerships or groups of institutions, with students expected to spend time in several different locations. Online education, too, could cut demand for pricey overseas study, if not by replacing it then by allowing students to do part of a foreign institution’s courses more cheaply from home. English-speaking countries have benefited hugely from international students. Those students have subsidised locals, kept courses in the hard sciences viable, acted as informal ambassadors on their return—and eased skills shortages when they have stayed. Some countries have seized the opportunity; others have taken it for granted. More fool them.BETWEEN them Sotheby’s and Christie’s, the Western world’s two largest auction houses, have been in business for 522 years. They display many of the characteristics of old men: a gouty gait that makes them slow to adapt; and a fixation on ancient rivalries that leads them to butt heads repeatedly rather than focus on reviving their businesses for the rapidly changing world around them. Striving to stay on top is hard work. Christie’s, a private company owned by a French luxury-goods billionaire, François Pinault, gives little away. But in a brief overview of its 2015 results, released on January 26th, it admitted that sales were down by 5% compared with 2014, to £4.8 billion ($7.4 billion). “This is a blip,” its deputy chief executive, Stephen Brooks, insists. More worrying was the news that the slump was not just in Old Master paintings, in which buyers have for some time been losing interest. Sales also slipped in the areas that have been the engines of recent growth: watches, wine, even post-war and contemporary art, which has captured the imagination of the global new rich but which fell by 14% in sterling terms and 20% in dollars. Four days earlier, Sotheby’s new chief executive, Tad Smith, told analysts in New York that its sales were flat compared with 2014’s, that the firm would post fourth-quarter losses of up to $19m and that it was scrapping its dividend. Sotheby’s shares have fallen by more than half in the past six months. In part the weakness of the big two’s sales is because of the world’s wealthy, Russians especially, drawing in their horns. But in part it is because their business model is looking outdated, leaving them vulnerable to sprightlier rivals. Although Christie’s clocked up more auction sales than Sotheby’s, $6.5 billion against $6 billion (the rest comes from private sales they broker), the two firms have broadly similar overheads. Each employs between 1,600 and 2,000 people. Between them they hold nearly 750 auctions a year in more than 80 categories—some significantly less profitable than others. Together they run more than 140 offices in 40 countries, and have 22 salerooms. Under pressure from activist shareholders who want to see a better return on capital, Sotheby’s has made a high-profile (if costly) effort to reduce its head count by 5% over the past few months. Christie’s, too, has been quietly shedding staff for over a year. But neither feels it can afford to cut back too far for fear of weakening itself compared with the other. Expensive promises The high cost of protecting this duopoly is most visible in guarantees that the auction houses make to sellers about the price they can expect if they sell their treasures. In deciding where to consign their works, rich collectors play off one auction house against the other to force up the guarantee. Often they also demand a slice of the buyer’s premium (the fee charged to buyers on top of the hammer price) and a reduction in the commission that sellers have to pay, thereby cutting the auctioneer’s margin. Sotheby’s has had its manicured fingers burned by a generous guarantee it gave to the heirs of its late chairman, Alfred Taubman, on the sale of his collection. Christie’s says it pushed up its offer to the Taubman family to well over $400m. So as not to lose face, Sotheby’s, which had estimated the collection’s worth at $500m, offered a guarantee of nearly $515m. On the items sold by the end of 2015, Sotheby’s reckons, it was $12m out of pocket including its marketing expenses. On January 27th it auctioned off a batch of the Taubman collection’s Old Masters, reducing its overall loss to $9m, though 17 of the 67 lots on offer, including Ligozzi’s “The Abduction of the Sabine Women” (pictured), did not sell. More than 200 other works will be sold in the spring. Sotheby’s is not alone in making foolhardy decisions to win or keep business. Last year Christie’s offered a guarantee of about $45m on a silk-screen by Andy Warhol called “Four Marilyns”, from 1962. The offer caused surprise, as the picture had been knocked down at auction, just two years earlier, at $34m. The deal was complicated. The seller was Kemal Has Cingillioglu, a scion of a prominent Turkish banking family who sits on Christie’s European advisory board. He owed the auction house money for a work by Cy Twombly that he had contracted to buy privately. The market was less than impressed. The Warhol picture, it judged, was being “flipped”—returned for sale too quickly—and the auction estimate of $40m-60m was viewed as over-optimistic. In the event its hammer price was $32m, resulting in a considerable loss for Christie’s. This is not the only source of pressure on the auction houses. In the past decade the contemporary-art world has ballooned, with new fairs, biennials and exhibition spaces opening everywhere. According to a recent report by Clare McAndrew, a respected art-market analyst, $33.1 billion-worth of art and antiques were sold at auction in 2014, half of all sales. An increasing amount is being traded in undisclosed private deals arranged by brokers. Information is power Time was when the big auction houses had a near-monopoly on information about the art market, which gave them an edge over customers as well as potential rivals. But now buyers, sellers and dealers are much better informed, and the mystique of the auction room has faded. Many collectors regard their contemporary art as an alternative asset class, which has prompted the launch of new businesses offering market data, tax advice and analysis of the investment potential of art. Sotheby’s and Christie’s have been trying to grab a larger slice of this pie. Earlier this month Sotheby’s paid $85m for Art Agency Partners (AAP), which was set up less than two years ago by a former Christie’s specialist, Amy Cappellazzo, and two other founders. Left out of the deal was a $125m art-investment fund AAP had set up with seven of its clients. (“It was clear we could have raised much, much more,” says one partner, Adam Chinn.) The fund, now the second-largest in the world, has spent only half of the money it had raised, but has already managed to return an impressive $15m to investors. Such funds, like the burgeoning art-advice business, are a promising area that the big two auction houses have been slow to move into. The two houses realise there is much that they must do to protect their dominance. They need to consolidate their expansion into growing markets in Asia and elsewhere. They must draw new buyers into the art market by first enticing them to buy watches, wine and other luxuries. They need to improve their online-auction platforms, in the face of rising competition (see article). And they must expand their share of the middle market—lots with a value of up to $2m—where there is no need to offer guarantees or discounts to attract sellers, thus making it more profitable than selling more valuable works. Most important, the auction houses must do more to please buyers, expanding what they call “demand-led curation” by creating more imaginative, well-timed sales, and by collating and digitising the information they hold on sellers, to help buyers find what they want. If they do not do all this, others will. Phillips, a smaller auction house, may have been founded in 1796 but it has recently showed the ambitions of a startup. Just over 18 months ago its two owners, Leonid Fridlyand and Leonid Strunin, the founders of Mercury Group, a Russian retailer of luxury goods and cars, appointed a former boss of Christie’s, Edward Dolman, to start snapping at the heels of the big two. Phillips’s elegant new headquarters, with its carefully curated contemporary-art exhibitions, in Berkeley Square in London, mask a lean operation: two offices and a staff of just 225 compared with seven or eight times as many at each of the other two houses. The focus is on getting the new rich hooked on buying, first, watches and then contemporary art; and on finding out what such clients want and providing it. The strategy is working. From a standing start, Phillips sold $80.3m-worth of watches in 2015. Total auction sales, at $523m (mostly of contemporary art), were 34% higher than in 2014. Mr Dolman expects Phillips to reach $1 billion within three years. Although the bosses of Sotheby’s and Christie’s are telling investors that last year’s weak figures were just a temporary setback, the market is changing fast. The big two need to sharpen up.EVERYONE seems to agree that online auctions are important to the art world’s future. In 2013 Daniel Loeb, an activist investor, seethed over Sotheby’s “inability to even develop a coherent plan for an internet-sales strategy, much less implement one.” Sotheby’s has worked to remedy that, for example by joining forces with eBay and holding five online-only auctions last year. Christie’s holds its own online sales. Add a swarm of startups, and there seem to be ever more web auctioneers selling ever more art. But the ways in which online auctions are not changing art sales are as interesting as the ways in which they are. Sales of art online reached €3.3 billion ($3.6 billion) in 2014, about 6% of all worldwide sales, according to the European Fine Art Foundation (TEFAF). Sceptics used to predict that collectors would be highly reluctant to buy online because they would want to inspect prospective purchases in person. However, David Goodman, Sotheby’s digital and marketing chief, argues that online sales will keep growing, with buyers “comfortable buying more and more things at more and more price points online”. Influential investors agree. Peter Thiel and Jack Dorsey, the respective founders of PayPal and Twitter, are among the backers of a startup called Artsy. It has an extensive online art catalogue and last year it launched a platform for online auctions. Top gallerists such as David Zwirner of New York and Jay Jopling of London are backing Paddle8, another online auctioneer, which says its sales doubled last year. Auctionata, yet another, reports even faster growth. The main effect is to open up the cliquish art world. Any collector who has provided credit-card details in advance can bid in an online Sotheby’s or Christie’s sale. Paddle8 boasts that 39% of visitors to its site are aged 18-34. Though online auctions can lure new collectors, they are not yet stealing much business from conventional art firms. Indeed, says Sebastian Cwilich of Artsy, his firm wants to join forces with galleries and auction houses, not compete with them. In October, for example, it held an auction with Sotheby’s. Paddle8 seeks to complement Sotheby’s and Christie’s, by offering mainly works valued at $1,000-100,000. The greatest threat is to smaller, local auction houses. But Anders Petterson of ArtTactic, a research firm, argues that even these may be saved, if they adapt to the online age. Barnebys, launched in 2011, aggregates items for auction, helping smaller auction houses reach a wider audience. Overall, online firms are doing little so far to disrupt the art market, says Clare McAndrew, who wrote TEFAF’s report. Indeed, some may be making the market even more opaque than before. Paddle8, for example, does not publish final prices after auctions have ended.Sharp screens, fuzzy future FEW tasks are more urgent for Japan than the clean-up of the stricken Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear plant. Extracting spent fuel-rods from its toxic reactor buildings calls for a new generation of remote-controlled robots. One gadget broke down last spring after just a few hours’ operating amid intense radiation. This month Toshiba, a conglomerate ranging from semiconductors to nuclear engineering, unveiled a scorpion-shaped robot equipped with multiple live-feed cameras that will go into action at the plant next year. That is a reminder of how important the company remains at home, where it is a pillar of the engineering establishment. But its financial plight has deepened following an accounting scandal that began early last year and that obliged Toshiba to restate its profits to the tune of ¥152 billion ($1.3 billion). An investigation ordered by the firm concluded that, under the guidance of Atsutoshi Nishida, its boss from 2005 to 2009, employees began doctoring losses into paper profits and continued doing so under two subsequent bosses.   Its crisis deepened in December, when Toshiba forecast a ¥500 billion loss for the year to March, due to ill-performing businesses and restructuring costs. Its shares promptly fell by one-fifth and Moody’s, a credit-rating agency, downgraded its debt to junk. Its cash flow has collapsed. Analysts worry that its equity could be wiped out if it is obliged to write down goodwill resulting from its acquisition in 2006 of Westinghouse Electric Company, an American nuclear-industry supplier. Investors are watching to see if the authorities’ handling of Toshiba’s fall from grace is consistent with Japan’s of-late more shareholder-friendly climate. Last year Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, brought in a corporate-governance code which mandates firms to listen to outside board directors and requires hitherto supine institutional investors to keep a close eye on firms they invest in. This week the overseer of Mr Abe’s reforms, Akira Amari, the economy minister, resigned over bribery allegations, denying any wrongdoing. The government’s professed zeal for corporate reform ought to mean that, in dealing with Toshiba, it departs from old-style industrial policies, says Hidemi Moue of Japan Industrial Partners, a private-equity firm which hopes to snap up some of the stricken firm’s businesses. But it will be hard for the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry to resist pressure to lend a helping hand to the group and its 200,000 or so employees. Toshiba was allowed to miss several financial-reporting deadlines and remain listed last year as its accounts were being investigated (though its shares remain “on alert”, which could lead to delisting). Lesser firms would surely have faced tougher sanctions. In parallel, Mr Abe’s bid to make Japan more open to foreign investment is being tested by an offer from Foxconn, the Taiwanese assembler of Apple’s iPhones, for Sharp, a once-great but now near-bankrupt electronics firm. It emerged that Foxconn had bid more than $5 billion for Sharp (though some details, including whether the offer includes the firm’s vast debts, have yet to be revealed). Shareholder advocates fear that, under official pressure, Sharp’s two Japanese creditor banks will spurn Foxconn and sell the firm to a government-backed fund, the Innovation Network Corporation of Japan (INCJ), for a lower price. One reason for this would be bureaucrats’ fears that Sharp’s liquid-crystal display (LCD) know-how could benefit foreign rivals. After its scandal, Toshiba urgently needs to shore up its balance-sheet ahead of bank loans coming due. It must sell some businesses, from perennially loss-making ones, like the manufacture of televisions, to jewels such as its medical-equipment division. Some of those businesses may attract foreign bids. But Toshiba may also turn to the INCJ, which may buy its electrical-appliances operations, then perhaps seek to meld them with Sharp’s white-goods businesses and those of Hitachi, another conglomerate that has revived itself through disposals. The INCJ’s goal is to consolidate industries that have too many competitors and little profit to go round (five Japanese companies, for example, make fridges). Three years ago the fund cobbled together Japan Display out of the small and mid-size LCD-panel divisions of Sony, Toshiba and Hitachi. It is now thriving as a supplier to Apple. This suggests that the INCJ could succeed in overhauling other industries, says Atul Goyal of Jefferies, a stockbroker. Even if the INCJ does a good job in rationalising the troubled businesses of Toshiba and Sharp, shareholders may lose out if this means turning down higher offers for them. And some serious worries about Toshiba’s scandal would linger. The firm already obeyed, on paper, the new governance code’s requirements on outside board directors, which suggests that those at other firms may prove just as toothless. Toshiba’s auditor, Ernst & Young ShinNihon, has been fined and suspended from taking new audits for three months, but many Japanese businesspeople agree with Toshiba’s description of its profit-padding as merely “inappropriate” accounting, since executives were not out for personal gain. It was fraud, insists Jamie Allen of the Asian Corporate Governance Association in Hong Kong; and those involved should face prosecution, as they would in any other developed market. It is unclear whether they will.STEVE JOBS once visited an apple orchard while on a fruitarian diet, and it gave him the idea for the name of the company that he, Steve Wozniak and Ronald Wayne went on to found. Jobs thought the name would make the company seem quirky, approachable and fun. Its popular, highly profitable products have helped make it the world’s most valuable company for nearly five years. However, questions are growing about its shelf life. On January 26th Apple announced profits for its most recent quarter of $18.4 billion, more than any listed firm worldwide has yet made in a three-month period. However, the good news was overshadowed by Apple’s warning of a sharp fall in revenues in the current quarter. In the past six months its shares have fallen by over 20%, more than double the decline in the S&P 500 index, on fears that sales of the iPhone, which provides most of the firm’s revenues and profits, have peaked. Is it only a matter of time before Apple (worth around $550 billion) is overtaken by Alphabet, Google’s parent ($500 billion)? In its rise to greatness, Apple has repeatedly shrugged off bouts of panic among investors, who have suddenly convinced themselves that its glory days are over. The most recent was three years ago, amid fears of rising competition from other smartphone and tablet makers. But each time Apple has bounced back and gone on to greater highs, the job of topping its most recent achievement has become harder. Beating the 231m iPhones that Apple sold in the fiscal year to the end of September will be a formidable task. The smartphone market is ever more saturated. Worldwide sales of phones costing more than $190 will grow by just 3% this year, reckons Strategy Analytics, compared with 64% in 2011. (The average selling price for the iPhone is $691, although carriers usually help subsidise the cost.) Meanwhile, the global economy—and China in particular, upon which Apple depends for a growing share of its sales—is looking more fragile. Recently several Asian suppliers have been sharing stark warnings that orders for iPhone parts, such as chips and cameras, are down. Currency fluctuations have made iPhones significantly more expensive in some markets, like Japan and Australia, which could put them out of reach for new buyers. Sales of iPhones are likely to decline by around 10% this year, according to analysts. But then what? Loyalty among its users is high; perhaps 90% go on to buy another one. According to an analysis by Sanford C. Bernstein, another research outfit, if such users upgrade to a new iPhone every two years, in 2017 Apple will sell them another 185m, not including sales to new users. The installed base of iPhone owners (and thus users of iTunes and Apple’s other revenue-earning services) could easily grow to 534m in 2017, up by 13% from 2015. The iPhone’s future will depend a great deal on how compelling its next incarnation, expected in September, will be. Cheaper versions can also help boost sales. The lower-priced iPhone 5c, which Apple launched in 2013, enhanced the firm’s appeal in China. Tim Bajarin of Creative Strategies, a research firm, thinks that Apple may offer an even more affordable iPhone for the Indian market. There is currently much excitement in India about Apple’s plans to open shops there. But finding suitable locations, and dealing with the red tape involved in opening them, will not be easy. And only a small fraction of India’s population has the means to buy even a cheap iPhone. So, Apple is under pressure to produce another hit product. Sales of iPads have wilted, and Apple’s watch, released last year, has not sold as well as optimists had predicted. Its answer to disrupting television, Apple TV, has proved merely a discretional plaything for wealthy consumers who want a slicker interface and do not mind spending more on films and TV episodes à la carte. Apple faces plenty of roadblocks in making a success of its long-rumoured electric car, which it is reportedly hoping to complete by 2020. Recently the head of that project, Steve Zadesky, left. As an investment, Apple is surprisingly inexpensive. Its shares trade at about 10.4 times forecast earnings, excluding cash, compared with Alphabet and Facebook, which trade at 21.4 and 33 times respectively. That is because many perceive it as a hardware company—vulnerable, like Hollywood studios, to product hits and flops. Apple is trying to change that image and become perceived more as a services company, with stable recurring revenue. Its services division, which includes its app store and music offering, has huge sales, of around $20 billion a year. That business will only increase as the number of users expands and spends more in the Apple ecosystem. So long as it stays fresh in the eyes of consumers, Apple will be able to prove the sceptics wrong—again.FOREIGN internet giants often struggle in China. Facebook, Twitter and Google are largely irrelevant on the mainland. Uber, an American car-hailing app that is conquering markets everywhere else, is also finding China hard to crack. But unlike those other tech titans, the taxi disrupter is not being frozen out by unfair Chinese regulations favouring local firms. Uber’s biggest problem is that it has encountered a world-class local upstart. Didi Kuaidi was forged last year by the merger of rival taxi-hailing apps controlled by Alibaba and Tencent, two Chinese internet giants. It now dominates China’s online market for personal transport. Last year it arranged 1.4 billion rides in China, more than Uber has done worldwide in its history. It has perhaps two-thirds of the market for private-car rides (the source of most of its revenues) and provides a taxi-hailing service in several hundred cities. Uber, with a third of the market for private-car service, this week announced plans to expand to cover 55 Chinese cities. Both have spent heavily on subsidies to lure drivers to sign up. Unlike Uber, which in China focuses on private-car services, Didi lets users select a taxi, private car, shared car, shuttle van or bus to pick them up. During next month’s Chinese New Year mass migration, when millions of travellers will encounter sold-out flights and trains, Didi will help users share intercity rides at prices comparable to train fares. It has also forged alliances with, and invested in, Uber’s rivals elsewhere: GrabTaxi in South-East Asia, Ola in India and Lyft in America. Jean Liu, Didi’s president and a former Goldman Sachs dealmaker, helped Didi raise $3 billion to take on Uber. Soon half of the global market will be on her alliance’s technology platform, Ms Liu says, which will help both Chinese people travelling abroad and foreigners visiting China. But getting people from A to B is just the start of Didi’s ambitions. It plans to offer a variety of other services that make the most of its huge base of users and the trove of data it holds on them. On January 26th the firm announced an agreement with China Merchants Bank (CMB). A growing number of Didi’s drivers want to buy a new car, and many have a steady income thanks to the app, but often lack formal credit. Didi and CMB will start offering car loans—first to drivers, but in future perhaps to passengers as well. Didi’s app already lets passengers book test drives of new cars on behalf of several carmakers, including Mercedes and Audi. Some 1.4m customers have taken one of 92 models for a spin since this service was launched in October. Perhaps Didi’s quirkiest new sideline is that of matchmaker. Hitch, its ride-sharing service, will soon allow drivers and passengers to select each other based on their shared interests. It already has a deal with LinkedIn, to let people join up their accounts on the two networks. The intention of such initiatives is that white-collar workers, who often endure daily commutes of an hour or two, will have more fruitful journeys during which business, friendship and maybe even romance will develop.Clouds over Scunthorpe’s future FOR 151 years blast furnaces in Scunthorpe, a town in northern England, have been churning out pig iron and steel. In spite of rounds of consolidation, in which employment in the industry in Britain has fallen from more than 200,000 in the 1970s to around 24,000 now, Scunthorpe’s rust-streaked steelworks has survived, specialising in producing steel plates, wire rods and rails. Now, though, a global crisis of overcapacity is putting the rich world’s remaining producers of low-value bulk steels, and even some specialist producers such as Scunthorpe’s, at risk. Over the past year bulk steel prices have fallen by more than half. This week the World Steel Association (WSA), an industry body, said that global production in 2015 had fallen by 2.8% (see chart). It declined in every large country except India—though even its steelmakers are suffering, and pressing the government for tariffs on Chinese imports. US Steel, America’s biggest producer, said this week that it lost $1.5 billion last year. This month it laid off 1,300 workers. British steelworkers have fared even worse: one in six lost their jobs last year, and Tata Steel announced a further 1,050 job cuts this month. The collapse in the steel price is mainly the result of falling demand and, until recently, rising production in China, says Edwin Basson of the WSA. Between 2000 and 2014, global production doubled to around 1.6 billion tonnes a year, mainly driven by rising output in China. But as its construction boom came to an end, demand sagged, prompting the country’s state-owned steelmakers to sell their growing surpluses on foreign markets. Chinese exports rose from 45m tonnes in 2014 to 97m tonnes last year—an increase significantly bigger than Germany’s entire output of 43m tonnes. This has triggered demands from rival firms for protection from what they see as dumping. American producers have been helped by their government’s willingness to impose tariffs—of almost 500% on some forms of steel. Although the strong dollar has hurt their competitiveness, cheap gas has kept their costs low. In the euro area, although the European Commission has been slower to increase anti-dumping levies, steel mills have benefited from the euro’s depreciation over the past year. But producers in Britain have faced a perfect storm, suffering from Europe’s high energy costs as well as from a strong pound. Hence the severity of their job cuts. Some commentators have predicted that, without government assistance, low prices will soon wipe out almost the entire steel industry in high-cost countries such as Britain. Certainly, for simpler, commoditised steels, production in Europe and America is drawing to a close, says Vladimir Sergievskiy, an industry analyst. In Britain, SSI has closed its Redcar plant, which made cheap steel slabs. Tata Steel and ArcelorMittal, two Indian-owned giants which loaded up on debt to buy much of Europe’s slab capacity when steel prices were high, look vulnerable. Not all production can be moved to developing countries, claims Gareth Stace at UK Steel, another industry association. Sophisticated steel products, such as the components that Sheffield Forgemasters makes for the nuclear, oil and gas industries, are harder to shift. And some customers who need costly precision-cut or cast steel want a close-by supplier in case they have to return a part for adjustments. Among high-end producers such as Novolipetsk Steel of Russia and Voestalpine of Austria, demand for what they make is rising. For its part, Tata is hoping that there will be sufficient demand for the specialist products made at its Scunthorpe mill to allow it to sell the plant as a going concern. There are even signs that the prices of sophisticated steels are bottoming out in Europe. The price of high-grade steel sheeting in Germany may have already stabilised; French and Italian producers attempted to push through price rises this month. The global picture is also likely to improve later this year, says John Kovacs, a commodities economist at Capital Economics, a consulting firm. Some steel mills in China have started to close, including one, in November, that had previously produced 5m tonnes a year. On January 24th, the Chinese authorities announced plans to cut capacity by a further 150m tonnes, although they did not say when. Low prices are also starting to stimulate demand in some places, such as in India’s booming construction industry and in America, where steel stocks are now unusually low. Yet even with a trough for prices in sight, a return to profitability in steelmaking will take time. In 2014 EY, another consultant, said that the global industry’s capacity utilisation would need to rise from below 80% to 85% for it to become sustainably profitable. Instead, that figure has now slid to just 65%. For many plants, survival is going to be hard enough; profitability still seems a distant dream. Correction: America has imposed a countervailing duty of 236% and an anti-dumping duty of 256% on some types of Chinese steel—together a tariff of almost 500%—and not an anti-dumping duty of 236%, as this article originally stated. The text above has been amended. IF A cynic is someone who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing, as Lord Darlington observes in Oscar Wilde’s “Lady Windermere’s Fan”, then it is getting progressively harder to be a cynic. A growing number of companies keep their prices in a constant state of flux—moving them up or down in response to an ever-shifting multitude of variables. Businesses have always offered different prices to different groups of customers. They offer “matinée specials” for afternoon cinema-goers or “happy hours” for early-evening drinkers. They offer steep discounts to students or pensioners. Some put the same product into more than one type of packaging, each marketed to a different income group. Dynamic pricing takes all this to a new level—changing prices by the minute and sometimes tailoring them to whatever is known about the income, location and spending history of individual buyers. The practice goes back to the early 1980s when American Airlines began to vary the price of tickets to fight competition from discounters such as People’s Express. It spread to other airlines, and thence to hotels, railways and car-rental firms. But it only became the rage with the arrival of e-commerce. The price of goods and services sold online can be varied constantly and effortlessly, in accordance with the numbers and characteristics of those making purchases, and factors such as the weather. Competitors can be monitored constantly, and their prices matched. Amazon updates its price list every ten minutes on average, based on data it is constantly collecting, according to Econsultancy, a research and consulting firm. The practice is spreading to physical retailers, which are installing electronic price displays and borrowing pricing models from e-retailers. Kohl’s, with nearly 1,200 stores in America, now holds sales that last for hours rather than days, pinpointing the brief periods when discounts are most needed. Cintra, a Spanish infrastructure firm, has opened several toll roads in Texas that change prices every five minutes, to try to keep traffic moving at more than 50mph (80kph). Sports teams, concert organisers and even zookeepers have embraced dynamic pricing to exploit demand for hot tickets and stimulate appetite for unwanted ones. The dynamic-pricing revolution provides plenty of benefits for businesses. Besides helping them smooth demand (which can spare them the cost of maintaining extra capacity for peak times), it makes it easier for them to squeeze more out of richer customers. Travel websites have experimented with steering users of Apple computers—assumed to be better-off than Windows PC users—towards more expensive options. Airlines have been caught charging loyal travellers more for a ticket than infrequent travellers, on the assumption that they are more likely to be on a work trip, so their employer will probably be paying. The technology is far from perfect: ever since buying a coffee machine online your columnist (who is not good at newfangled tasks such as clearing browser cookies) has been inundated with offers for coffee machines, as if the purchase was proof not of a need that had been satisfied but of an insatiable desire. Even if the technology becomes more sophisticated, there are two risks for businesses with dynamic pricing. The first is psychological resistance: companies’ reputations can suffer if they offend customers’ sense of fairness. Uber encountered a backlash when it increased its prices eightfold during storms in New York in 2013. Such “surge” pricing makes perfect economic sense: drivers are more likely to go out in hostile conditions if they get paid more; and many customers would prefer a high-priced ride to no ride at all. But these arguments cut little ice when prices run counter to people’s sense of equity. So, in this week’s snowstorms in New York, Uber capped its surge prices for its regular taxis at just 3.5 times the normal fare. Psychological resistance can be fierce when companies use data collected from their customers to charge them more. That is why, in 2000, Amazon quickly dropped a scheme to charge some customers more for DVDs based on their personal profiles, and why it has trodden carefully since. Customers are learning to play the game. Some are searching for flights from an internet café instead of their living-rooms, to get lower fares. Others are piling goods into their online baskets and then failing to click “buy”, hoping this will prompt the seller to offer a better deal. Price-fixation The second risk with dynamic pricing is that it ends in a race to the bottom. Companies that sell online have long been caught up in a war for the top slot on price-comparison sites: even being cheaper by a penny can make all the difference. Physical retailers are being caught in the same logic: those adopting dynamic pricing are mostly doing so to avoid being turned into mere showrooms by customers who inspect the goods but then buy online. The Nebraska Furniture Mart constantly watches what competitors such as Amazon and Best Buy are charging, and updates its in-store electronic displays each morning to meet its guarantee of offering the lowest price. This is obviously good for customers. But getting fixated on prices can distract businesses from seeking ways to make their products and services so attractive that customers will be less fussy about their cost, as the most successful purveyors of luxury items, from Ferraris to Hermès scarves, do. The oldest form of dynamic pricing was practised in ancient bazaars, where merchants would size up their customers before the haggling began. Those retailers might not have been able to compute as many different variables as today’s algorithms. But they still have something to teach today’s dynamic pricers about the importance of establishing trust and playing on desire. Cynical as it sounds, to understand a customer’s underlying willingness to part with their money you need to pay a good deal of attention to values.
