THE Singapore Sling is a cocktail with such a variety of ingredients that few ever taste exactly alike. So it may seem an odd name to apply to a contract to help standardise the global trade in gas. That has not deterred the Singapore Exchange, a market for stocks, bonds and derivatives. Last year, as part of the city-state’s push to become a global trading hub for liquefied natural gas (LNG), it developed the slightly laboured SLInG, a spot-price index for Asian LNG. On January 25th it complemented this with a derivatives contract. There is a long way to go though. As yet the spot market accounts for only about 5% of volumes traded in Asia, executives say. Instead, the international gas market is dominated by long-term contracts linked to the price of oil, both for gas delivered via pipeline and as LNG. This is an anomaly that dates back to the 1960s, when European suppliers developing their first gasfields had no price on which to base long-term contracts, so used oil instead. Since then, supply and demand for these commodities have diverged; oil indexation increasingly fails to reflect the disparities. Analysts believe that, as a result, the pricing mechanism for natural gas is on the verge of change, and that a real global market will start to emerge, adding Asian trading hubs to those in America and Europe. This should spur the spread of natural gas, the cleanest fossil fuel and one that should be in the vanguard of the battle against global warming. But producers, who fear any change will lead to a drop in prices, are set to resist. They say long-term oil-linked contracts are still needed to offset the risk of their huge investments in LNG. (Gazprom, a Russian producer, has made the same argument in Europe about pipelines.) Long-term and cyclical shifts explain why the gap between the two fossil fuels has widened. The LNG trade has grown massively in the past decade (see map). Adrian Lunt of the Singapore Exchange says LNG now rivals iron ore as the world’s second-biggest traded commodity, after oil. In the past 40 years natural gas’s share of the energy mix has grown from 16% to more than 21%. Oil’s has shrunk. Gas generates 22% of the world’s electricity; oil only 4%. It might make more sense to tie the price of natural gas to coal, against which it competes as a power source. Moreover, during the current decade, the outlook for gas prices has become even more bearish than for oil. Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, reckons global LNG supply will increase by about a third over the next three years, pushing overcapacity to about 10%. (There is far less spare capacity in the oil market.) At least $130 billion of this investment in supply is in Australia, which within a few years will overtake Qatar as the world’s largest LNG producer. America will also add to the surplus. Its first, much-delayed LNG exports are due to be shipped from the Gulf Coast in weeks. Investment in the liquefaction trains, tankers, regasification terminals and other paraphernalia needed to ship natural gas was boosted by a surge in demand from Asia. Japan and South Korea scrambled for LNG after Japan’s Fukushima disaster in 2011 forced them to shut down nuclear reactors. China saw LNG as a way to diversify its energy sources and curb pollution from coal. Last year, however, those countries, which account for more than half of global LNG consumption, unexpectedly slammed on the brakes. The subsequent supply glut means that the spot price of gas in Asia has plunged. Those buyers who took out long-term oil-indexed contracts when crude was much higher are suffering. Mel Ydreos of the International Gas Union, an industry body, says that Chinese firms saddled with such contracts are urging suppliers to renegotiate them. He notes that a Qatari company recently agreed to renegotiate a long-term contract with an Indian buyer, cutting the price by half. The drop in Asian prices has brought the cost of natural gas traded in different parts of the world closer to each other. America is an outlier. Thanks to the vast supplies unleashed by the shale revolution, its Henry Hub benchmark is by far the world’s cheapest, at just over $2 per million British thermal units (MBTU). But add liquefaction and transport costs, and American LNG prices rise above $4 per MBTU. In Europe and Asia they are a dollar or two higher. A few years ago the range would have been much wider, from $5 at Henry Hub to $19 in Asia. More homogenous prices are an important step towards a globalised market, says Trevor Sikorski of Energy Aspects, a consultancy. But to get there several more hurdles must be overcome. First, traded markets must become deeper, with a mix of piped gas and LNG, to provide more reliable prices. Asia, in particular, lacks infrastructure and international interconnections. Second, derivatives markets are needed to allow producers to hedge against price swings when investing in expensive new capacity. Third, end-users need deregulated energy markets to encourage competition for the best sources of supply. These, too, are scarce in Asia. Japan is only just starting to free its electricity and gas markets. (In the meantime the likely flood of American LNG into Asia may make Henry Hub a useful reference price.) The strongest impetus for reform may be the fear of what happens without it. Few expect the overcapacity in oil markets to last much more than a year or two, after which prices of crude may spike. Yet the glut in the LNG market could last into the 2020s, in which case the disparity between spot and oil-indexed prices could balloon and buyers would rebel. Other commodities have gone through similar upheavals when spot prices diverged from long-term contracts. The system of “posted prices” for oil fell apart in the 1970s. The spot iron-ore market got a boost as a result of the collapse in demand during the 2008-09 financial crisis. Producers and consumers appear to be lining up for battle. On January 27th shareholders of Royal Dutch Shell, an Anglo-Dutch oil major, gave their approval to the $35 billion purchase of BG (formerly British Gas). The deal will create the undisputed world leader in LNG. On the other side, TEPCO and Chubu Electric, two Japanese utilities, have teamed up to create the world’s biggest LNG buyer, to demand better terms from suppliers, including spot contracts. It will be a long, hard fight. But the days of oil-linked contracts seem to be numbered. Correction: an earlier version of this article incorrectly identified Adrian Lunt of the Singapore Exchange. This has been amended. THERE was much talk at Davos, the global elite’s annual get-together in Switzerland, of wealth inequality: the gap between the haves and the have-nots. The corporate-bond market is currently displaying a similar divide—between the have-yields and the yield-nots. According to Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BAML), around €65 billion ($71 billion) of European corporate bonds are trading on negative yields; in other words, investors lose money by holding them. Yet the rates paid by issuers of low-quality or junk bonds have been soaring. The spread (the interest premium over government borrowing rates) paid by junk-bond issuers has risen by nearly three-and-a-half percentage points since March last year (see chart). The gap is now nearly as great as it was during the euro crisis of 2011, although it is less than half as wide as it was after Lehman Brothers collapsed in 2008. Odd though it may seem, these market movements are part of the same trend. As January’s stockmarket wobbles have shown, investors are very nervous and are looking for safety. Certain corporate-bond issuers, such as Nestlé, a Swiss foods group, are perceived to be very safe. Since the yields on Swiss government bonds (even those with a ten-year maturity) are also negative, it is no great surprise that Nestlé bonds fall into the same camp. Similarly, investors are willing to accept negative yields on German and Dutch government bonds with maturities of two and five years. Better to suffer a small loss from owning them than risk a big loss by buying a junk bond, which might default. Historically, the average recovery rate on unsecured bonds that default has been just 40 cents on the dollar. Given that risk, investors are demanding a much higher yield from junk bonds. The proportion of junk bonds deemed “distressed” (defined as having a yield ten percentage points higher than Treasury bonds) is 29.6%, up from 13.5% a year ago. That is the highest ratio since 2009, according to S&P. Unsurprisingly, given the fall in energy prices, the oil and gas sector accounts for the biggest share of issuers in distress, at 30% of the total. The default rate, at 2.77%, has virtually doubled from the low of 2014 (although it is still below the historical average of 4.3%).   Matt King, a credit strategist at Citigroup, thinks the reason for the turmoil is the reduced support that central banks are offering financial markets. For several years the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England used quantitative easing (or QE, the creation of money to buy assets) to drive down yields on government bonds and thus encourage investors to buy riskier assets, both equities and corporate bonds. Both have now stopped using QE (although they have yet to sell their piles of acquired assets); the Fed has also raised interest rates. Although the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan are still buying bonds, their efforts are being offset at the global level by sales by emerging-market central banks, including China. Net asset purchases by global central banks dipped last summer (coinciding with another market downturn) and recent data show they have done so again. Given this backdrop, investors are sensitive to bad news. The fall in commodity prices and the slowdown in emerging markets are two adverse developments; those sectors were “where the growth was”, as Mr King points out. Corporate-bond investors have also noticed that profit forecasts have been revised lower in recent months in every industry in America. In short, Mr King concludes: “When monetary stimulus’s effect on markets fails to be matched by a corresponding improvement in the real economy, we are inevitably vulnerable to a correction.” The big issue for the corporate-bond markets is whether the sell-off is self-perpetuating. According to BAML, investors in high-yield bonds globally have withdrawn $4.9 billion in the past seven weeks, equivalent to 5% of their assets under management. Those withdrawals force fund managers to sell bonds, creating bigger losses for the remaining investors and encouraging more withdrawals. The impact is exacerbated by the poor liquidity of corporate-bond markets. Banks have reduced their market-making activities in the wake of regulations imposed after the financial crisis of 2007-08. The sell-off will be stopped if yields rise to a level where long-term investors (pension funds and insurance companies, for example) think the bonds are a bargain. But those investors probably need a dose of good news to persuade them to open their wallets. Economist.com/blogs/buttonwoodThe perfect customer INVESTORS have poured billions of dollars into “fintech” startups, creating hundreds of new firms determined to shake up lending, payments, broking and data, among other financial niches. Insurance, however, has not yet been subject to the same melee. That may be changing. Insurance is tricky to break into, for two reasons. The most important is regulation. Health insurance—or its American version, at least—may be the most heavily regulated industry in the world. Before a company can even offer a policy, it must have multiple approvals from state and often city agencies and then negotiate agreements with local hospitals. Running the gauntlet of these regulations is a costly and time-consuming process. A company that set up shop today could not issue any policies before 2018 at the very earliest, says Mario Schlosser, chief executive of Oscar, a company founded in 2012 to provide health insurance to individuals online. It has attracted attention not least because it has managed to secure all the necessary paperwork. The second obstacle is capital. Fintech firms typically receive backing from venture capitalists to pay for salaries, systems, bright and airy offices and an eternal smorgasbord for employees, but not to support a big balance-sheet. Many tend to structure their operations to avoid holding risky assets for any length of time, acting more as intermediaries between creditors and borrowers, investors and investments, or the sender of some money and the recipient. This sort of arrangement does not work as well for insurance. Unless a firm serves purely as a broker, it will end up carrying some risk, and the weighty capital requirements that come with it. What is more, customers will not take out policies unless they are confident that the issuer will be around to honour them when a claim is made. But a startup, by definition, does not have the record or reputation that would help bolster that confidence. Lemonade, an American startup, plans to offer insurance via a peer-to-peer platform—in effect, acting as a middleman. Others, such as Guevara in Britain and Friendsurance in Germany, try to get groups of friends to pool risks, on the assumption that they know better than the actuaries how accident-prone their nearest and dearest are. This also helps get around the problem of confidence. Metromile, a startup car insurer based in San Francisco, takes a different tack. Its policies are underwritten by another insurer, National General, which was spun out of GM after the carmaker’s near-collapse during the financial crisis. For now, that allows it to hone its technology and increase its customer base. But in time retained earnings, reinsurance and debt could enable it to retain more risk, as more mature insurance firms do. Like many insurers, Metromile seeks to cherry-pick the least risky customers. For car insurance, that involves working out which are least likely to have an accident. Several big insurance companies, most notably Progressive in America and Aviva in Britain, have begun to use tracking devices or voluntary apps on cars to monitor how safely their customers drive. How fast they go and how hard they brake are just a couple of the factors that can be used to sort the cautious from the reckless. Metromile, in contrast, tracks mileage. Customers pay a fee of $45-50 a month and then $0.05 to $0.06 cents a mile. There is a clear correlation, Metromile contends, between miles driven and the likelihood of an accident. It reckons there are 75m vehicles in America that are driven only rarely, but insured at a cost of $73 billion a year. Offering a metered option may not only save their owners some money, but also go some way to disproving the view that insurance and fintech do not mix.FEW subjects are as bloodless as the ins and outs of corporate tax—until they provide an opportunity to accuse a politician of coddling big business. George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer (Britain’s finance minister), got his critics’ blood up this week by hailing as a “major success” a deal in which Google agreed to cough up £130m ($185m) in back payments for 2005-15, in addition to the roughly £120m it had already paid. Almost everyone else, including bigwigs from his own Conservative Party, was scathing. Tax authorities, particularly in Europe, have been stepping up efforts to claw back lost tax amid growing public anger over companies’ energetic tax avoidance. The main targets are technology giants, which have become masters at cutting their tax bills by shuffling intellectual property and profits to tax havens. In addition, governments around the world are implementing a raft of anti-avoidance measures proposed last year by the OECD. But as the Google kerfuffle shows, trying to look tough can backfire. A ten-year bill of £250m looks light for a company whose revenue from British advertisers was $6.5 billion in 2014 alone. There may be a good explanation, but if so the taxman has not made it public. Google’s announcement that from now on it will be taxed differently, on a portion of its local advertising revenues, has done little to quell the uproar. This week a parliamentary committee announced an inquiry into corporate taxation, which, its chairman lamented, had become “a piece of elastic”. Google won’t be the last firm targeted. Facebook is said to be resisting efforts to recoup back tax from 2010-14. The social-media firm paid just £4,000 in British corporation tax in 2014. The companies argue that they comply with all relevant laws. Maybe so, but only because the laws have failed to keep up with the globalisation of business. The mishmash of national laws and bilateral treaties covering corporate taxation dates back to when manufacturers ruled. One question hanging over hard-to-tether digital groups is whether they should be forced to register a “permanent establishment”, tax parlance for a taxable presence, in countries where they make sales. Mr Osborne may not really be up for the fight. He talks tough and has introduced a “diverted-profits” tax, aimed at the most egregious offshore schemes. But Britain remains one of Europe’s most alluring countries in tax terms, offering numerous benefits to multinationals that others view as beggar-thy-neighbour policies. The European Commission is trying to get EU members to pull together. It rolled out its latest anti-avoidance proposals this week. These include limits on the use of brass-plate subsidiaries and on tax deductions linked to intra-group loans, an esoteric but lucrative ruse. EU countries have already agreed to be more open about their tax rulings, which in the past often gave large companies an easy ride. The new proposals would be binding, but they have been watered down to increase their chances of becoming law. (EU tax measures require unanimous approval.) The commission will unveil more proposals later this year, including a “common consolidated corporate tax base”, which would offer a single set of rules that multinationals could use to calculate their taxable profits in the EU. More investigations into iffy tax arrangements are likely, too. Having already targeted several of these (see chart), the commission plans to scrutinise another 300 tax rulings. Governments in low-tax countries are responding to this assault. Luxembourg is moving towards ditching some multinational-friendly exemptions, while lowering its headline corporate-tax rate. Ireland is banning the notorious “Double Irish”, a structure that has helped Google and others shave billions off their tax bills. How all these national and regional efforts will fit in with the OECD’s global initiative remains to be seen. In the meantime the triumphant Mr Osborne has been invited to appear before a committee of the European Parliament to discuss how, as its vice-chairman put it, Britain is becoming “a kind of tax haven”.BILL BURR, an American entertainer, was dismayed when he first came across an automated checkout. “I thought I was a comedian; evidently I also work in a grocery store,” he complained. “I can’t believe I forgot my apron.” Those whose jobs are at risk of being displaced by machines are no less grumpy. A study published in 2013 by Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne of Oxford University stoked anxieties when it found that 47% of jobs in America were vulnerable to automation. Machines are mastering ever more intricate tasks, such as translating texts or diagnosing illnesses. Robots are also becoming capable of manual labour that hitherto could be carried out only by dexterous humans. They’re everywhere Yet America is the high ground when it comes to automation, according to a new report* from the same pair along with other authors. The proportion of threatened jobs is much greater in poorer countries: 69% in India, 77% in China and as high as 85% in Ethiopia. There are two reasons. First, jobs in such places are generally less skilled. Second, there is less capital tied up in old ways of doing things. Driverless taxis might take off more quickly in a new city in China, for instance, than in an old one in Europe. Attracting investment in labour-intensive manufacturing has been a route to riches for many developing countries, including China. But having a surplus of cheap labour is becoming less of a lure to manufacturers. An investment in industrial robots can be repaid in less than two years. This is a particular worry for the poor and underemployed in Africa and India, where industrialisation has stalled at low levels of income—a phenomenon dubbed “premature deindustrialisation” by Dani Rodrik of Harvard University. Rich countries have more of the sorts of jobs that are harder for machines to replicate—those that require original ideas (creating advertising), or complex social interactions (arguing a case in court), or a blend of analysis and dexterity (open-heart surgery). But poorer countries are not powerless. Just because a job is deemed at risk from automation, it does not necessarily mean it will be replaced soon, notes Mr Frey. The cheapness of labour in relation to capital affects the rate of automation. Passing laws that make it less costly to hire and fire workers is likely to slow its advance. Scale also matters: farms in many poor countries are often too small to benefit from machines that have been around for decades. Consumer preferences are a third barrier. Mr Burr is hardly alone in hating automated checkouts, which explains why 3m cashiers are still employed in America.BOSSES at big banks would once have cringed at releasing the kind of results they have been serving up to investors in recent days. This week, for instance, Deutsche Bank posted a loss of €6.8 billion ($7.4 billion) for 2015. In the third quarter of last year the average return on equity at the biggest banks, those with more than $1 trillion in assets, was a wan 7.9%—far below the returns of 15-20% they were earning before the financial crisis. Exclude Chinese banks from the list, and the figure drops to a miserable 5.7%. Returns have been languishing at that level for several years. In response, the banks’ top brass are following a similar template: retreats from certain countries or business lines, along with a stiff dose of job cuts. Barclays, which earlier this month said it would eliminate 1,000 jobs at its investment bank and close its share-trading business in Asia, is typical. More radical measures, such as breaking up their firms into smaller, more focused and less heavily regulated units, do not seem to be on the cards. In fact, in spite of investors’ frustration at dismal returns and regulators’ insistence that banks that are “too big to fail” will be cut down to size, the world’s mightiest banks have scarcely shrunk at all since Lehman Brothers collapsed. The 11 behemoths considered the most pivotal by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), a global grouping of regulators, had $22 trillion in assets at the end of 2008; they now have $20 trillion. The assets of the wider group of 30 institutions the FSB describes as “global, systemically important banks” have grown, not shrunk, in recent years. On the face of it, this is a puzzle. To forestall future crises, regulators have piled on new rules intended explicitly to make life harder for the banks that are thought to present the greatest risks to the stability of the global financial system. All banks must meet higher capital ratios these days, funding a greater share of their activities with money put up by shareholders rather than by borrowing. This crimps returns but ensures a stouter buffer if they run into trouble. But the extra capital requirements are especially severe for the biggest banks. Whereas a smaller bank might be required to hold capital equivalent to 7% of its risk-weighted assets, HSBC and JPMorgan Chase, the two institutions the FSB judges to be most systemic, have to hold 2.5 percentage points more. American regulators have imposed a further surcharge on JPMorgan Chase which will push its minimum ratio to 11.5% by 2019. The intention is not just to make sure that big banks are safer, given the expense of bailing them out, but to discourage banks from getting too big in the first place. Other bits of regulation also hamper big banks in particular. America has banned “proprietary trading” (a bank making investments with its own money, rather than on behalf of clients); Britain is “ring-fencing” the retail units of big banks to protect their assets in case of disaster in other parts of the business. And whereas regulators used not to make much fuss if the subsidiary of a multinational bank in their country was not brimming with capital, as long as the bank as a whole was, most now require local units to be able to withstand shocks on their own. These rules have little impact on smaller banks, which tend not to sprawl across so many countries or to combine retail and investment banking. By the same token, small banks have not been fined quite so heavily by prosecutors in America and elsewhere. The penalties—some $260 billion and counting for big American and European banks—have fallen mainly on commercial and investment bankers who have fiddled markets. Some banks have regulatory staff sitting in on most meetings, even at board level. “For every maker there are four checkers these days,” grumbles one investment banker. Such changes have had some impact. Although the 11 banks that most perturb the FSB have not really shrunk, they have at least stopped growing. There has been a marked change since the pre-crisis period. In 1990 the world’s ten biggest banks had just $3.6 trillion of assets ($6.6 trillion in today’s prices)—equivalent to 16% of global GDP. By 2008 they had assets of $25 trillion (40% of global GDP). They now have assets of $26 trillion, or 35% of global GDP. The geographical spread of the two “global” banks, HSBC and Citi, has shrunk markedly as they have left many countries. Many investment banks, particularly in Europe, have retrenched to areas of particular strength: UBS has largely abandoned the trading of bonds, currencies and commodities, for example. In general, banks are shifting away from risky and so capital-intensive activities, such as trading financial instruments, towards safer areas such as helping firms raise capital and managing the money of wealthy investors. Some of the titans have been more radical. Once the largest bank in the world by assets, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) has shrunk by more than half under its new majority owner, the British government. General Electric, once a bank-within-a-firm, shed most of its financial assets over the course of the past year. Credit Suisse is mulling spinning off its domestic retail bank; Deutsche Bank is selling Postbank, a big retail-banking unit in Germany. Yet big banks could still go much further. Many of them currently trade below book value, suggesting that they would be more valuable broken up. Richard Ramsden, an analyst at Goldman Sachs, suggested last year that JPMorgan Chase should be split into four units. MetLife, a big American insurer, is splitting itself up in part to reduce its capital requirements and thus boost profits. There is a “gravitational pull” towards being smaller, says the boss of one bank high up the FSB’s list. Competing with non-systemic banks, which have a lower capital ratio, is hard. “If you have a unit competing head-on against a bank that isn’t [systemically important]…that unit is worth more outside than inside.” Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan Chase’s boss, claims that having all its units under one roof brings $18 billion a year in synergies. Such claims are basically unverifiable, but researchers have long struggled to find much in the way of economies of scale in finance. Costs tend to rise roughly at the same clip as revenues. Some studies posit that savings peter out above $50 billion in assets—a tiny fraction of the trillions held by really big banks. Others see benefits continuing further up the scale, though these are relatively small. But heft could also carry costs. The creaking IT systems of big banks, some of which run code adapted from the 1950s, certainly suggest that. Smaller banks, let alone “fintech” upstarts, can adapt faster. Big banks can borrow more cheaply than smaller ones. In part, that is because they are typically more diversified than smaller banks. But investors have also lent more cheaply to big banks on the assumption that they will get bailed out in case of trouble. New rules should make it easier to force banks’ creditors, rather than taxpayers, to foot the bill if a bank fails. This has undoubtedly shrunk the subsidy—but not eliminated it. An IMF study from 2014, for instance, found that it still amounted to a discount of a quarter of a percentage point on their borrowing in quiet times, and potentially more during times of crisis. Even so, there is no correlation between size and returns. The most profitable banks appear to be the middling ones, with assets of between $50 billion and $1 trillion. Bigger and smaller ones are markedly less profitable (see chart). So if regulators want them to shrink and decent returns are hard to come by, what is holding the big banks together? The risks and costs of breaking up a large bank are one consideration in favour of the status quo. As the boss of another systemic bank puts it: “Breaking up would be a gamble, and we are not paid to gamble.” Byzantine behind-the-scenes plumbing would prove a nightmare to disentangle. That gives regulators pause as well as bankers. In all industries, not just banking, few bosses enjoy the prospect of slimming the empires they have built. Banks are both very complex and highly regulated: that puts off activist shareholders. Bondholders, who put up much of the money big banks use to buy assets, may also be reluctant, having contracted a debt against a diversified set of banking businesses rather than just one fragment of it. Tax can be a factor: banks that made large losses in the downturn can still write them off against today’s profits, in a way that might be compromised by a break-up. This argument once blunted calls for Citi to be dismembered. The clearing mechanisms that exist in other markets are jammed in banking: small banks are put off making big acquisitions by capital charges. All the same, shareholders are growing impatient. Bosses seen as too timid are being sent packing. Anshu Jain, who built up Deutsche Bank’s investment bank over 20 years, was removed as co-chief executive in June after moving too slowly to overhaul his creation. His successor, John Cryan, an avowed cost-cutter, has warned staff of the need for “a fair balance between staff and shareholder interests”. That means less for staff and more for shareholders, reversing a decades-long trend (see chart 2). The big banks may not have changed shape radically since the crisis. But that doesn’t mean life is fun. Correction: an earlier version of this article stated that Barclays was “shutting up shop” in Asia. In fact, it is only closing its share-trading business there. Apologies. TO LOSE Greece or Portugal may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose Italy looks like carelessness. It is hard to imagine the single currency surviving a showdown with Italy, the currency club’s third-biggest economy (and the world’s eighth-biggest, just ahead of Brazil). Perhaps that explains the recent pugnacity of Matteo Renzi, Italy’s prime minister, regarding European fiscal rules. In an article published in the Guardian newspaper in mid-January, he sounded positively Greek, complaining that the European Union’s “fixation on austerity is actually destroying growth”. His finance minister, Pier Carlo Padoan, has been tangling with the European Commission over how to deal with the €350 billion ($382 billion) of bad loans clogging up the Italian banking system. Mr Renzi is demanding the Eurocrats’ forbearance as he tries to restart Italy’s long-stalled economy. Italy’s experience within the euro zone has been miserable. It has been in recession for five of the past eight years. Real (ie, adjusted for inflation) GDP per person is lower than in 1999. Sovereign debt has risen above 130% of GDP. Worse, Italy’s economy is woefully uncompetitive. Since 1998 productivity has fallen steadily. Labour costs, however, have not (see chart). Since Italy joined the euro, exports have ceased to be a driver of growth, which has consequently slowed. A slowdown is not something a country with such daunting debts can afford. Mr Renzi came into office at a propitious moment, in early 2014. The tight fiscal and monetary policy that had contributed to the euro zone’s poor performance in the years after the financial crisis was becoming less of a drag. Soon afterwards the ECB began to use quantitative easing to pep up domestic demand, with salutary effects on Italian interest rates. But the problem of competitiveness remains. There is no shortage of explanations for Italy’s slump in productivity. Thanks to punitive regulation of labour and product markets, it is one of the most expensive places in the rich world to start a new business. Taxes and red tape strongly discourage productive firms from growing very large. Nearly 70% of Italian workers labour in firms with fewer than 50 employees, compared with about a third in America. The government taxes income from labour far more heavily than consumption, discouraging work (and encouraging evasion). Perhaps most worrying, the share of young Italian workers with a university degree is among the lowest in the rich world. At just under 10%, the share of highly educated Italians living abroad is also among the highest in the rich world. The slowdown in productivity occurred just as Italy joined the single currency. Some economists see this as coincidental. The euro was born just as the global economy was undergoing a rapid bout of globalisation. Italy’s small firms did not scale up to capitalise on emerging-market demand, as Germany’s did. By the same token, its under-skilled population could not take advantage of the rising return to trade in professional services, as firms in America and Britain did. But such problems were predictable. Whereas many euro-area governments prepared for a world in which they could not depreciate by adopting structural reforms, Italy was a laggard. Once the euro was in place, Italian wages rose as capital flowed in from northern Europe. Exporters grew ever less competitive, and workers and capital shifted from manufacturing to services, where productivity was even lower. Rome is where the Hartz is Mr Renzi wants to alter this dynamic. He has in mind something truly ambitious—an overhaul of the labour market not unlike Germany’s sweeping Hartz reforms, which are often credited with the rejuvenation of its economy a decade ago. He has taken steps in this direction—adopting rules to make it easier to sack workers, for instance. But even Mr Renzi’s advisers acknowledge that progress has been frustratingly slow. The IMF reckons that Italy’s economy will manage growth of just over 1% a year over the next three years. A recent analysis by economists at the European Commission found that a truly ambitious reform plan could boost GDP substantially—by nearly 24% relative to their baseline forecast. But that gain would materialise over the course of half a century, with very little of the benefit coming during the first decade. Rather than waiting for productivity to rise, a quicker route to faster growth is to drive down wages. The Hartz reforms succeeded in part because they prompted a decline in real wages in Germany. Real GDP per person has soared in Germany since the introduction of the euro, but workers’ pay has not. Reforms that decentralised collective bargaining in Italy, and that therefore helped to contain wages in less productive regions and firms, would be a step in the right direction, reckons Pietro Reichlin of LUISS, a university in Rome. Indeed, Mr Renzi’s advisers suggest that the government may seek to impose a decentralised wage-setting process if negotiations between trade unions and industry do not yield one. Yet even the benefits of wage restraint could be disappointing. Germany’s competitiveness drive occurred during an era of relatively strong global growth and relatively buoyant inflation, which made the suppression of real wages both less painful and less noticeable. Italy will enjoy no such help. Any growth scheme that rests on falling wages is unlikely to endear Italians to Mr Renzi. For his reforms to work, he will need time that voters are unlikely to grant him. Keeping Italy happy enough to stay in the euro zone will, in the short term, take much faster growth across the euro area as a whole, fostered by continued dovishness from the ECB and less finickiness from the European Commission. The deal that Mr Padoan and the commission struck this week to allow a state guarantee for sales of Italian banks’ bad debts is a step in the right direction. If the euro area is to keep Italy on board, it will need to become a bit less austere and a bit more Italian.
