THE only way to operate an increasing number of modern devices, from smartphones to cash machines and cars, is the deft use of a finger on a touchscreen, with a tap for this and a swipe for that. But sometimes such actions do not work all that well. It is easy to miss the required key on a tiny virtual keyboard and produce splling eworrs. Sometimes the screen fails to respond at all. And it can be downright dangerous to take your eyes off the road to flip through myriad air-conditioning options on a vehicle’s control panel. Now help, as it were, is at hand. As touchscreens become ubiquitous on devices, new ways to make and use them are emerging. Robert Bosch, a German producer of car parts, among other things, recently displayed a touchscreen with “haptic feedback”. Visual effects, sounds and vibrations are already used with touchscreens to confirm when icons or keys are selected. What the Bosch system does is to add different surface textures to the mix. The textures on the screen can be rough, smooth or patterned in various ways to represent the location of different buttons with different uses. The idea is that a driver would be able to feel for the right button without having to look at the screen. To avoid accidentally activating buttons as he feels his way across the screen, the driver needs to press a particular surface more firmly to turn the required function on or off, much like pushing on a mechanical switch. By applying variable pressure, a user can scroll faster or slower through, say, different music tracks or radio stations. Because neoSense, as Bosch calls the system, is still under development the company will not say how it works other than that it uses a conventional touch sensor coupled with a sensor that measures the amount of pressure from fingers. That gives little away. Bosch is probably doing something similar to other groups working on such systems: placing under the screen a thin device that generates specially tuned vibrations in the area of the virtual buttons. The pattern of these vibrations would create textured effects that could be felt by the user’s fingers as if they were physical elements on the screen. All charged up Although research into touchscreens dates back to the 1960s, they did not appear on consumer gadgets until the 1980s. Many of these early screens were the “resistive” type, which in its simplest form relies on a finger pushing against a ductile screen to press two underlying conductive sheets together to complete an electric circuit. The point of contact is measured to provide the co-ordinates of the finger. Resistive screens are cheap to make and tough: lots are still used in restaurants to take orders and in factories to control machines. But many devices, particularly smartphones and tablets, now use a system that relies on capacitance. (Capacitance is a measure of an object’s capacity to store an electric charge. The charge builds up if there is no circuit through which the electrons can flow and is dissipated when a circuit is completed—in extreme cases as a jolt when static electricity builds up in the body and is discharged when touching something metallic.) There are a number of ways in which capacitive touchscreens can be made. The current favourite uses a grid of tiny wires made from a transparent, conducting material, usually indium tin oxide, just below the surface of the screen. When a finger touches the screen, or is very close to it, an electrostatic field created in the grid is disturbed by a small change in capacitance at the point at which the charge transfers to the finger. The software in a chip which controls the screen detects the position of the change in capacitance and uses it to determine the finger’s location. Capacitive touchscreens are smooth to operate and require only a light touch. They also allow the use of more than one finger, making “pinch and zoom” movements possible. Most research now is going into improving capacitive devices and integrating the conducting layers into the screen to make thinner displays, says Jeff Han, a pioneer of multi-touch systems. His company, Perceptive Pixel, developed giant touchscreens used by some news organisations for election coverage and was sold to Microsoft in 2012. Mr Han says users should expect to see more ways to use fingers and gestures to operate touchscreens, along with additional haptic effects. More capacitive screens will become pressure-sensitive. Apple’s latest iPhone 6s responds to finger pressure with a process the company calls 3D Touch. The phone has another sensor below the screen which can detect a minute deformation in the glass when a finger is pushed against it. This allows additional actions by the user, such as pressing to preview a message or e-mail before opening it. Apple has also added haptic effects with something it calls a “taptic engine”, in effect a refined tiny vibrator which provides subtle taps in response to certain finger movements. To boost the responsiveness of touchscreens, alternatives to indium tin oxide are starting to be used. Although the material is transparent it is only moderately conductive, which can restrict just how responsive a screen is to touch. Metals, particularly gold and silver, are much better conductors, but not being transparent, they can interfere with the displayed image unless deposited in minute quantities—which reduces conductivity. One way around that problem has been developed by Dimos Poulikakos and his colleagues at ETH Zurich, a Swiss technical university. This involves building gold and silver capacitive grids as “nanowalls”, just 80-500 nanometres (billionths of a metre) wide. As the walls are perpendicular to the screen and two to four times taller than their width, the grid is highly conductive but almost invisible. Printing walls Dr Poulikakos’s nanowalls are made with a new form of 3D printing. The process begins with gold or silver nanoparticles suspended in a solvent. This “ink” is drawn out of a tiny glass capillary tube by an electric field to form a drop which remains hanging onto the tip of the tube. By carefully balancing the composition of the ink and the electric field, the researchers have been able to get an even smaller droplet to form at the base of the attached drop. It is these secondary droplets which are used to print the nano walls. Using nanoparticles means the cost of printing grids with precious metals, such as gold or silver, is not a concern, says Dr Poulikakos. Indeed, he reckons the “nanodrip” process would be a lot cheaper than current methods used to produce capacitive grids for touchscreens as these rely on costly clean rooms and vapour-deposition equipment, similar to that used to make computer chips. Nanodrip is now being scaled up for commercial use by a spin-off company called Scrona. Other conductive materials that might be used to build touchscreens include graphene, a lattice of carbon atoms which, being only one atom thick, is essentially transparent. Researchers at the University of Manchester in Britain, where graphene was discovered, reckon the material can be used to make touchscreens which are flexible enough to roll up like a newspaper. This is because, unlike indium tin oxide, graphene is not brittle. It will also become possible to operate touchscreens without actually touching them. Samsung has already employed tiny infra-red sensors just above the screen on some of its phones to detect hand gestures. Google is developing a miniature radar chip that could be embedded behind the screen itself to do much the same thing. The chip is supposed to be sensitive enough to pick up complex gestures, such as twirling a finger in a clockwise circle to increase the volume on a virtual dial or anticlockwise to reduce it. Such technology could work on touchscreens in cars, too, without distracting drivers. BMW has developed a touchscreen that uses a camera in the roof of the car to recognise hand gestures. If the phone rings, say, you can simply point towards the screen to take the call; if it’s the office, swiping your hand to the side will reject it. Add in fast-improving speech-recognition systems, such as Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana, and the amount of time people spend jabbing, gesticulating and talking to their devices will only rise.Did you learn that from AlphaGo? IN 1996 IBM challenged Garry Kasparov to a game of chess against one of its computers, Deep Blue. Mr Kasparov, regarded as one of the best-ever players, won—but Deep Blue won the rematch. Two decades on, computers are much better than humans at chess but remain amateurs when it comes to the much tougher, ancient game of Go. Or at least, they did. Now a computer has managed to thrash a top-drawer human player. The computer used a program, called AlphaGo, developed by DeepMind, a London-based artificial intelligence (AI) company bought by Google in 2014 for $400m. It took on Fan Hui, European Go champion, beating him 5-0, according to a report in Nature. Beating a champion at Go has long been considered a “grand challenge” in AI research, for the game is far harder for computers than chess. Go players alternately place black or white stones on a grid of 19x19 squares with the aim of occupying the most territory. The size of the board, and the number and complexity of potential moves, make the game impossible to play via brute-force calculation. Demis Hassabis, DeepMind’s founder and one of the paper’s authors, reckons that a typical Go turn offers around 200 legal moves, compared with just 20 or so in chess. Whereas a chess-playing computer like Deep Blue was programmed directly by humans, AlphaGo used AI to teach itself about how to play Go and then make its own decisions. This was done with a technique called machine learning, which allows computers to figure out for themselves how to do things, such as to recognise faces, respond to speech and even translate between languages. AlphaGo works in two parts. When it is the computer’s turn, the program first suggests moves based on the sorts of general tactics that human players have used in the past—much as Deep Blue would. Then the second part of the system sifts those moves for those that look like they might lead to a win, again based on patterns it has picked up through memorising zillions of previous games. The ultimate test of AlphaGo’s capabilities, though, will come in March. DeepMind has persuaded Lee Sedol, a Korean player widely regarded—like Mr Kasparov in his day—as one of the best-ever players, to take on their machine in a series of games in Seoul. If AlphaGo wins—and given its performance against Mr Hui, that seems like a distinct possibility—then human brains, and their possessors, will have to cede another defeat to the machines.AS GRAPE varieties go, pinot noir is famously finicky. Got right, the thin-skinned grapes can produce some of the world’s finest wines. Central to that is plucking the grapes from the vine at the right time. Winemakers typically depend upon testing the level of sugar to determine if their berries are ready, but that is not terribly accurate. As pinot noir grapes reach late stages of maturity, the rate at which they gain sugars slows down just as the rate at which they accumulate the aromatic compounds that can grant wine a good “nose” goes up. And in wine, the aroma is a fundamental part of its appeal. Varying rainfall, temperatures and soil conditions all affect the rate at which aromatic compounds enter grapes, making it difficult for wineries to know whether they should harvest their grapes a few days or weeks after the increase in sugar tails off.    Michael Qian and Fang Yuan of Oregon State University had a local interest in the problem. The prime crop of the vineyards in Oregon’s Willamette Valley is pinot noir. And Oregon’s cool climate, short growing season and periodic heavy rains make determining whether grapes are ready for harvest particularly challenging. Curious to see if they could monitor directly the presence of aromatic compounds, the biochemists set up an experiment. They collected ten bunches of grapes from the Stoller Family Vineyard in Willamette Valley on two separate dates, one early season and one late, during 2012 and 2013. The first date from each year was just two weeks after the berries had started to change colour from green to red, while the second was between five and six weeks after this milestone. Aside from monitoring the sugar levels, Dr Qian and Mr Fang also made use of a technique called aroma-extract dilution analysis to study aromatic compounds in the grapes. This was done using a gas chromatograph, in which compounds are separated out from a sample based upon their boiling points and chemical properties. The kit was also fitted with a sniffing port for researchers to smell the compounds as they were released. Oh, the damascenone! The researchers report in the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry that they detected 49 aromatic compounds in the grapes from the two years during both the early and the late sampling periods. Most of these compounds remained at low levels throughout the growing period. However, four of them (ß-damascenone, which carries a floral and tea-like smell; vanillin, the key compound in vanilla; 4-vinylguaiacol, which smells like cloves, and 4-vinylphenol, which is reminiscent of spicy almonds) were found in much higher concentrations in the mature grapes than in the early-season ones. Dr Qian and Mr Fang suggest these four aromatic compounds are commonly associated with a good pinot noir and therefore could provide another way to determine the optimum time to harvest. For their part, wine buffs will keep settling the argument the old-fashioned way, with a sniff straight from the glass.FOR decades scientists have been trying to understand schizophrenia, a distressing disorder that afflicts one in a hundred people. Its destructive symptoms include hallucinations, delusions, muddled thoughts and changes in behaviour. The best drugs offer little more than the ability to target symptoms. There is presently no hope of a cure because its ultimate cause has long been a mystery. Schizophrenia is known to run in families, so it has always been thought that genes might shed light on the origins of the disease. But the genetics have proved harder to unpick than anyone imagined. It is only now, 16 years after the human genome was first sequenced, that scientists have homed in on the relevant genes. For more than five years researchers led by a group at the Broad Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, collected more than 100,000 DNA samples from around the world. They were looking for regions of the human genome that might be harbouring variants that increased the risk of schizophrenia. What they found implicated more than a hundred genes and provided a strong pointer towards a portion of the genome associated with infectious diseases. Many of these genes did not operate independently of each other, and further detective work revealed that the most important source of variation lay within a particular gene known as C4. Steven McCarroll, of Harvard Medical School, and his colleagues involved in the study, report in Nature this week that particular forms of the C4 gene led to a greater risk of developing schizophrenia. What makes C4 hard to identify is that it comes in many different forms and has an intriguing function. The gene produces a protein known as a complement factor, which helps to tag pathogens for removal by the body’s immune system. In the brain, however, it appears to be tied to a developmental process known as “synaptic pruning”, in which neurons are continuously eliminated throughout childhood and into early adulthood. In other words schizophrenics may be producing too much of a protein that creates a signal that synaptic connections should be removed. During late adolescence the brain undergoes widespread synaptic pruning, particularly in the cerebral cortex. This is also the age at which schizophrenia symptoms tend to begin. David Goldstein, director of the Institute for Genomic Medicine at Columbia University, says he is persuaded by the research, but reckons it is important for the medical community to examine the study carefully because the region of the genome under discussion is hard to work on and is “stuffed full of genetic variation”. That makes it difficult to point to a single gene and say “it’s this”, he adds. As to whether those with a family history of schizophrenia ought to have their genome sequenced to assess their susceptibility, Dr Goldstein is keen to point out that more work needs to be done on the risks that different forms of the genes bring. Moreover, other factors can be implicated in developing schizophrenia, ranging from taking psychoactive drugs to being exposed to viruses while in the womb. Synaptic pruning is so crucial in brain development researchers wonder what other mental disorders might be tied to its aberrant activation or regulation. This study is bound to initiate a flurry of similar work. Alzheimer’s disease, for one, has been tied to, among other things, excessive destruction of synapses. And it is already believed that autistic individuals have a surplus of synapses in the brain, due to a slowdown in normal brain pruning. Indeed, the onset of autism often follows a period when there is a burst of synapse formation. One big step forward in schizophrenia research could have an enormous impact on the way other neurological disorders are viewed and treated.A square idea goes farther in space LITTLE more than ten centimetres across, so-called CubeSats are cheap-to-launch satellites that are able to carry out many scientific and commercial tasks at a fraction of the cost of conventional orbiters. This miniaturisation is mainly thanks to electronics developed for smartphones. CubeSats can be launched as additional payload alongside bigger satellites, sent up during deliveries to the International Space Station or put aloft on small, purpose-built rockets like NASA’s new Venture Class. Being cheap means that once their orbits decay and they burn up on re-entering the atmosphere, CubeSats can simply be replaced with newer versions. But it can pay to reposition them, both to operate more effectively and prolong their service life. That, however, is a challenge because for reasons of safety a CubeSat cannot carry conventional rocket fuel. They typically rely for manoeuvrability on heating an inert liquid and ejecting small jets of the resulting vapour, which is a poor substitute for the energetic burning of rocket fuel. So better means of motion are required—and at least two are on offer. One, developed by Paulo Lozano and his colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is a miniature version of the ion drives used on larger satellites. An ion drive accelerates charged particles derived from a liquid propellant to very high speeds. This creates thrust more efficiently than ejecting heated vapour, but without the explosive chemical reactions of a conventional rocket. At the moment, ion drives are not used on CubeSats because both space and weight are at a premium in such small devices and an ion drive needs pumps to move the propellant around. Dr Lozano, however, has been able to dispense with these large and heavy components. He and his team have developed a porous glass emitter that has hundreds of tiny channels running through it. These suck the propellant up by capillary action, obviating the need for pumps. The propellant itself is a substance known as an ionic liquid, that consists of positive and negative ions which can be separated by passing a current through the liquid and then, because they are electrically charged, accelerated by an electric field. (Both current and field are supplied by a battery on board the satellite.) The ions are then fired from separate thrusters, one for the positive ions and one for the negative ones. Individual modules, containing emitter, thrusters and enough propellant for an hour of thrust, are about the size of a sugar cube and weigh less than four grams. Dr Lozano’s team has shown in the laboratory that eight can produce enough impulse to shift a typical CubeSat sufficiently to extend its life in orbit from months to years. Three are now in the hands of NASA, awaiting flight-testing later this year. The other approach, that of Young Bae of Advanced Space and Energy Technologies in Tustin, California, is to use light. Dr Bae’s device, which he dubs a photonic laser thruster, was developed with NASA funding. His thruster works because light exerts pressure when it hits something. In theory, it is possible to move an object like a CubeSat by nudging it with a laser beam. In practice, however, the pressure which light exerts is so small that a device able to do a useful amount of nudging would require a laser of unfeasibly large power. Dr Bae has overcome this limitation by bouncing light repeatedly between the source laser and the satellite, to multiply the thrust. In his latest experiments, Dr Bae has managed to amplify the thrust imparted by a single nudge of the laser by a factor of 1,500, which is big enough to manoeuvre a CubeSat as well as a conventional thruster would. This brings two advantages. First, since no on-board propellant is required, there is more room for instruments. Second, there being no fuel to run out, a CubeSat’s orbit can be boosted as many times as is desired, and its working life prolonged indefinitely. The flip side of these advantages is that a suitable laser is required to provide the thrust. Dr Bae thinks it could be in orbit as well. The laser would be powered by solar cells and shepherd a veritable flock of CubeSats, providing the propulsion needed to move and arrange them as required. That is still some years away so, unlike Dr Lozano’s system, Dr Bae’s is not yet ready to fly. But his vision of an orbiting Bo Peep, cajoling and directing her charges by flashing lights at them, is a pleasing one.Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the Rise of the Radical Right. By Jane Mayer. Doubleday; 449 pages; $29.95 IN 1972 W. Clement Stone, a wealthy businessman, gave $2m to Richard Nixon’s presidential campaign. The cheque, worth $11.4m today, provoked outrage and led to calls for campaign-finance reform. How quaint history seems when compared with the momentous present. In 2016 a group of rich conservative donors will spend nearly $900m to influence the presidential and congressional elections. They avoid public scrutiny by funnelling money into a labyrinthine collection of foundations and anonymous political groups. This secret system is the subject of “Dark Money”, an ambitious new book by Jane Mayer of the New Yorker. David and Charles Koch (pronounced “coke”), who inherited an industrial conglomerate based in Wichita, Kansas, which is the second-largest private company in America, are at the heart of the book. Although the company is diverse, with interests in energy, chemicals, commodities and consumer goods, its owners focus on advancing their conservative political agenda. The Kochs deny climate change and oppose government regulation, welfare and taxes. They view the rise of the Democrats and Barack Obama’s election in 2008 in apocalyptic terms, and the counterinsurgency they have funded has changed the face of politics in America. They have exerted their strongest influence at state level, where a lot of business regulation is written. Ms Mayer, whose sympathies are with the left and who is a critic of Republican values and motives, does not go so far as to call the source of the Kochs’ fortune “blood money”, but she does claim that it is tainted. This is not the first book to look at their business interests (“Sons of Wichita”, by Daniel Schulman, came out in 2014), but it is the first to allege that the patriarch Fred Koch made part of his early wealth by helping build oil refineries in Soviet Russia and Nazi Germany. The company has faced plenty of public controversy in America, including environmental fines and lawsuits. There have also been family conflicts. There are four Koch brothers, not just Charles and David who are well known. Along with their brother Bill, they allegedly tried in the 1960s to blackmail a fourth sibling, Frederick, to sell his shares in the company. The brothers had concluded that he was gay (which he has denied) and, Ms Mayer suggests, they threatened to expose him to their father, which caused a permanent rift. It is the political panorama beyond the Kochs, however, that makes Ms Mayer’s book more than just another feisty corporate critique. Rich conservatives, Ms Mayer argues, set up private foundations, which allow them quietly to divert money to their favourite political causes free of tax. These foundations—including those set up by the Kochs, Richard Mellon Scaife and Harry Bradley—are not subject to much disclosure or oversight. Since foundations were first used by the robber barons as a way to avoid taxes while appearing philanthropic, they have ballooned. In 2013 there were over 100,000 of them, with assets of around $800 billion. Some of these do good for the world’s poor, but their structure also enables them to push money secretly into partisan think-tanks like the Cato Institute, the Heritage Foundation, the American Enterprise Institute and the Hoover Institution. In other words, the wealthy have always used charitable foundations to influence politics at the expense of taxpayers. “Dark Money” tracks other attempts to alter public discourse without leaving a trace. The Kochs and other conservatives support academic research that is allied to their political ideologies. They want to take “the liberal out of liberal arts”, as Ms Mayer puts it. For example, the John M. Olin Foundation backed a professor at the University of Chicago, John Lott, to write a book, “More Guns, Less Crime”, calling for concealed weapons to be legalised. The Kochs have regularly held summits to share their free-market, anti-taxation views. Among those invited are federal judges, 185 of whom have attended seminars sponsored by conservative interests, including the Koch Foundation. Ms Mayer’s book seethes with distaste for her subjects. The Koch brothers declined to be interviewed for “Dark Money”, and purportedly tried to smear Ms Mayer’s reputation by accusing her of plagiarism after she published a critical article about them in the New Yorker in 2010. An author can dislike her subjects. However, the book would have been stronger had Ms Mayer expanded the scope of her scorn. She acknowledges in passing that Democratic donors, including two hedge-fund billionaires, George Soros and Tom Steyer, have funnelled money into their own political causes. But she never dissects whether the left has embraced the deceptive funding mechanisms that she so assiduously has traced for the right. The fact that she does not cast a critical eye across the whole system prevents “Dark Money” from being a comprehensive analysis of how America’s campaign finances are distorted. But it offers a valuable contribution to a subject that requires far greater scrutiny in this election year.The temptations of hindsight The Noise of Time. By Julian Barnes. Jonathan Cape; 180 pages; £14.99. To be published in America by Knopf in May. ON THE surface, Julian Barnes seems an unlikely author of historical novels, a genre which often offers a fixed interpretation of a period in history, or characters within that period, albeit one conjured by the writer’s imagination. Yet he returns to them again and again. “Talking It Over”, which came out in 1991, sets its characters’ memories against each other, showing how they overlap and contradict. “Arthur & George”—his recreation of a real-life mystery taken on by Arthur Conan Doyle that was published in 2005—is as much an excavation of biography and identity as it is a detective yarn. “The Sense of an Ending”, which won the Man Booker prize for fiction in 2011, offers a dramatic reassessment of one man’s past. The epigraph of “Talking It Over”, “He lies like an eyewitness”, is described simply as a “Russian saying”. It reappears in “The Noise of Time”, Mr Barnes’s brief, compelling inhabiting of the life of Dmitri Shostakovich. For a novelist fascinated by the slipperiness of truth, what richer ground than the Soviet Union under Stalin, where a memory might save your life, or cost another his? Here every action, every thought must be called into question almost as it happens; as when the composer finds himself trying to recall whether he really did, as a ten-year-old schoolboy, see Lenin arrive at the Finland Station. This paragraph-long episode of recollection begins in certainty and moves with breathtaking swiftness to incredulity. “These days, he no longer knew which version to trust. Had he really, truly been at the Finland Station? Well, he lies like an eyewitness, as the saying goes.”   “The Noise of Time” is not narrated by Shostakovich, but in a restricted third-person voice that sits on the composer’s shoulder. Art belongs to the people, is the dictate of the Soviet state, but the narrative voice offers a rebuttal. “Art belongs to everybody and nobody. Art belongs to all time and no time. Art belongs to those who create it and those who savour it.” One could argue that these are platitudes. But in the context of the terrifying control exerted by the party and the state on artists such as Shostakovich, they are radical ideas. “Art is the whisper of history, heard above the noise of time.” Just as the music of Shostakovich can be listened to with no knowledge of the historical circumstances out of which it arose, so Mr Barnes’s novel does not depend on a detailed knowledge of history or biography. In any case, doubts that linger over the events of Shostakovich’s life are “highly frustrating to any biographer, but most welcome to any novelist”. Mr Barnes’s imagining of the composer’s life does not stretch to many pages, which makes it a welcome anomaly in an era of 900-page doorstoppers. The skilled novelist here brings alive not just the political turmoil that surrounded Shostakovich, but his love for his wives, his love for his children, a vivid counterpoint of artistic freedom and political oppression—the eloquent conjuring of one glass of vodka clinking against another.Party Animals: My Family and Other Communists. By David Aaronovitch. Jonathan Cape; 309 pages; £17.99. WERE those post-war Britons who kept faith in communism, despite the horrors of Stalinism, simply “useful idiots”? In this engaging, witty and beautifully written book, the epithet, usually attributed to Lenin, never occurs. Yet David Aaronovitch must surely have been tempted to apply it to his parents, Sam and Lavender, and their friends, almost all of them fellow-members of the Communist Party. Mr Aaronovitch, who ditched the gospel of Marxism years ago and is now a columnist for the Times, obviously has first-hand experience of the cultlike loyalty of the “party animals” in the 1950s and 1960s: “The facts of existence, the assumptions about how the globe turned that we imbibed were not the same as—and often the opposite of—what everyone else deemed normal…There were things that other people did that we didn’t do. We didn’t believe in God, pray, go to church, stand up for the queen in the cinema when they played the national anthem (which in any case, wasn’t our anthem, our anthem being the ‘Internationale’).” Is there a parallel today? “Perhaps there are children of very devout Muslims or evangelicals who will read this and nod along.” But Mr Aaronovitch’s memoir is no glib rant against the delusions of sincere party members. Instead, he acknowledges the power of the message from Moscow (the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact was explained away as a delaying tactic to allow Russia to prepare for its heroic role in defeating Hitler). For the true believers, almost anything could be justified, even the evils of Stalinism, the repression of the Hungarian uprising in 1956 and the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. As with any cult, some devotees will never break away. Yet most of all, Mr Aaronovitch’s book is a sensitive analysis of his own family—the Jewish Sam, an autodidact from London’s impoverished East End, and the genteel Lavender, rebelling against her middle-class roots in the countryside. Sam’s passion for learning takes him in middle age to Balliol College, Oxford (he later became an economics lecturer at a London polytechnic); Lavender’s passion for the party leads her to overlook not just the flaws—so evident to any outsider—in Soviet behaviour, but also Sam’s energetic womanising. Meanwhile, the young David joins in the party entertainment: marching and demonstrating against any perceived capitalist ill—but willing by 1987 to abandon his parents’ faith in order to work for the BBC. As the Soviet Union disintegrated in the early 1990s, Roger Scruton, a conservative British philosopher, called for Westerners who had “promoted and apologised for Soviet communism” to face “their day of reckoning” in the court of public opinion. Mr Aaronovich’s riposte to “the Scrutons, as a class” that had benefited from the British empire, should hit home: “If it was criminal to have been a believer in communism and an apologist for Russia, then why was it less criminal to have been a believer in colonialism and an apologist for racism?” As for Lavender and Sam, “She was a party member through thick and thin because it was a kind of family. He was a party member despite everything because it was his bigger world.”This Is London: Life and Death in the World City. By Ben Judah. Picador; 426 pages; £18.99. LONDON, a city famous for Hyde Park, Harrods and giddy house prices, has undergone a quiet revolution. So says Ben Judah, a young foreign correspondent now turning his eyes towards his home town. He begins his new book with a confession: “I was born in London but I no longer recognise this city…I don’t know if I love the new London or if it frightens me: a city where at least 55% of people are not white British, nearly 40% were born abroad and 5% are living illegally in the shadows.” “This Is London” is Mr Judah’s journey to rediscover his city. The author throws himself in at the deep end, spending anxious nights huddled in an underpass not far from the unimaginable wealth of Mayfair, in the company of homeless Roma beggars. Many of these men, and they are almost all men, are indentured slaves. Having lost their jobs at home, they borrowed money to travel to London and are now forced to beg to pay off their debts. From here, Mr Judah grabs hold of London and shakes out its secrets. He has a gift for ingratiating himself into very foreign surroundings and teasing out stories. He meets a bored Middle Eastern princess, who passes her days in a haze of skunk, an Afghan shopkeeper who entered Britain hidden in a lorry, and a Punjabi minicab driver who exhausts himself washing bodies by night at his local mosque. These Londoners achieve varying degrees of success at making a life in the metropolis. Most of London’s immigrant population shares the same obsession: the city’s economic hierarchy. Mr Judah meets a Nigerian who had escaped work in a sweaty hotel laundry room to join the police, a rare example of upward mobility. But he still sees race as destiny: “In London you’ve always had the Africans at the bottom of the pile along with the West Indians…Then you get some Afghans. Then the eastern Europeans coming up…Then you get the Asians. Then you get the Irish. Then you get the whites…And at the very top you get the rich…Where there is no race.” The perceived failure of London’s many ethnicities to mix has geographical consequences, which add to Mr Judah’s disorientation. He visits Neasden, an area in the north-west of the city that used to be a picture of white suburban contentment. But the English have departed: “They want to be central, they want to cycle—they want the city.” London’s oldest inhabitants are pouring back into the centre, so that former inner-city terraced slums now offer craft beer and organic food, whereas the suburbs with their net curtains have become overpopulated tenements for the city’s migrant labourers. Standing in front of the demolition of a landmark housing estate, Mr Judah realises this migration may also have a political dimension: “Thirty times all over south London I have written down in street interviews that someone thinks the government wants to push poor black people out of the centre.” For those without sufficient means to enjoy London’s wealthy and rejuvenated centre—most of the men and women Mr Judah meets—the city is frequently as disappointing as it is difficult. He observes: “They come to London inspired not by a dream of how great things could be, but by the knowledge of how much worse they can be.” “This Is London” is not prescriptive; there is nothing here about how to lessen the grinding poverty or improve the rights of low-wage workers. But Mr Judah has done an important service in capturing the voices of those swept to the margins by economic forces beyond their control.
