The War on Alcohol: Prohibition and the Rise of the American State. By Lisa McGirr. W.W. Norton; 330 pages; $27.95 and £18.99. NEARLY a century after America fleetingly banned alcohol, Prohibition seems like a charming absurdity. The rise of moonshine and speakeasies before the Great Depression seems more like Hollywood than history. But Prohibition was no joke for the working classes, writes Lisa McGirr in “The War on Alcohol”, a focused and thought-provoking book. When the 18th Amendment banning the sale of alcohol was passed in 1919, it was targeted at the saloons where men gathered after work for beer and conversation. “I believe that alcoholism threatens the destruction of the white race,” said Charles Eliot, the president of Harvard University. Such sentiments were common among the reformers. Thus began what Ms McGirr, a professor at Harvard, describes as the “boldest effort to remake private behaviour in the nation’s history”. Neighbourhood saloons closed, home distilleries opened and drinking moved underground, to homes and speakeasies and even athletic clubs. The protests of the working classes—“no beer, no work”—went unheard amid the paternalistic zeal of high-minded (and often wealthy) Protestants. An enormous new federal bureaucracy emerged to enforce the ban, often targeting small family operations rather than the large, politically greased criminal rings like Al Capone’s. After the shock wore off, anger ensued. The result, Ms McGirr argues, was political upheaval. Many thirsty working-class Americans, from the Poles to the Germans (whose breweries were targeted), swung behind Al Smith, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1928. African-Americans, long loyal to the Republicans as the “party of Lincoln”, also moved towards the Democrats, not least because the Ku Klux Klan, whose numbers proliferated in the 1920s, had taken on Prohibition-enforcement duties. Smith, the first Catholic presidential nominee, did not win in 1928, but the anger was palpable. “The War on Alcohol” is not as dense as Daniel Okrent’s “Last Call”, which came out in 2010. Instead, Ms McGirr’s interest lies in Prohibition’s lasting effects on society. Despite its reputation as a historical oddity, Prohibition was another development in the growing power of the American state in the early 20th century, she argues. Woodrow Wilson’s Progressivism and Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal also emerged during that period. Prohibition required enforcement, and the prison-staffing apparatus of the 1920s soon became larger than the Bureau of Investigation, the forerunner to the FBI. As one disgruntled newspaper editor put it: “A man’s home used to be his castle. Now, it is the United States government’s castle.” Prohibition ended in 1933, during the first year of Roosevelt’s presidency. “It’s time the country did something about beer,” the new president declared. But, as Ms McGirr points out, the lessons of America’s 13-year misadventure with Prohibition have yet to be learned: “Despite a wide consensus that Prohibition of the liquor traffic was a fundamentally flawed crusade with devastating consequences, its spiritual and policy twin—the war on drugs—has gone largely unchallenged.” Much like the war on alcohol, the war on drugs has “far overshot the ills” that it is trying to fix, all the while showing little success in reducing supply or demand for drugs. A little dram of history might do wonders for America’s politicians.“A HARMLESS drudge.” Of the definitions in Samuel Johnson’s great English dictionary of 1755, that of “lexicographer”, his own calling, is the most famous, an example of the same wit that led him to define “oats” as “a grain, which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.” Why name a language column after a harmless drudge? Because Johnson, despite the drudgery, knew that language was not harmless. Its power to inform and to lead astray, to entertain and to annoy, to build co-operation or destroy a reputation, makes language serious stuff. The Economist’s “Johnson” column began in 1992 and was later revived online. This week it returns to the print edition, and henceforth will appear fortnightly. Many of the topics tackled are fun: swearing and slang, preferences and peeves. Some are more fundamental. Language reveals a lot about human nature: how people reason differently in a foreign language, or to what extent different languages encode a world view, are some of the most exciting and controversial topics in linguistic research. People care intensely about their language, and so languages in the wider world sometimes come into conflict. The perceived arrogance of Castilians to Catalan threatens to sunder Spain; “language police” in Quebec tell restaurant owners to change “pasta” and “grilled cheese” to pâtes and fromage fondant. At the extreme, the passage of a law downgrading Russian in Ukraine helped spark war in that country; Vladimir Putin has used it as evidence that Ukrainian nationalists are bent on wiping out Russian culture there. The war has rumbled on since, with language the most obvious symbol of wider identity and sympathy. So the Johnson column treats topics light and heavy as well as language both English and international. How does the spirit of Johnson himself come into it? The best way to answer is to see how he would fit into today’s “usage wars” over authority and correctness. A language column is expected to tackle questions of right and wrong. There are roughly two views of how to do this: one top-down, based on authority, prestige, writing and stability; one bottom-up, resting on how most people actually use the language, and open to change. The two schools of thought, known as “prescriptivism” (which sets down how the language should be) and “descriptivism” (which tells how it is), have often been at daggers drawn: English teachers and some usage-book writers on one side, and academic linguists, lexicographers and other usage-book writers on the other. In the caricature, prescriptivists are authoritarians with their heads in the sand, insisting on Victorian-era non-rules. The descriptivists are mocked as “anything-is-correct”, embracing every fad, even that Shakespeare should be taught in text-message-speak. To take one example, some prescriptivists say “like” cannot be a conjunction (“tastes good, like a cigarette should”, in a 1950s advert.) Descriptivists point to continuous use since Chaucer. Recruiting-sergeants from both sides can bang on Samuel Johnson’s door. An intellectual writing for an elite audience, he did not shy away from “right” and “wrong”, even “barbarity”, “depravity” and “corruption”, in matters of language.But he declared his task was not to “form” but to “register” (that is, describe) the language; trying to stop change was like trying to “lash the wind”. Above all, his years of drudging at the dictionary had taught him humility: he knew he was sure to commit “a few wild blunders, and risible absurdities, from which no work of such multiplicity was ever free”. Prescribing is not really the opposite of describing. Lexicographers from Johnson’s day on must describe the language, grounding their definitions in real living English. But that is in order to give stronger roots to a book they know people will use for firm guidance. Academic linguists, the arch-descriptivists, are perfectly willing to call some usages wrong and others plain ugly. One can prescribe and preach a high-quality English while accepting variety and change. Stability is not the same as rigidity.  And judgment should be empirical, not dogmatic, open to real usage and willing to change when the facts change. Getting things right is worth the effort, just as it is in politics. As Johnson wrote, “We have long preserved our constitution, let us make some struggles for our language.”THE glittering, hooded eyes captured guests even before they sat down. His apartment high above the Thames was full of paintings of famous men—he had a penchant for popes—but they struggled to compete with George. (He was rarely, after first acquaintance, “Lord Weidenfeld”.) Somewhere in the room would be the guest of honour: Angela Merkel, perhaps, whom he had befriended when she was still a middling Christian Democrat politician, or an Israeli general. He would invite them to take the floor, with an elegant introduction and a couple of probing questions to stimulate discussion. But it was the rotund, courtly son of an Austrian classics teacher who was the dazzler-in-chief, inexhaustibly unearthing facts, analogies, literary allusions and personal connections from his elephantine memory.   English diffidence tended to elude him; assiduity was more his thing. Yet the conversational flow was not ponderous or one-way; he was just as interested in new people and ideas as in old ones. And, as he had learned when the Nazis turned his comfortable childhood upside down, you could never have enough friends. The breadth and depth of his acquaintance were the foundation of his success as a publisher. The ties could be intellectual, cultural or romantic, and sometimes all three. He cultivated them from pre-war Vienna to the heights of the British establishment—and at the best parties in London. They produced publishing coups, donations, diplomatic reconciliations and sometimes, where his many paramours were concerned, scandal. Personal loyalty, in his view, trumped narrower or more abstract fealties. Though an adamantine Zionist, he defended his schoolmate Kurt Waldheim, who was embroiled in a war-crimes scandal when he became president of Austria. Waldheim had bravely helped young George evade Nazi curbs on higher education for Jews; that debt had to be repaid. Cosmopolitan to his bones, he was patriotically and thankfully British, though for years he did not feel wholly part of the country to which he had come as a penniless teenager. A peerage helped: it was awarded in 1976 by Harold Wilson, the Labour prime minister whose talent he had spotted 30 years before in a dog-eared manuscript about the coal industry. Once he was an insider, he revelled in it. He loved intrigue (too much, some said) and excitement. The flair and showmanship of publishing—conceiving a book with mischievous, relentless persuasion of anyone with writerly potential, and showily promoting it—appealed greatly. The dull stuff in the middle appealed a lot less. Business partners sometimes found that tiresome, especially when vagueness about their interests was matched with ruthlessness about his. Though not short of enemies, he did not bear grudges. In the ruins of post-war Vienna he tracked down a Nazi student with whom he had duelled and invited him to breakfast. The towering young thug had become an emaciated cripple, and gratefully wolfed down huge sausage sandwiches at the British Officers’ Club. His greatest triumph, Lord Weidenfeld reckoned, was outfacing the censors and publishing Vladimir Nabokov’s “Lolita”. Other celebrated authors in his stable included Isaiah Berlin (“The Hedgehog and the Fox”) and James Watson (“The Double Helix”). Among his fiction writers were Edna O’Brien and Saul Bellow. His forte, however, was personal reminiscence. (His own autobiography, a true gossipfest, was called “Remembering my Good Friends”.) He published memoirs and biographies of De Gaulle (whom he met while working in the wartime BBC), Adenauer, Kissinger, Mussolini and even Albert Speer. The fact that his own family had barely escaped the Holocaust made it all the more important to explain how the Nazi empire worked. Provincialism and narrow-mindedness were his greatest foes; he had seen the damage they had done to his cherished continent. In the same vein, reconciliation was his paramount cause: chiefly between Germans and their victims and between Jews and Christians. Charm and personal contact could bridge most differences, given a chance. When the Iron Curtain fell he raised money to bring students from the former communist countries to his beloved Oxford. His travels across the Atlantic and the Channel were indefatigable; his hospitality, vigour and erotic energy were legendary to the end of his life. Tablets of stone Only on Israel was he unbendable. Its return to statehood he saw as the greatest achievement of the modern age (and one in which, when he briefly worked as an adviser to Chaim Weizmann, he had played a direct part). Nothing must jeopardise its security. Though his heart remained with the Israeli left, he said in later life that his head was with Likud. He was buried on the Mount of Olives, the Jewish state’s highest honour for its dead. Britons sometimes mistakenly thought him old-fashioned. It was true that he had the manners and polish of a Habsburg literary aristocrat: he was fluent in four languages and could read for pleasure in another three. But that was civilisation, not anachronism. The future enthralled him just as much as the past—especially if there might be a book in it.Several governments in Latin America and the Caribbean advised women to delay getting pregnant because of an outbreak of Zika, a mosquito-borne virus that may cause birth defects in babies of mothers who are infected. The government of El Salvador suggested that women wait until 2018 to get pregnant. Those of Colombia, Ecuador and Jamaica recommended shorter delays. Brazil, which has more cases than any other country, will deploy 220,000 troops to help battle the epidemic. See here and here.  Venezuela’s National Assembly rejected a request by the president, Nicolás Maduro, for emergency powers to deal with an economic crisis caused by a combination of low oil prices and the government’s populist policies. The opposition-controlled legislature said that the government already has enough powers to deal with the crisis. The IMF forecast that the economy will shrink by 8% this year and that the inflation rate will be 720%. The United States further eased restrictions on trade to Cuba. The new rules allow American banks to finance exports of all products except farm goods. Sales of products to government agencies will be permitted on a case-by-case basis if they benefit ordinary Cubans. Harvest doom The impact of a drought across large parts of southern Africa became clearer when South Africa forecast a 25% fall in the harvest of maize, its staple crop. Zimbabwe is likely to be particularly hard hit after poor crops in 2015. The 2016 harvest is expected to be even smaller and 16% of its population already gets food aid. A panel of experts at the UN recommended that sanctions should be imposed on the leaders in both sides of South Sudan’s bloody civil war, now in its third year. Talks aimed at bringing an end to five years of civil war in Syria failed to get under way as planned in Geneva because of arguments about which factions should be invited and whether a ceasefire should precede negotiation. It was hoped that they might start on January 29th. See article.  Iran’s president, Hassan Rohani, visited Rome and Paris hoping to drum up investment in his country, newly liberated from nuclear-related sanctions. In Rome, nude statues were covered up to spare Mr Rohani’s blushes. Migration watchers Greece was criticised by the European Commission for “seriously neglecting” its obligations during the migration crisis as a member of the Schengen passport-free area. As a result the commission may advise other EU member states to reintroduce temporary migration controls at their frontiers. Austria and Hungary decided to pre-empt this by tightening their borders. The Danish government approved a bill which allows policemen to seize valuables worth more than DKr10,000 ($1,460) from refugees, in order to pay for food and accommodation. The measure, which was criticised by human-rights groups, is similar to ones already in place in the Netherlands, Switzerland and in the state of Bavaria in Germany. In Chisinau, the capital of Moldova, the poorest country in Europe, 20,000 protesters took to the streets to demand the resignation of Pavel Filip, the prime minister. The protests brought together both pro-European and pro-Russian citizens, with both camps complaining of inequality and corruption in the country. See article.  Generation no-change The Communist Party in Vietnam chose not to endorse the hopes of the colourful reformist prime minister, Nguyen Tan Dung, to accede to the post of party chief. Instead, that position remained with the grey incumbent, Nguyen Phu Trong, whose backers ended Mr Dung’s political career. Meanwhile, the Communist Party in next-door Laos replaced a 79-year-old party head with a 78-year-old. Vietnam’s party wants to steer a delicate course between America and China, while that in Laos needs to balance its two biggest neighbours, China and Vietnam. Bold reform will have to wait. See article.  Akira Amari resigned as Japan’s economy minister, after it was claimed his constituency office had not reported cash it received from a building company seeking favours. He said he had been so busy negotiating Japan’s membership of the Trans Pacific Partnership trade deal that he failed to spot wrongdoing by his aide. Mr Amari is a key architect of Shinzo Abe’s reform programme; his departure is a setback for Abenomics. In Malaysia the attorney-general found that no laws had been broken when hundreds of millions of dollars were transferred into bank accounts belonging to the prime minister, Najib Razak, supposedly by members of the Saudi royal family. His decision was met with disbelief. China deported a Swedish civil-rights activist after detaining him amid a sweeping crackdown on dissent. After his arrest, the activist, Peter Dahlin, was shown on Chinese television making a “voluntary” confession to having broken the law by helping unlicensed Chinese lawyers. See article.  During a visit to Beijing (which followed ones to the capitals of Laos and Vietnam), America’s secretary of state, John Kerry, and his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi, agreed on the need for a new UN resolution on North Korea’s nuclear programme following its test of a nuclear device. But China has not said whether this should include new sanctions, as America wants. Mr Wang warned that a resolution should not provoke tensions. He’s got the money Rumours swirled that Michael Bloomberg might enter the race for the American presidency as an independent. He is apparently worried by Donald Trump’s dominance in the Republican race, and also by the rise of Bernie Sanders in the Democratic one. A “Draft Bloomberg” movement tried in 2008 and 2012 to get Mr Bloomberg to run. Ammon Bundy, a car-fleet manager and anti-government protester who led the armed occupation of a federal wildlife reserve in Oregon, was arrested with four other members of his “militia” 50 miles from the reserve. One of his supporters was shot and killed during the arrest. Mr Bundy said he was following “divine” instructions. His antics have doubtless made it less likely that his complaints about federal over-regulation will be heeded.The World Bank reduced its forecast for the average price of a barrel of oil this year to $37, from the $51 it had projected just last October. In all, price forecasts for 37 of the 46 commodities that the bank monitors were revised lower. The Federal Reserve cited concerns about the world economy at its latest meeting, which suggests it is hesitant about raising interest rates again at its March meeting. The Chinese new fear China’s stockmarkets had another turbulent week, with the Shanghai Composite index falling by 6.4% over one day to its lowest point in more than a year. The central bank injected $67 billion into the financial system to boost liquidity. It also continued to prop up the yuan, which is under pressure partly because of the large amount of capital that is flowing out of the country. Meanwhile, the government decided to reduce capacity in steelmaking, which could result in 400,000 job losses. Italy, which has one of the highest rates of non-performing loans in Europe, struck a deal with the European Commission to help its banks sell off their bad debt. The government will provide guarantees to investors who buy the loans. The agreement comes after a dramatic fall in the share prices of Italian banks in recent weeks. See article.  Andrew Bailey, who oversees financial stability for the Bank of England, was selected by the government to head Britain’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates banks’ behaviour and integrity. His appointment comes after a six-month search for someone to replace Martin Wheatley, who was ousted by the Treasury last summer, in part because of his uncompromising approach towards wrongdoing in the City. Senior bankers generally welcomed Mr Bailey as someone who is tough but fair. A jury in London found five former brokers not guilty of conspiring with Tom Hayes to manipulate LIBOR, the benchmark inter-bank interest rate. Mr Hayes was sentenced to prison last August. Blasts from the past JPMorgan Chase paid $1.4 billion to resolve a claim by Lehman Brothers’ creditors that it unnecessarily siphoned liquidity from the investment bank before it collapsed in September 2008. In a separate settlement the bank agreed to pay $1 billion to Ambac, an insurer, in a dispute over mortgage-backed securities sold by Bear Stearns, a distressed bank that was bought by JPMorgan Chase in a government-backed rescue in March 2008. American International Group said it would return $25 billion to shareholders, a move it hopes will rally shareholder support in the face of calls from activist investors, led by Carl Icahn, to split the insurance company in three. Johnson Controls, a maker of car parts, agreed to merge with Tyco, which builds electronic security-systems. The $20 billion merger will allow Johnson to move its headquarters to Ireland, where Tyco has relocated its base, in order to lower its tax bill. The American Treasury had introduced rules last year to make such “inversion” deals harder after a political backlash. Tyco, which became entangled in a high-profile corporate scandal in 2002, will lose its name after the acquisition. In Britain, where the generous tax arrangements enjoyed by multinationals has created a political kerfuffle, Google reached an agreement with British tax authorities in which it will pay £130m ($186m) in back taxes. This came after a lengthy investigation into whether the internet giant had coughed up all the taxes it should have over the past decade. The inquiry found that Google had not evaded tax, but critics allege that the deal was still too generous to the tech firm. See here and here.  Facebook posted a quarterly profit of over $1 billion for the first time on the back of strong revenues from its ads on mobile devices. DeepMind, a secretive artificial-intelligence company acquired by Google for $400m in 2014, announced that it had hit an AI milestone by developing a computer that can beat the best humans at Go, a complicated board game of East Asian origin. Such a feat had not been expected for years. Sorry, wrong number Apple warned that it expects sharply slower sales of the iPhone, which accounts for two-thirds of its revenues, in the current quarter. It blamed currency fluctuations, uncertainties in the global market and a sluggish China, its biggest market. Sales of iPhones were flat in the last three months of 2015 compared with the same quarter in 2014, and it shifted 25% fewer iPads. Still, its quarterly profit of $18.4 billion was the biggest to date for any listed company. Commenting on the global outlook, Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said the situation is “dramatically different” from a year ago. See article. More KAL's cartoonsTHE muscle-bound rivals have entered the ring. The verbals are at fever pitch. On February 1st Iowans will caucus in the opening round of America’s presidential tussle. Just over a week later, voters will gather in New Hampshire. From there the contest will move on towards Super Tuesday on March 1st, and beyond that to the conventions in July. It is the world’s greatest electoral tournament. It is not going to plan. Across America, political elites and moderate voters are in a state of disbelief. Hillary Clinton, as much part of the establishment as the Washington Monument, is under pressure from Bernie Sanders, a crotchety senator from Vermont who calls himself a democratic socialist. The sensible squad on the right—“Jeb!” Bush, Marco Rubio, John Kasich et al—have been impaled by the gimlet gibes of Ted Cruz and swamped by the sprawling, tumultuous diatribes of Donald Trump. The choice was supposed to be between a Bush and a Clinton—more a coronation than an election. Instead, the race for the world’s most powerful office has been more dramatically upended by outsiders than any presidential campaign in the past half-century. America, what on earth is going on? Bigger and brasher The United States is not the only country where the establishment is on the ropes. Britain’s Labour Party is in thrall to a man well to the left of Mr Sanders. In the first round of France’s recent regional elections, the far-right National Front won the largest vote. Populists are leading the polls in the Netherlands and running the government in Poland and Hungary. In politically correct Sweden, nativists are polling at 30%. Like voters across the West, Americans are angry—often for the same reasons. For years a majority of them have been telling pollsters that the country is heading in the wrong direction. Median wages have stagnated even as incomes at the top have soared. Cultural fears compound economic ones: in 2015 a Pew poll found that white Christians had become a minority in America. And in recent months, fears of terrorism have added a menacing ingredient to the populist brew (see pages 19-21). Though the trends are common, populism in America is especially potent. Europe has grown used to relative decline. As the sole superpower, America has smarted at the rise of China and the spread of jihadism from parts of the Middle East that it had poured blood and treasure into trying to pacify. When Mr Trump promises to “Make America great again” and Mr Cruz vows that the sand of Iraq and Syria will “glow in the dark”, they are harking back to a moment, after the fall of the Soviet Union, when America enjoyed untrammelled power. A second reason is that, in America, outsiders channel popular anger into a political duopoly. In Europe Mr Trump and Mr Sanders would have their own protest parties, which inevitably struggle to win high office. In contrast, America’s two-party system sucked in Mr Sanders, who joined the Democrats last year, and Mr Trump, who rejoined the Republicans in 2009. If they win the primaries, they will control political machines designed to catapult them into the White House. And a third, related, explanation is that elites cannot easily manage America’s raucous democracy. Populist insurgencies are written into the source code of a polity that began as a revolt against a distant, high-handed elite. The electoral college devolves power from the centre. Primaries attract the 20% of eligible voters most fired up by politics. Candidates with money behind them—his own in the case of Mr Trump, someone else’s for Mr Cruz—can sneer at their party’s high command. Hence populists and anti-establishment candidates make frequent appearances in American presidential races. But as the thrilling spectacle runs its course and voters reluctantly compromise with reality, they tend to fade. That usually happens early (Pat Buchanan, a Republican firebrand who promised a “pitchfork rebellion” in 1996, won the New Hampshire primary, but was out of the race by the end of March). On the rare occasion when insurgents win the nomination, they have collapsed at the general election: Barry Goldwater lost 44 of 50 states in 1964. Those who stand as independents (as Ross Perot did in 1992) have also failed—which would not bode well for a self-financing candidate like Michael Bloomberg. For the Democrats, history is likely to be repeated in 2016. Even if he wins Iowa and New Hampshire, it is hard to see Mr Sanders thriving as the race moves to the delegate-heavy South. Mrs Clinton has money, experience and support from black Democrats. National polls put her 15 points ahead. But this time really could be different for Republicans. Goldwater’s surge came late; Mr Trump has mesmerised crowds, and been rewarded in the polls since July. Some Republican grandees who detest Mr Cruz even more than they despise Mr Trump have fallen in behind the billionaire. Perhaps on the day people won’t turn up for either man; perhaps the two of them will throw enough vitriol to destroy each other; perhaps what is left of Mr Bush’s $100m war chest will leave the elite time to mount a counter-attack. As of now, both populists have a chance of taking the fight to the convention and even, barring a backroom establishment deal, of winning the nomination. The 50:50 nation That prospect worries this newspaper. Neither Mr Trump nor Mr Cruz offers coherent economics or wise policy. Neither passes the test of character. Yet, merely by being on the ballot in November either would come close to the presidency. General elections have become 50:50 affairs, determined by a few votes in a handful of states. Mrs Clinton is not a good campaigner; Mr Trump and Mr Cruz are. In so far as he has policies, Mr Trump borrows freely from right and left. He could win votes by tacking brazenly to the centre. In a close race, a terrorist attack or a scandal near polling day could be decisive. Pessimism about America is misplaced. The economy is in better shape than that of any other big, rich country; unemployment is low; so is violent crime. But mainstream Republicans have pilloried Barack Obama with such abandon that they are struggling to answer Mr Trump and Mr Cruz. If anyone should regret the spectacle about to unfold, it is they.“GIVE me lucky generals,” Napoleon is supposed to have said, preferring them to talented ones. Muhammadu Buhari, a former general, has not had much luck when it comes to the oil price. Between 1983 and 1985 he was Nigeria’s military ruler. Just before he took over, oil prices began a lengthy collapse; the country’s export earnings fell by more than half. The economy went into a deep recession and Mr Buhari, unable to cope, was overthrown in a coup.   Now he is president again. (He won a fair election last year against a woeful opponent; The Economist endorsed him.) And once again, oil prices have slumped, from $64 a barrel on the day he was sworn in to $32 eight months later. Growth probably fell by half in 2015, from 6.3% to little more than 3% (see article). Oil accounts for 70% of the government’s revenues and 95% of export earnings. The government deficit will widen this year to about 3.5% of GDP. The currency, the naira, is under pressure. The central bank insists on an exchange rate of 197-199 naira to the dollar. On the black market, dollars sell for 300 naira or more. Instead of letting the naira depreciate to reflect the country’s loss of purchasing power, Mr Buhari’s government is trying to keep it aloft. The central bank has restricted the supply of dollars and banned the import of a long list of goods, from shovels and rice to toothpicks. It hopes that this will maintain reserves and stimulate domestic production. When the currency is devalued, all imports become more expensive. But under Mr Buhari’s system the restrictions on imports are by government fiat. Factory bosses complain they cannot import raw materials such as chemicals and fret that, if this continues, they may have to shut down. Many have turned to the black market to obtain dollars, and are doubtless smuggling in some of the goods that have been banned. In charts: Explore Nigeria’s economy and politics Nigerians have heard this tune before. Indeed, Mr Buhari tried something similar the last time he was president. Then, as now, he resisted what he called the “bitter pill” of devaluation. When, as a result, foreign currency ran short, he rationed it and slashed imports by more than half. When Nigerians turned to the black market he sealed the country’s borders. When unemployment surged he expelled 700,000 migrants. Barking orders at markets did not work then, and it will not work now. Mr Buhari is right that devaluation will lead to inflation—as it has in other commodity exporters. But Nigeria’s policy of limiting imports and creating scarcity will be even more inflationary. A weaker currency would spur domestic production more than import bans can and, in the long run, hurt consumers less. The country needs foreign capital to finance its deficits but, under today’s policies, it will struggle to get any. Foreign investors assume that any Nigerian asset they buy in naira now will cost less later, after the currency has devalued. So they wait. Those who fail to learn from history... Mr Buhari’s tenure has in some ways been impressive. He has restored a semblance of security to swathes of northern Nigeria that were overrun by schoolgirl-abducting jihadists. He has won some early battles against corruption. Some of his economic policies are sound, too. He has indicated that he will stop subsidising fuel and selling it at below-market prices. This is brave, since the subsidies are popular, even though they have been a disaster (the cheap fuel was often sold abroad and petrol stations frequently ran dry). If Mr Buhari can find the courage to let fuel cost what the market says it should, why not the currency, too? You can forgive the general for being unlucky; but not for failing to learn from past mistakes.YOUNGSTERS have long crossed borders in search of an education. More than 2,000 years ago the Roman poet Horace went to Athens to join Plato’s Academy. Oxford University admitted its first known international student, Emo of Friesland, in 1190. Today more than 4.5m students are enrolled in colleges and universities outside their own countries (see article). Their fees subsidise local students. Their ideas broaden and enliven classroom debate. Most go home with happy memories and valuable contacts, making them more likely in later life to do business with the country where they studied. Those who stay on use what they have learned to make themselves and their hosts wealthier, by finding work as doctors, engineers or in some other skilled career. Immigration policy is hard: Europe is tying itself in knots over how many Syrian refugees to admit. But the question of whether to welcome foreign students ought to be much easier. They more than pay their way. They add to the host country’s collective brainpower. And they are easy to assimilate. Indeed, for ageing rich countries seeking to import young workers to plug skills gaps and prop up wobbly pension systems, they are ideal. A foreign graduate from a local university is likely to be well-qualified, fluent in the local lingo and at ease with local customs. Countries should be vying to attract such people. Places with the good fortune to speak English have a gigantic head start. Australia is the leader: a quarter of its tertiary students come from abroad, a bigger share than in any other country. Education is now its biggest export, after natural resources. For a while the influx of brainy foreigners was slowed by an overvalued currency and the reputational damage from the collapse of some badly run private colleges. But recently the Australian dollar has weakened, degree mills have been shut down, visa rules have been relaxed—and foreign students have flooded back. Last year their numbers rose by 10%. Canada, until recently an also-ran, now emulates Oz. In 2014 it set a goal of almost doubling the number of foreign students by 2022. It has streamlined visa applications and given international students the right to stay and work for up to three years after graduating. Those who want to make Canada their home have a good chance of being granted permanent residence. Its share of the market for footloose students is growing, and numbers have more than doubled in a decade. America, by contrast, is horribly complacent. In absolute terms, it attracts the most foreign students, thanks to its size, its outstanding universities and the lure of Silicon Valley and other brainworking hotspots. But it punches far below its weight: only 5% of the students on its campuses are foreign. Its visa rules are needlessly strict and stress keeping out terrorists rather than wooing talent. It is hard for students to work, either part-time while studying or for a year or two after graduation. The government wants to extend a scheme that allows those with science and technology qualifications to stay for up to 29 months after graduating. But unions oppose it, claiming that foreign students undercut their members’ wages. One that represents high-tech workers in Washington state has filed a court challenge, seeking to have the scheme axed. The self-harming state Britain is even more reckless. It, too, has the huge advantages of famous universities and the English language. But its government has pledged to reduce net immigration to 100,000 people a year, and to this end it is squeezing students. Applying for a student visa has grown slower and costlier. Working part-time to pay fees is harder. And foreign students no longer have the right to stay and work for two years after graduation. Britain’s universities are losing market share: their foreign enrolments are flat even as their main rivals’ are growing strongly. Sajid Javid, Britain’s business secretary, says the aim is to “break the link” between studying and immigration. This is precisely the wrong approach. For a country that wants to recruit talented, productive immigrants, it is hard to think of a better sifting process than a university education. Welcoming foreign students is a policy that costs less than nothing in the short term and brings huge rewards in the long term. Hence the bafflement of James Dyson, a billionaire inventor, who summed up Britain’s policy thus: “Train ’em up. Kick ’em out. It’s a bit shortsighted, isn’t it?”
