IT WAS meant to win plaudits for clawing more money out of cunning, tax-shy multinationals. Instead, a deal between Google and the British government, in which the tech giant will pay £130m ($185m) in back taxes covering a ten-year period, has attracted only opprobrium. Critics at home and abroad argue that Google has got off lightly. On the European mainland, for example, suspected corporate tax-dodgers face raids and whopping demands: France wants €500m ($550m) or more from Google. Apple could be on the hook for $8 billion if the European Commission, which is investigating its Irish operations, concludes that it got a cushy deal from the Emerald Isle. Britain may well have been too generous to Google. But the bigger problem with the deal is what it says about international efforts to crack down on corporate-tax avoidance. Nineteen for me, one for you Corporate taxes are a poor way to raise revenue. Since the burden is ultimately borne by people, whether investors, workers or consumers, it would, in theory, be more efficient to tax them directly. But abolishing corporate levies would create its own problems (see article). In poor countries with large informal sectors, big companies are a rare source of reliable tax revenue. In rich countries, wealthy people would doubtless turn themselves into companies to avoid income taxes. For policymakers, therefore, the priority is to make corporate taxes less distorting and less easy to avoid. The rules governing the taxation of multinationals are a threadbare patchwork of national laws and bilateral treaties, dating back almost a century and designed for an age of manufacturing, not multimedia. They grow ever more gameable with the spread of e-commerce and companies’ increasing reliance on intangible intellectual property (IP). Technology and drug firms, for instance, routinely move their IP to subsidiaries in tax havens, which can then manipulate the fees they charge other parts of the group for access to it in order to suck their profits into the lower-tax country. These manoeuvres may be legal, but their goal is tax avoidance, often in a way that flouts the spirit of the law. In an era of austerity, that offends the public mood, which is why governments around the world are being pressed to implement dozens of anti-avoidance measures proposed last year by the OECD, a club of mainly rich countries. Many of these measures make sense. They seek to tie tax more closely to economic activity and also to limit some arcane but hugely profitable tricks, such as using internal loans to claim tax deductions. Progress at the OECD is spurring action: indeed, as part of its deal with British tax authorities, Google has agreed to pay tax in future on a chunk of its sales to British advertisers. The problem is that the OECD approach maintains a damaging fiction which is ingrained in the current system: that a multinational can be seen as a cluster of separate companies to be treated as if they are trading with each other at arm’s length. The “transfer pricing” rules that police this system are complex and flawed. Keeping this approach, but toughening up the policing, means creating yet more rules—and loopholes. Better to think of each firm as a single entity. Then countries could either agree to share the tax on companies’ worldwide profits according to a formula that takes account of their sales, employees, assets and so on; or allow the entire worldwide profits to be taxed by the home country, with a tax-credit mechanism for countries where the work actually goes on or revenue is earned—but, crucially, not brass-plate jurisdictions—in order to avoid double taxation. In both cases, the incentives and opportunities to move profits into tax havens would be greatly reduced. Instead of this unitary approach, however, the patchwork persists, and with it the likelihood of unco-ordinated national tax policies. This is the context in which Google and the British government forged their deal. The bill presented to the company looks from the outside like a sweetheart deal, but it is impossible to be sure because you cannot know how it was calculated. This lack of transparency will do nothing to increase public confidence that tax avoidance is being curbed. Nor, in the long run, will the Google approach help multinationals. If a lot of countries go their own way, at their own pace, the result could be tax chaos, a bloody battle over countries’ taxing rights in which overlapping claims cause the pendulum to swing back from under- to over-taxation. Tax diplomacy, like politics, is the art of the possible. But failing to push harder for a radical overhaul, at a time when the planets were aligned for change, looks like a costly mistake.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Cultural dissonance Ayaan Hirsi Ali has long and rightly complained of the West’s dual standards in the way it regards the Muslim mistreatment of women. By highlighting the issue as one affecting “European women”, you are reinforcing that hypocrisy (“Migrant men and European women”, January 16th). The most basic research into what happens inside Muslim communities—within Europe as well as outside—reveals a pattern of discrimination, physical and sexual abuse, and general misogyny that Western women (and hopefully men) would find intolerable. The Economist appears to have an idée fixe that immigration is a universal good, regardless of origin and consequences and holds pious hopes that work, time and education will promote integrated communities. Unfortunately, evidence is that even some second- and third-generation immigrants have not integrated successfully: the persistence of FGM; “honour-killing” and forced marriages; the support of terrorism at home and overseas; electoral fraud and malpractice in strongly immigrant areas; all suggest a significant, systemic failure. Kipling’s line that “East is East, and West is West and never the twain shall meet” may well be a good starting point for policy. Require all citizens—prospective, newly arrived or settled—to embrace the values of a modern, liberal democracy and for those who won’t, show them the door. SIMON DIGGINS You ask where the migrants from the Middle East and Africa should go if they can’t come to Europe. Surely they should be settled somewhere near their countries so that they can easily return home again one day? Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan have already taken in 4m migrants, four times more than Europe. If there was trouble in my country, I would not want to go far away and settle among people with an utterly different culture. Most of the 800,000 Kosovars who fled their country during the war with Serbia went home when the war was over. The Palestinians are still near their country, waiting to go home. I admire their steadfastness and hope that one day the Israelis will abandon Zionism like the South Africans abandoned apartheid, and allow the Palestinians to return home. MIKAEL GRUT Family values The real reason that local, family-owned stores in India are thriving in the face of modern retail chains is because families do not reckon the opportunity cost of the property they occupy (“Local Heroes”, January 16th). They either own the real estate or are paying a decades old, peppercorn rent protected by rent laws. As the chairman of the board of directors of a modern retail chain, I asked many such family patriarchs if they had considered this. The majority felt they owed it to their forebears from whom they had inherited the store to keep it going. Additionally, if it were to shut, they would lose their standing in their community. So until their progeny undergo a course in economics, you will continue to see the kiranas beat up the newfangled, tablet-wielding entrepreneurs. NAWSHIR MIRZA The case for aid * Your article on foreign aid highlights an important risk to the effectiveness of British aid which has received too little attention (“Strings Attached”, January 9th). When Tony Abbott abolished AusAID in 2013 and integrated its functions into those of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, it made aid less effective and project selection and evaluation became influenced by political motives. The Labour Party Bagehot is right to point out that the 230 Labour MPs in the House of Commons represent a much bigger and wider constituency than Jeremy Corbyn’s self-selected non-parliamentary supporters, who are accountable to no one but themselves (January 16th). But he is wrong to suggest that the moderate MPs should form a new “social democratic party”. They have absolutely no need to: all they need do is declare that the leadership of the Labour Party is entirely in the gift of members of the parliamentary party. They should then proceed to elect their own leader and return Mr Corbyn to the backbenches where he performed with such notable lack of distinction for more than 30 years. This assertion of their undoubted rights as elected lawmakers will no doubt send Mr Corbyn’s ragbag of political nutters even madder than they already are. It will also set off all sorts of show-trials, expulsions and deselections. In that event, the parliamentary Labour Party should simply endorse its own candidates for all constituencies. But in no circumstances should it relinquish its claim to be the real Labour Party which many millions of British voters support. MICHAEL EGAN In the name of science * This new preference for “scientific” exploration (“A new age of discovery”, January 2nd) isn’t so new. It brings to mind George Palmer Putnam, the American publisher, writer, and sometime-explorer who famously married Amelia Earhart in 1931. Catalonian politics When the new president of Catalonia, Carles Puigdemont, quoted a Catalan journalist, Carles Rahola, who was executed under Francisco Franco’s dictatorship saying “the invaders will be expelled from Catalonia”, he was not referring to the Spanish government, as you incorrectly reported (“Rebel, Rebel”, January 16th), but to the German and Italian fascist army that air-bombed Catalan cities during the Spanish civil war. Mr Puigdemont explained when he was sworn in before the Catalan parliament on January 10th how his use of the quote, at a memorial service in 2013, had been distorted and he was in fact using the reference to illustrate that the clutch of fascism doesn’t loom over Catalan lives any more. JOSEP SUÁREZ The big bank theory * The theory that big bank fees are high due to competition being “phoney” would be more convincing if not for the high number of low-fee competitors of the big banks (“Blunt Elbows”, January 9th). For instance, the vast majority of Americans are eligible to join member-owned credit unions, which generally have much lower fees. That the big banks are still huge despite this suggests that a more plausible explanation is that banking relationships are quite “sticky” and that the perceived hassle of switching to a low-fee competitor outweighs the benefits in many consumers’ minds. Indeed, extensive customer research in banking has indicated as such. Another level I found your conclusion on the future of European clubbing disheartening (“Less than ecstatic”, January 9th). The most demoralising part comes from the overwhelming statistical data illustrating a decline in the number of European venues. Nightlife is fundamental to the eclectic mixture of urban identity. It offers release, an ability to evade the realities of everyday existence. The case for the possibility of festivals overtaking clubbing is compelling. The rise in the number of festival-goers each summer arguably doesn’t have an inversely proportional effect on the allure of dark, grungy club scenes. No matter how financially compelling the economies of scale of big festivals are, there are DJs intent on returning to and retaining the urban scenes from which they came. This gives one hope. Councils may be able to close and regulate the buildings themselves, but the 24-hour party people are here to stay. JOSEPH MILLARD Ageing gracefully As one of the octogenarians who “fiddles with my hearing aid and takes afternoon naps” (“Three wise men”, January 9th), I wonder what the age limit is in order to avoid being ridiculed by your young reporters? Wasn’t it Tom Lehrer who wrote the song: “Make-fun-of-the-handicapped-week”? HANS ROTHENBORG * Letters appear online onlyNO FIRM in the world matches the economic imprint of Walmart. The retailer, based in Arkansas and known across America for its vast “supercentres” and low prices, is the world’s largest company by revenue. Its 2.2m worldwide workforce is about the same size as China’s army, excluding reservists. Sam Walton built his empire with a relentless focus on costs: “Control your expenses better than your competition. This is where you can always find the competitive advantage,” he said. Yet change is afoot at “Wally world”. In April 2015 Walmart abruptly raised the wages of its lowest-paid staff: all now earn at least $9 an hour. On February 1st that will rise to $10 an hour for trained-up workers—fully one-third higher than the federal minimum wage. The change is curious, because in the past Walmart has paid notoriously little. In 2014 the average hourly wage of an American cashier was $9.93. According to data from Glassdoor, a jobs website, Walmart’s cashiers then took home $8.62. Retail salesmen made $12.38 nationwide; at Walmart, they earned only $8.53. Walmart wages were low, but not pitifully so; for both cashiers and salesmen, average pay at Walmart was close to the 25th percentile nationwide. What has made Walmart look mean is the firm’s enormous size. It employs 1.4m of America’s 16m retail workers. Almost 4.5m others toil in small shops with fewer than 100 employees. Wages there are expected to be low. But, typically, big firms pay more. One study from 2014 found that high-school graduates earn 15% more at retailers with more than 1,000 workers, compared with those who have fewer than ten staff. Not so at Walmart, which paid corner store wages while making megachain profits. This—combined with a fierce resistance to unions—made the firm a target for campaigners. One common accusation against Walmart—whose shareholders made a 17% return in the year to January 2015—is that its low wages mean it benefits from hidden government subsidies. Many low-wage workers rely on government programmes to top up their low wages, and on Medicaid for health insurance. Without this support—the argument goes—firms relying on cheap labour would collapse. In May 2013 congressional Democrats produced a report which furiously alleged that a typical Walmart supercentre in Wisconsin, employing 300, costs the taxpayer $900,000 a year in welfare payments to its staff. That was hyperbole; it assumes some other employer would be willing to hire Walmart’s workers at higher wages. Looks matter, though, and the benefit of today’s pay rises is partly cosmetic. Other factors are in play, too. “In some ways it demonstrated leadership, in other ways it [was] a market reaction,” Doug McMillon, Walmart’s boss, told investors in October 2015. Recently wage growth has been higher for junior retail staff than for other workers, suggesting that competition for staff may be hotting up (see chart). Walmart’s first pay rise, to $9 an hour, was emulated by Target and TJX, which owns the retailers T.J. Maxx, Marshalls and HomeGoods. The pay rise is also a strategic investment. Walmart wants to boost its productivity and give its workers more freedom to innovate, as it seeks to make its stores more pleasant and, perhaps, appealing to more affluent customers. That requires motivated staff. It is too soon to judge conclusively whether the rise to $9 an hour has worked, although Walmart says that the number of stores rated as sufficiently “clean, fast, friendly” by customers has increased from 16% in February 2015 to over 70% today. That will please advocates for higher minimum wages, who argue that better-paid workers are more productive. Economists call this the “efficiency wage” hypothesis. Opponents of higher minimum wages note that pay rises cannot be free. Some combination of Walmart’s customers, shareholders, suppliers and other employees must be paying for the increase. Walmart’s customers are unlikely to feel the pinch soon; low prices are a cornerstone of the brand. But the firm now says that higher wages come before price cuts: “You clean up your house before you invite people over,” argues Mr McMillon. Wage rises are certainly denting profits. Walmart’s share price barely moved when they were first announced in February last year, suggesting that investors thought them immaterial at first. But in October the firm warned that it expected profits to fall by 6-12% in 2017, with higher wages responsible for three-quarters of the shortfall. Following that announcement, the share price fell by 10%—its biggest one-day drop since 1988. A transfer from capital to labour, though, is precisely what campaigners want to achieve. A more potent criticism of higher wages is that they cause job losses. And on January 15th Walmart announced that it would close 154 stores in America, with the possible loss of 10,000 jobs. The firm says that wage costs are not to blame. The closures mostly reflect Walmart’s wholesale abandonment of its small “Walmart Express” stores. Elsewhere, Walmart hired 8,000 new department managers at the same time as raising pay. Adding middle-management is hardly the hallmark of a firm set on trimming its labour force (though some say hours have been cut instead). Not every firm would find it easy to copy Walmart. Wages only cost retailers 9.5% of their revenues. In the food-and-drink industry—a prime target of the “Fight for $15” campaign to raise the minimum wage—wages amount to 31% of revenues (see chart). A much higher fraction of workers in the food, drink and hotel industries make the minimum wage, so any rise would have a greater effect on those industries. Even within retailing, there are nearly 600,000 small firms with fewer than 20 workers. In Mississippi, half of all cashiers make less than $8.79 an hour; a big increase there would have unpredictable effects. Walmart has had some difficulty with the move. Long-serving staff who already earn more than $10 are miffed at missing out on a bumper rise. A section of Reddit, an online message board, for Walmart employees is filled with complaints. “I’m mad at the company...for invalidating 15 years of my hard work,” writes one. Incrementally higher wages will not much reduce the welfare bill for Walmart’s workers; campaigners will go on claiming that low-wage firms are subsidised. Whether they are right depends on who bears ultimate responsibility for caring for the poor and sick. Campaigners think it is employers, which implies that government-funded health care in Britain or Canada is primarily a subsidy for businesses. And employers, unlike governments, can disappear in response to regulation. It is usually more efficient to let market outcomes play out and leave transfers to the government. Still, minimum wages, set carefully, are beneficial—perhaps even for the firms who pay them. Another piece of Sam Walton’s advice: “High expectations are the key to everything.”“THESE children have fewer rights than prison inmates,” says Tom Morrison, a Republican state representative in Illinois. Mr Morrison is talking about girls at a high school in his constituency, Palatinate, who share a locker-room with a transgender girl. Late last year the Department of Education ruled that the school had violated anti-discrimination laws by banning a pupil, who was born male but identifies as a girl, from the girls’ locker room. Male prison inmates have successfully argued in court that letting female guards supervise them when they are taking a shower violates their privacy, reasons Mr Morrison, so they now have more rights than Illinois schoolchildren.   Schools in Illinois, as in many other states, have a patchwork of rules governing where transgender people can pee. Some allow them to use the locker and restrooms (or loos to Brits) of their choice; others make them use designated facilities. This is confusing for parents and children, says Mr Morrison, which is why he introduced a bill in the legislature on January 20th that would require all pupils at high schools in Illinois to use loos and changing rooms that correspond to the gender on their birth certificate. The bill would make it optional for schools to provide separate facilities for transgender pupils. The debate in Illinois is part of a national discussion that pits those who think of gender as something a person is born with against those who argue that being male or female can be a choice. Progressives have taken the “choice” side of the argument—in April 2015 the White House added a gender-neutral toilet—prompting conservatives to take the opposing one. In South Dakota a bill similar to Mr Morrison’s is moving forward in the legislature. Last autumn voters in Houston, Texas, rejected a broad anti-discrimination ordinance because its opponents had depicted it as a “bathroom ordinance” that would enable potentially predatory men and even registered sex offenders to enter women’s loos. In Indiana Jim Tomes, a Republican state senator, introduced a bill last December which would make the use of a facility that does not correspond with a person’s birth certificate a misdemeanour, punishable with up to one year in jail and a fine of $5,000. A spokesman for Mr Tomes says the bill will not be submitted to a vote in the legislature, but that does not mean that “similar language in a different bill couldn’t be considered”. Given all the troubles faced by transgender people, who make up just 0.1% of the population according to the least unreliable estimate, why the focus on loos? According to Human Right Campaign, a gay lobby group, in the first ten months of 2015 at least 21 transgender people—nearly all of them black or Hispanic women—were killed, more than in any other year recorded by activists. Unemployment among transgender people is double the national rate and as much as four times that of the general population for non-whites. Fully 90% of those who have a job say they have experienced harassment at work. The issue is more pressing than it seems, says Kim Hunt of the AIDS Foundation of Chicago. Some transgender people do not go to the loo all day because they have been harassed, assaulted or kicked out of one. This can result in dehydration, urinary-tract infections and kidney problems. A survey by the Williams Institute, a think-tank, found that 68% of those questioned had been subjected to slurs while using a bathroom. This month San Francisco joined Washington, New York, Philadelphia, Austin, Seattle and Santa Fe in requiring all businesses and city buildings to designate single-stall loos as all-gender. The bigger battle, though, is over multi-stall restrooms and locker rooms, especially in schools. Title IX , an amendment tacked on to the Higher Education Act in 1972, says that “no person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education programme or activity receiving federal financial assistance”. The Obama administration has interpreted this as meaning that transgender pupils must be allowed to use facilities for the gender with which they identify. In October it filed a legal brief in a federal appeals court backing the legal challenge of Gavin Grimm, a transgender boy, to the policy of his school in rural Virginia which bans him from using the boys’ toilets. On January 27th the judges will hear oral arguments in GG v. Gloucester County School Board. It is the first time a federal court will have to weigh up the question. Correction: The original version of this article stated that a bill would require schools to provide separate facilities for transgender pupils; the bill would in fact make this optional.   Safe and warm in LA STILLNESS pervades the South Los Angeles Wetland Park. A turtle floats by, undisturbed by lunch hour at the high school opposite. Tall bulrushes bend around the pool at the centre of the nine-acre (3.6 hectare) site. The water comes from the city’s storm drains, cleaned of oil and rubbish. Completed in 2012 for $26m, the park captures urban run-off after wet weather—vital in a state suffering from severe drought. Water from rain in recent weeks, brought largely by El Niño, the world’s largest climatic phenomenon, now flows through the park’s fountains. More will come. El Niño sees warm water, collected over several years in the western tropical Pacific, slosh back eastwards after the weakening, or reversal, of winds that blew it there. This affects atmospheric cycles, and therefore weather patterns, around the world. The current Niño is one of the strongest on record; its rivals in 1982-83 and 1997-98 ushered in two of California’s wettest years after storms between January and March. In the first week of this year more than 100mm of rain fell near Lake Tahoe; snow turned the Golden State’s peaks white. At Mount Waterman ski slopes have opened for the first time since 2011. The Los Angeles fire department has prepared more than 200,000 sandbags; churches and shelters have flung open their doors to the 18,000 or so living on the city’s streets. Across the state, the number of people with flood insurance has jumped by 12% in recent months, according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Such foresight makes sense. El Niño caused more than $500m-worth of damage 18 years ago. Rainfall on dry, cracked ground is likely to run across it, not soak in, causing flooding and mudslides. And the state is truly parched: California has missed more than a year’s worth of precipitation. Three months ago, about 46% of the state was suffering “exceptional” dryness according to US drought monitor, a research tool; now just less than 43% of it is. Snow business Yet even if California endures ark-worthy deluges, the drought will probably persist anyway, says Noah Diffenbaugh, a professor of earth-system science at Stanford University. Studies published in recent years agree that for the past three winters a region of high atmospheric pressure off the coast has diverted seasonal storms to the north. Underground aquifers, raided mercilessly to compensate, will not recover quickly. They may have provided as much as 65% of the water used in the state in 2014—up from 40% during average years—according to the California Water Foundation, an environmental group. Snow, as well as rain, is needed to quench the state’s thirst; it supplies about a third of the water needed by cities and farms. It falls in the Sierra Nevada in the winter; meltwater then flows to reservoirs in the spring, and thence to users. Randall Osterhuber runs a 70-year-old weather station near Lake Tahoe for the University of California, Berkeley. This year the snow is slightly more abundant than usual, while last winter brought “the least amount of snow we’ve ever measured, by a wide margin”, he says. Yet 2011 was among the whitest years for the station. Mr Osterhuber frets about the “ever-increasing variation” in the state’s weather. Since the 1980s average temperatures in California have been higher than they were in the 50 years before; 2014 and 2015 were among the hottest on record. A study published last year in Geophysical Research Letters claims that man-made warming can explain 8-27% of the anomalous drought conditions between 2012 and 2014. The rest is natural variability in precipitation levels in a drought-prone state. Jerry Brown, California’s governor, told city-dwellers to cut water consumption by a quarter last April; in the second half of 2015 it dropped by just over 26%. Once-lush lawns now crunch underfoot; fields that formerly grew alfalfa, a thirsty crop, now lie fallow in the Central Valley. Felicia Marcus, head of California’s State Water Resources Control Board, says conservation saves money and buys time; better water-use monitoring would help still more, as could more projects to collect run-off. For any Niño rains, “we need every ounce of storage we can get,” she says. To prosper, the state’s primates will have to start living more like south LA’s turtles.AT THE end of the highway, 200 miles from Anchorage, sits a small fishing and tourism town where, in early January, thousands of dead common murres, or guillemots, were washed ashore. These penguin-like seabirds littered the tidal wracks so densely that beach walkers had to be careful where they stepped. And beyond Homer, tens—probably hundreds—of thousands of these birds have drifted in dead along Alaska’s vast coastline or have been found far inland half-dead in the snow. Alaska is home to about 3m common murres, which spend most of their lives on the open ocean but come to shore to nest in dense colonies on coastal cliffs. The female lays a pear-shaped egg so pointed at one end that it will roll in a circle, helping to keep the egg from plummeting off the bird’s narrow nest. Murres are renowned divers, using their wings to “fly” down 600 feet (183 metres) under water in search of a meal. Around Homer, they are a daily sight all summer. They nest in a raucous crowd on a rocky island a few miles offshore, which becomes a magnet for tour boats during the warm months. But last summer they failed to raise chicks. And they have been dying in large numbers along the Pacific coast, from California to Alaska. The birds appear to have starved. The likely cause is warmer ocean waters. Temperatures in the North Pacific have been three to seven degrees Fahrenheit higher than average for the last two years. The “warm blob”, as it has been called, is rattling the marine food chain from bottom to top. “Whole systems are out of whack,” says Heather Renner of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge, a federal agency which manages a collection of far-flung islands and remote coastline in Alaska which, if laid over a map of the continental United States, would stretch right across it. The refuge contains nesting colonies for most of the state’s murres, which are a sizeable chunk of the worldwide population. In a town that grew up as a collection of homesteads, where people still build their own houses, split wood, tend gardens and put up a winter’s-worth of fish and game, local knowledge is valuable currency. But know-how is not enough to explain what is happening to these birds. “I think we’re going to start seeing more events like this that we don’t have the right data to explain,” says Ms Renner. Scientists are starting to understand certain links between climate change, ocean warming and their impact on polar regions. These areas warm at twice the rate of the rest of the world on average; what’s happening now may hint at what more ocean warming would bring. Old-timers in Homer have never experienced anything like this. And they are perplexed by a host of other freakish phenomena: humpback whales lingering in local waters months after they typically head south for the winter, toxic algae populations surging, sea otters dying in large numbers, and out-of-this-world king-salmon-fishing. “Global weirding,” the complex impacts of climate change, can be a mixed bag. While the sea has taken back many of the dead birds, a robust population of bald eagles has carried other carcasses off the beach, scattering bits and pieces into back yards and parking lots. Ms Renner expects murres to continue to wash ashore for the rest of the winter. They will serve as a constant reminder, as the days slowly lengthen into spring, of mysteries still to be solved.IN APRIL 2014, three men were shot when a drug deal turned sour on a tree-lined residential street in Baltimore. The city’s police department quickly linked the crime to Kerron Andrews, a dreadlocked 22-year-old, but could not find him at his registered address. Agents used phone records to determine roughly where he was, but instead of going door-to-door until they found him, they opted for something far more efficient: a Hailstorm. Using this, they tracked Mr Andrews directly to an acquaintance’s sofa, between the cushions of which he had stuffed the gun used in the shooting. The Hailstorm is a more advanced version of the StingRay, a surveillance device that operates by mimicking a cellular tower, forcing all nearby mobile phones to reveal their unique identifying codes, known as IMSI numbers. By crosschecking the IMSI numbers of suspects’ phones with those collected by “cell-site simulators” such as Hailstorm and StingRay, police officers can pinpoint people with astonishing precision. The tools have been used to trail suspects to specific rooms in apartment blocks and to find them on moving buses on busy city streets. Developed at first for military and intelligence services, cell-site simulators are now furtively used by federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) as well as by local police forces across the land. Law-enforcement agencies rarely seek explicit court approval to employ cell-site simulators, and rarely admit to using them after the fact. As a condition for purchasing them, state and local police forces must sign strict non-disclosure agreements with the FBI, since the more information is made public about cell-site simulators, the more “adversaries” will adapt to them. The agreements prohibit police from disclosing any information about the technology, even to judges in the form of warrant requests; prosecutors must drop cases if they are pressured to reveal details about them. In one case in Baltimore, a judge threatened to hold a detective in contempt after he refused to testify about the use of StingRay in locating an armed-robbery suspect. Instead of instructing the detective to answer, the prosecution dropped the evidence. In another armed-robbery trial in Tallahassee, prosecutors offered the defendants a generous plea deal rather than demonstrate how the device worked in open court. Given this secrecy, it is impossible to identify all the agencies using cell-site simulators. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) has counted 58 agencies that possess the devices, across 23 states and the District of Columbia, but thinks the true number may be much higher. The technology has been used not only to trace murderers and armed robbers, but also to nab car thieves, phone pilferers and, in one case, a woman who made a series of abusive phone calls. The city of Baltimore alone has admitted to using the technology 4,300 times between 2007 and 2015. “I have never seen a tool that is on one hand treated in such a cloak-and-dagger fashion, but on the other used as a bread and butter tool,” says Stephanie Pell of West Point’s Army Cyber Institute. The ray and the net Civil-liberties advocates claim the secrecy around cell-site simulators is unjustified. According to Christopher Soghoian, a technologist at the ACLU, the wiliest criminals already know to use disposable “burner” phones and, short of forgoing cellular communication altogether, there is no foolproof way for them to evade StingRays and Hailstorms. But their covert use raises worries about privacy, he says. Cell-site simulators often trace phones to pockets, purses, homes and other places protected by the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition on “unreasonable searches”. Moreover, they do not just gather information from the target’s phone, but also from other phones nearby. Brian Owsley, a law professor at Texas Tech University School of Law who, as a judge, rejected several federal requests to use cell-site simulators without a warrant, says there should be laws requiring data inadvertently gathered in this way to be deleted. Lawmakers are starting to address such grievances. Washington state, California, Virginia, Minnesota and Utah have passed laws requiring their police forces to seek warrants before using cell-site simulators. Congressman Jason Chaffetz of Utah hopes to pass a bill that would do the same on a federal level, though he is unlikely to prevail in such a politically charged year. Movement in the courts may come more quickly, however. After the Baltimore police department grudgingly confessed in a court hearing last summer that it had used a Hailstorm to locate Mr Andrews, the presiding judge suppressed all evidence related to the surveillance operation—including Mr Andrews’s gun. Without a warrant, she held, the police had breached his Fourth-Amendment rights. Civil-libertarians are optimistic about the precedent the case may set. The state of Maryland will appeal against the ruling on February 9th.Chicago’s freedom tower WHEN Louisiana State University fired a professor in June 2015 for using rude words in a class designed to prepare teachers for careers in inner-city schools, it was an early skirmish in a conflict between students (one of whom had complained) and faculties over free speech that has since spread across the land. The university’s faculty is now considering something that others in the same position have done: copying the University of Chicago. In response to a number of universities cancelling invitations to controversial speakers and challenges to academic freedom, Geoffrey Stone of Chicago’s law school was appointed chair of a committee that would restate its principles on free speech. The statement was issued a year ago, shortly before the murderous attack on Charlie Hebdo, a French satirical publication, for its cartoons of Muhammad. Since then the debate over permissible speech on college campuses has only become more contentious. A website, thedemands.org, lists speech-curbing demands from students at 72 institutions. Administrators are tying themselves in knots in an effort to balance a commitment to free expression with a desire not to offend. One consequence of this has been to call attention to the Chicago Statement, which has been adopted by Purdue, Princeton, American University, Johns Hopkins, Chapman, Winston-Salem State and the University of Wisconsin system, according to the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (Fire), a pro free-speech non-profit which is actively promoting it. It is brief (three pages) and emphatic. “It is not the proper role of the university to attempt to shield individuals from ideas and opinions they find unwelcome, disagreeable, or even deeply offensive,” it states. “Concerns about civility and mutual respect can never be used as justification for closing off discussion of ideas, however offensive or disagreeable.” The responsibility of a university, it concludes, is not only to promote “fearless freedom of debate”, but also to protect it. The committee gave much consideration to concerns about “hate speech” and “micro-aggressions”. Whatever harm such expression caused, it concluded, should be redressed by “individual members of the university…openly and vigorously contesting the ideas that they oppose,” rather than by censorship. The widening adoption of the statement came as a surprise, says Mr Stone, because it was built upon the college’s own history, including a controversial invitation by students in 1932 to William Z. Foster, then the Communist Party candidate for president. The proper response to unpopular ideas, responded then-president Robert Maynard Hutchins, “lies through discussion rather than inhibition”. In 1967, during protests over civil rights and the Vietnam war, and demands that the university itself should take a stand, a faculty committee chaired by Harry Kalven, one of Mr Stone’s professors, concluded that would be wrong: “The university is the home and sponsor of critics; it is not itself the critic”. This approach was not universal. The most prominent committee to follow Chicago’s was Yale’s, in 1974. It concluded that intellectual growth requires “the right to think the unthinkable, discuss the unmentionable, and challenge the unchallengeable”. When read in full, however, the report is confused, foreshadowing the current debate. Although Yale’s committee was “gratified” to find that most people surveyed supported freedom of expression, a minority “held reservations of various kinds about how much freedom should be tolerated.” One member dissented from the report, calling its support for free speech “too facile and simplistic”. Even the Chicago Statement has reservations. Expression that “invades substantial privacy” or “constitutes a genuine threat” can be punished. The university has the right to regulate the “time, place and manner of expression”, so that ordinary activities are not unduly disrupted—though this should never be used to undermine an “open discussion of ideas”. The statement is, in short, written not only to allow speech, but to facilitate protest. When it first appeared, this may have seemed a bit academic. Not any more.
