EVERY four years, American presidential candidates pledge to get tough and confront China. Populists promise to bring jobs home, if need be by starting trade wars. Security hawks vow to use every form of American might—from sanctions to the Seventh Fleet—to curb Chinese mischief-making. Yet, in the search for a China policy, it is hard to recall a candidate demanding America return looted Cambodian antiques. Yet inspecting newly returned sculptures—including a splendid tenth-century statue of a monkey god, handed back in 2015 by the Cleveland Museum of Art—is how John Kerry, the secretary of state, began a visit to Cambodia on January 26th, a day before he headed to Beijing. It was a striking scene at the National Museum of Cambodia in Phnom Penh, as Mr Kerry was shown carvings looted during the civil war of the 1970s, and traced after they were shown to be perfect matches for plinths unearthed in a jungle-clad temple. Addressing the local press a few hours later, Mr Kerry cited the return of stolen treasures as an example of his country’s commitment to Cambodia and other members of the ten-country Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Mr Kerry also touched on “painful reminders” of the Vietnam war, including unexploded American ordnance that continues to take Cambodian lives and limbs. There is in fact a China logic to this approach—though many China-bashing politicians back home would doubtless call Mr Kerry naive and too apologetic for past deeds. To critics, President Barack Obama’s “pivot to Asia”—a move to rebalance American diplomatic and military attention away from the Middle East and towards the Asia-Pacific—has generally been a flop, because it has not stopped Chinese officials from bullying American businesses, building runways on disputed rocks in the South China Sea or setting cyber-spies to steal commercial and state secrets. They would like to see China challenged to behave, or else. Mr Obama’s foreign-policy machine sees it differently. To simplify, their Asia policy is built around two ideas. The first is rather bleak: that the China led by Xi Jinping, its assertive president since 2013, has shown itself to be a mercantilist, arrogant and stubborn power, too self-interested and suspicious of American intentions to be swayed by appeals to its better nature. At best, this China can be persuaded to behave as America hopes when it sees that policy as coinciding with its self-interest. Nonetheless, China is too large and too important to the global economy to be taken on frontally as electioneering politicians urge. The second idea is that China’s overbearing behaviour in its neighbourhood is an opportunity for America to strengthen old bonds with such allies as Japan and South Korea, and to forge new ties with ASEAN nations that want an alternative to Chinese regional hegemony. ASEAN leaders have been invited to a summit with Mr Obama in February. Mr Obama’s aides have crafted a Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a trade pact with Asia-Pacific countries described as a chance to anchor in place a rules-based order for global commerce, rather than let China set terms (though Congress is unlikely to allow TPP to advance before November’s elections). American generals and admirals are exploring or deepening military co-operation with such countries as the Philippines, Vietnam and even Malaysia, long a critic. Mr Kerry, in an interview in Phnom Penh, calls such moves as the return of looted Cambodian sculptures more than just the “decent” thing to do. To show respect for a country and its culture can be “an important part of diplomacy”, says Mr Kerry, a courtly patrician who as a young naval officer fought in the rivers and marshes of Vietnam. To be blunt, dealings with China are not easy. But in the corridors of American power, the case is made that it could be worse. In recent years China has tried to turn relations into a gigantic, unsavoury system of barter. Chinese leaders deliver long lectures about areas of core interest in which they expect no American interference, from policy over Tibet to the South China Sea. China makes clear that it sees the collapse of North Korea’s brutal regime as a greater threat than that country’s nuclear-weapons programme. In return, China dangles the possibility of help on things America wants—assistance in Afghanistan or over the Iranian nuclear deal, or commitments on climate change. Confucius meets Brahmin Team Obama hotly rejects the idea that the way to get along is to let China do what it wants in sensitive areas, trading Chinese good behaviour for American appeasement. Instead, America’s offer is to seek areas of agreement, while holding frequent, candid talks to manage crises. Disagreements marked Mr Kerry’s meetings in Beijing on January 27th. In lengthy remarks at the Great Hall of the People, Mr Xi touted a “new model of major-country relationship” between China and America. Working together, the two powers can achieve “win-win results for both sides,” Mr Xi beamed. Alas the win-win mood was short-lived. As Mr Kerry began to reply, Lexington and the rest of the media were ejected, despite cross remonstrations from American diplomats. Mr Kerry had earlier held tense talks in private with the Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi. Mr Wang resisted suggestions that Chinese leaders could do much more to punish North Korea for its latest test of a nuclear bomb, citing among other things the harm that imposing sanctions might cause to Chinese companies. In the Xi era, the message went, China takes up great-power responsibilities only when it suits it. Team Obama is more clear-eyed about China than its critics allow. Some presidential candidates think the answer is for America itself to throw off the constraints of a rules-based global order and match China for self-interested ruthlessness (Donald Trump fancies punitive trade tariffs of up to 45%). That is a competition that America should not aspire to take part in.JANUARY is a languid month in Brazil. Beyond the hullabaloo at samba schools—practising for their bawdy annual face-off during Carnival, which starts on February 5th—business pauses while Brazilians go on holiday in the scorching southern summer. Fewer cars clog streets; more bodies throng the beaches. Politicians customarily switch off along with everyone else. Congressmen return from their Christmas break on February 2nd, but will probably do little until after Mardi Gras a week later. Neither they nor the president, Dilma Rousseff, will be able to relax, though. A frightening mosquito-borne disease has put the health authorities on high alert (see page 42). Meanwhile, Brazil’s political and economic crises are deepening. When politicians return to work they may regret the time they took off from attempting to solve them. The economic slide continues. The number of jobs in the formal sector fell by 1.5m in 2015, the fastest pace of job destruction since comparable records began in 1992. Another 1m could be lost this year, analysts reckon. Sales of vehicles dropped by a fifth last year. The IMF now predicts that GDP will shrink by 3.5% in 2016, more than three times as much as it expected in October. Despite the recession, inflation has risen to nearly 11%, its highest level since 2002 (see chart). Male breadwinners make up a higher proportion of the newly unemployed than in previous downturns, which mainly affected female and young workers, notes Naercio Menezes of Insper, a university in São Paulo. That means that the hardship caused by the current recession will be greater. For the relatively young, joblessness is a novelty. Many entered the formal labour market during the commodity boom of 2003-13. No one knows how they will react to their misfortune, warns Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former Brazilian president who is also a sociologist. As misery grows, the government’s capacity to tackle its causes is diminishing. Prosecutors investigating the vast bribery scandal centred on Petrobras, the state-controlled oil-and-gas giant, are expected to file additional charges against senior figures in Ms Rousseff’s Workers’ Party (PT), which has already been badly tarnished by the affair. An even bigger worry for Ms Rousseff is the threat of impeachment against her on unrelated allegations that she assented to the use of accounting tricks to hide the true size of Brazil’s fiscal deficit. Her weakness makes her more dependent on the goodwill of the PT and trade unions aligned with it, which are viscerally opposed to the reforms needed to steady the economy. This month Ms Rousseff dared to acknowledge that Brazilians retire too early (at 55 for men, on average). In effect she admitted that the government cannot stabilise its finances if it continues to devote 40% of (non-interest) spending to pensions. But she backtracked in the face of resistance from her party and the unions. Raising the retirement age would be unacceptable, declared the PT this week. Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts This will make it much harder for Nelson Barbosa, the newly appointed finance minister, to contain the budget deficit, which is close to 10% of GDP. His main idea is to reintroduce a financial-transactions tax, which is loathed by business but popular among Ms Rousseff’s left-wing allies. But this would raise just 10 billion reais ($2.5 billion) in extra revenue, a fraction of net government borrowing, expected to be 500 billion reais this year. Ms Rousseff wants to summon back a council of wise men and women, which she disbanded during her first term, to suggest reforms. That looks like a delaying tactic.  While fiscal policy wobbles, economists are starting to fret about monetary policy, too. After weeks of hinting that it would raise interest rates to fight inflation, the Central Bank decided on January 20th to hold them steady at 14.25%. The decision may have been justified: higher rates would weaken the economy further and make it still harder to control the fiscal deficit. But it looked like a surrender to political pressure. The Central Bank’s president, Alexandre Tombini, met Ms Rousseff two days before the interest-rate decision. Then he foreshadowed the bank’s U-turn by pointing to the IMF’s gloomier predictions of Brazilian and global growth, which by that point should have been no surprise. Rather than shoring up Brazil’s financial credibility, the Central Bank thus damaged it all the more. There is little prospect that congressmen will take measures to repair it when they return to work. Those who are pushing for Ms Rousseff’s impeachment concede privately that they are unlikely to muster the two-thirds majority needed in the lower house to send the motion to the Senate. But they plan to drag out the proceeding as long as the (vague) legal deadlines permit. That will accomplish their goal of undermining the president. It will do nothing to buck up Brazil.Martelly’s mind is on merengue MICHEL MARTELLY, Haiti’s president, had planned to mark the end of his term in office by going back to his old job as a popular singer of compas, a Haitian form of merengue. The idea was to perform once more as “Sweet Micky” at the Carnival in Port-au-Prince, Haiti’s capital, which begins on February 7th, the day he is due to step down as president. The problem is that there is no one to succeed him. The second round of the presidential election, scheduled for January 24th after two postponements, was called off two days before the vote. Jude Célestin, the runner-up in the first round of voting in October, had condemned the ballot as a “ridiculous farce” and refused to campaign further. Thousands of his supporters, and those of candidates who lost in the first round, took to the streets to demand that the run-off be cancelled. Haiti’s electoral council said the danger of violence was too great for it to go ahead. This leaves Haiti in limbo. Mr Martelly says he will only hand over to an elected successor, which suggests that he may govern a while longer. It is not clear how the next president will be chosen. One option would be to hold a completely new election, though Mr Martelly will fight to avoid that. He backs the winner of the first round, Jovenel Moïse, a banana grower and businessman who, like Mr Martelly before he became president, has no prior political experience. Polls suggest that he would lose if the election started from scratch. Such chaos is typical of politics in Haiti, where parties are weak and candidates often seem to be more interested in dispensing patronage than in implementing policies. In 1990, after 28 years of authoritarian rule by the Duvalier family and four years under transition governments, Jean-Bertrand Aristide won a free and fair election. Since then, “Haiti hasn’t had an election worth calling an election,” says Robert Fatton, a political scientist at the University of Virginia. Last October’s vote was typically messy. A commission appointed by Mr Martelly found evidence of widespread irregularities, though it is not clear that they were the cause of Mr Célestin’s second-place finish. Many Haitians do not share his sense of outrage. They see the protests, with their burning cars and tyres, as theatre staged by losers of a vote that was flawed but not rigged. The protesters “are not thinking about the real problems of Haiti,” says a student in Pétionville, a prosperous suburb of the capital. The most acute of these is inflation, which has risen by six percentage points since last April to 12%. Food prices have been pushed up by a drought and by a ban on 23 imports by road from the neighbouring Dominican Republic, imposed last September in response to the country’s expulsion of Haitian immigrants. Haiti’s currency, the gourde, has lost a quarter of its value in the past year. This adds to the misery caused by poverty, poor education and health care, weak growth and the after-effects of a devastating earthquake six years ago. Those are problems only an effective government can tackle. Choosing any sort of government right now would be a feat. “There is no legal body in this country with the legitimacy to get us out of this mess,” says Jacky Lumarque, the rector of Université Quisqueya in Port-au-Prince, who wanted to run for president himself but was disqualified—on spurious grounds, he says. Legislative elections, held last year after a delay of three years, produced the beginnings of a functioning parliament, which ended a period of 12 months during which Mr Martelly ruled by decree. This might provide the basis of a solution. There is talk of installing a transitional government, perhaps led by the president of the Senate, Jocelerme Privert, which would oversee the delayed presidential run-off vote. For that to work, Haiti would need an electoral council that the main candidates could trust. Mr Martelly would have to step aside. As a consolation, he could be invited back to hand over power formally to his successor—and perhaps to warble a bit of compas.THE mosquito-borne Zika virus, which has spread to 22 countries and territories in the Americas, is terrifying to pregnant women and their partners. The virus may cause birth defects in babies whose mothers were infected during pregnancy. In Brazil more than 4,000 have been born with abnormally small heads since last October, compared with fewer than 200 in a typical year. The response of several governments has triggered a debate about abortion, birth control and sex education which may outlast the outbreak itself. It started after a handful of governments advised women to delay getting pregnant. Colombia, which has the second-highest number of infections after Brazil, advised women to wait six to eight months. Jamaica issued a similar recommendation, even though no cases of Zika have yet been reported there. El Salvador’s government suggested that women should delay pregnancy until 2018. Panama warned women from indigenous communities, in which infection rates are high, not to conceive.   Some women find this advice rather bossy. Others say that governments have done little to help women control their fertility. Paula Avila-Guillen of the Centre for Reproductive Rights, a lobby group in New York, notes that rates of sexual violence and teenage pregnancy in Latin America are among the world’s highest. The Guttmacher Institute, a think-tank, found that 56% of pregnancies in Latin America and the Caribbean are unintended. Rates of accidental pregnancy are high because sex education is inadequate and birth control is hard to come by. Health workers are reluctant to prescribe contraceptives to teenagers or to women who have not yet given birth. If women are to avoid pregnancy, say women’s-rights activists, governments must inform them better and provide more access to contraception for both men and women. Some argue that the Zika crisis should prompt countries to liberalise policies that severely restrict abortion. In El Salvador, which does not allow abortion even if a woman’s life is at risk, activists are stepping up their campaign for a change in the law. An editorial in Folha de São Paulo, a Brazilian newspaper, argued that Brazil should end its ban on most abortions. Rather than calling on women to delay pregnancy, Brazil is sensibly concentrating its efforts on the real culprit, the Aedes aegypti mosquito, which also carries dengue and yellow fever. The country had stamped out the menace by 1958 but let down its guard and allowed it to return. This month the health minister, Marcelo Castro, announced that insect repellent will be distributed to 400,000 expectant mothers who qualify for Bolsa Família, a cash-transfer scheme. Some 310,000 health workers are raising awareness and teaching people how to keep mosquitoes at bay; on February 13th 220,000 soldiers will join them. Following World Health Organisation guidelines, Brazil advises women contemplating pregnancy on how to avoid getting bitten by mosquitoes. Women need facts, not fertility targets.AS PARTING gestures go, it was a risky one. Taiwan’s president, Ma Ying-jeou, leaves office in May, having lost an election on January 16th. But rather than slink out quietly, this week he visited Itu Aba, known in Chinese as Taiping, the biggest natural island in the Spratly archipelago in the South China Sea, garrisoned by Taiwan but also claimed by China, the Philippines and Vietnam. The Philippines and Vietnam were incensed, China much less so: it appreciates Mr Ma’s adherence to the fiction that there is but “one China”. From its point of view, Taiwan’s territorial claims in the much-disputed sea are its own. Besides reasserting Taiwan’s claim, Mr Ma wanted to rebut arguments made by the Philippines, in a case it has brought before the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague. This argues that under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Itu Aba is a rock that cannot sustain human life. So it is entitled to 12 nautical miles of territorial waters, but not the 200-mile exclusive economic zone accorded to habitable islands. Mr Ma also possibly hoped to advertise his own “South China Sea Peace Initiative”, which he announced last May but which was largely ignored. The risk is that the Philippines and Vietnam may retaliate in some way—perhaps even with high-profile visits to islands they occupy, though this is unlikely—and that this, in turn, provokes China. America is so alarmed that its representative in Taiwan issued an unusually forthright denunciation of Mr Ma’s “extremely unhelpful” day-trip as soon as it was announced. Tensions over the sea have been rising in any case. China has been building frenetically, turning rocks and reefs in the Spratlys into islands, three of them already bigger than Itu Aba, with airstrips. It has recently landed civilian aircraft carrying “tourists” on one (see picture). And China has again moved a large oil rig into waters claimed by Vietnam—as it did in 2014 when it provoked fatal anti-Chinese riots. China derides all criticism. One Chinese official compares rival claimants’ complaints to “smashing the windows of your neighbours’ house and then saying, ‘We are being threatened’.” China believes America is stoking alarm as part of a broader strategy to contain it. It is true that its neighbours are gradually stepping up security co-operation with each other and with America. Just this week Vietnam approved an Indian satellite-tracking centre on its soil to share imagery, including pictures of the South China Sea. The worry is that China is steadily expanding its presence until its dominance of the sea becomes an incontestable fact. This also concerns America: the sea is a vital trade artery, and China threatens 70 years of American naval supremacy in the western Pacific. In a report published in January, commissioned by the Pentagon to look at America’s strategic “rebalance” towards Asia, the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think-tank, projected that by 2030, on current trends, “the South China Sea will be virtually a Chinese lake, as the Caribbean or Gulf of Mexico is for the United States today.” Three approaches are being tried to moderate China’s behaviour—legal, diplomatic and military. The broader aim of the Philippines’ case under UNCLOS is to show that China’s historic claim—a “nine-dash line” on maps encompassing most of the sea—has no legal basis. In October China suffered a setback when the court in The Hague accepted that the case fell within its jurisdiction. But even if the court rules in the Philippines’ favour, China has made clear that it will ignore it. South-East Asian claimants in the sea—the Philippines, Vietnam, Brunei and Malaysia—have hoped that their regional club, ASEAN, can show a united front. But China prefers to negotiate with (and bully) ASEAN members individually. And it skilfully exploits the body’s internal differences. As for military deterrence, a marked increase in defence spending across the region in recent years still leaves America as the only power capable of standing up to China. As a reminder of this, in November the American navy conducted a “freedom of navigation operation” in the South China Sea. These operations, conducted around the world, involve sending warships to challenge excessive maritime claims by sailing through the claimed waters. In the South China Sea, America says it takes no position on the sovereignty disputes but does want international law to apply. In this exercise, the USS Lassen sailed close to Subi reef, where China has built an artificial island on what was once a feature submerged at high tide. Yet the message was muddied. In January Ashton Carter, America’s secretary of defence, explained that the operation had been conducted as “innocent passage”, ie, under a provision of UNCLOS that allows warships to enter even territorial waters so long as they do nothing that might have a military purpose. So it is not clear quite what point America was trying to make. John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, was in China this week (see article), after a trip that took in Cambodia and Laos, which holds the chairmanship of ASEAN this year. He spoke of the need to avoid a “destabilising cycle of mistrust or escalation” in the South China Sea. At a gathering on February 15th and 16th at a ranch in Sunnylands, California, Barack Obama will play host to the leaders of all ten ASEAN countries. The unprecedented summit is a symbolic demonstration of American support for ASEAN. China will probably scent another attempt to rally the region against it. But nothing suggests it will be deterred from trying to turn the sea into its own lake.Carry on, Nguyen Phu Trong WHEN Great Grandfather, a revered turtle which had long paddled around Hanoi’s central lake, was found dead on the eve of the Communist Party’s five-yearly congress, many Vietnamese thought it a bad omen for the ruling party. The animal embodied a legend about a 15th-century Vietnamese warrior who presented his sword to a turtle after vanquishing the Chinese. Some wondered whether the party’s leaders, whose dusty Marxism-Leninism feels increasingly out of step with Vietnam’s youthful population of 93m, were also losing their edge. As it happens, the congress, which concluded in pomp on January 28th, ended up backing an only slightly more sprightly reptile. After eight days of unusually fierce politicking, party bigwigs forced the charismatic and pro-business prime minister to leave government after his term expires in a few months. Nguyen Tan Dung had hoped to assume the top party post of general secretary. Instead Mr Dung, along with the state president, Truong Tan Sang, failed to get a seat on the party’s new Central Committee, while the septuagenarian incumbent, Nguyen Phu Trong, was asked to carry on as all-important party chief. Given term limits and mandatory retirement ages, Mr Dung, who is 66, had every reason to be shown the door. Yet analysts thought he might win promotion to general secretary. His patronage network is extensive, and he enjoyed the support of business types backing a more open economy. Younger Vietnamese liked Mr Dung’s friendly stance towards America and his robust defence of Vietnam’s sovereignty in territorial disputes with China. True, whiffs of corruption hung over him, and the bankruptcies of two state firms he championed were a blot. But many Vietnamese could accept these things. Despite the scandals, “he still improved Vietnam’s relations with America”, says Pham Khac Quang, a 33-year-old machine-parts distributor in Hanoi. Had he kept on doing that, all else “would have been forgiven”. In December Mr Dung defended his record in a nine-page memo to colleagues, later leaked to a political blog. In the end an opposing party faction loosely grouped around Mr Trong gained the upper hand, in part through skilful management of voting procedures that baffle even some insiders. This group appears to have emphasised Mr Dung’s economic mishaps. His opponents almost certainly pointed out that his self-promotion and his anti-China populism were incompatible with the Communists’ preference for cautious, consensual rule. Some doubtless worried that his rise would undermine their own power. As for Mr Trong, party chief since 2011, he is a colourless apparatchik in the twilight of his career. His support owes as much to Mr Dung’s divisiveness as to any personal merits; indeed, with the prime minister out of the picture Mr Trong may soon retire himself, to be replaced by a bland successor—a front-runner is the party’s propaganda chief, Dinh The Huynh. More interesting are the officials the congress appears to have chosen for other top jobs. Nguyen Thi Kim Ngan looks likely to become the first woman to chair the National Assembly; she understands economics and is broadly well-regarded. The probable new state president is Tran Dai Quang, the minister for public security. He would be a worrying choice, given the state’s tendency to lock up and occasionally torture dissidents. Human Rights Watch calls its record “dismal”. The next prime minister is expected to be Nguyen Xuan Phuc, who is harder to read. As one of Mr Dung’s deputies he has worked to cut red tape, with the help of some American funding. A foreign businessman calls him a “straight shooter”. Yet Mr Phuc has demonstrated little of Mr Dung’s popularity or vim, and he probably cleaves closer to Mr Trong’s slightly more conservative views. The new leaders may slow the pace of economic liberalisation, but they are unlikely to reverse it. Nor will relations with America be set back. It was Mr Trong, after all, who delighted in calling on President Barack Obama in Washington last summer—a big step in attempts to make Vietnam less vulnerable to Chinese bullying. A party plenum recently reaffirmed its support for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an American-led trade deal which the incoming government will soon have to ratify. Meanwhile, bigwigs at the congress made encouraging noises about shrinking flabby state firms. Investors will welcome this sense of consistency, although the prime minister’s imminent departure has also dashed hopes that grander modernisations might be on the cards. More radical changes may have to wait for the next congress, in 2021. Then a mass of Russian-speaking party members, brought up hating America, are due to retire. Their successors may well be Western-educated technocrats who understand that the party’s best hope of survival lies in making the economy more competitive, and in convincing young Vietnamese such as Mr Quang, the machine-parts distributor, that it has their interests at heart. For the moment, though, hammer-and-sickle banners cover the capital. And most people—like subjects in a 15th-century kingdom—have no say in who rules the roost.Bose made his bed with the baddies IN THE West, regard for the founding fathers of independent India is usually confined to Mohandas Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, the pacifist in a dhoti and the suave Cantabrigian. By contrast Subhas Chandra Bose, or “Netaji” (“revered leader”), took up arms against the British and sided with the Axis powers in the second world war, dying in a plane crash in 1945 in Japanese-occupied Taiwan. The British called him a quisling, but his martial valour still inspires Indians. In his native Bengal most public places seem to be named after him. Yet in India the story of Bose’s life remains partially classified—supposedly on grounds of national security. So it made for good drama on January 23rd, Netaji’s birthday (in 1897), when the government of Narendra Modi declassified 100 of its files on Bose and promised more to come. They shed little light, but that is hardly the point. Bose is one of the few heroes of India’s independence movement that the prime minister’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) can hope to claim—Gandhi and Nehru belong firmly to its arch-rival, the Congress party. In West Bengal the chief minister, Mamata Banerjee, with her own party, declassified all the state’s files in September. Mainly they confirmed that the government spied on Bose’s family in the 1950s and 1960s. By publishing first, she pipped the BJP. Bengalis have been clamouring for more disclosure, many with hopes of solving a mystery about Bose’s death. At one point, he considered disguising himself as a monk in Thailand to evade the Allies. Netaji was already famous for a daring escape in 1941, when he passed as an Afghan to cut a dash from Calcutta to Berlin. He then returned to the Pacific theatre by way of two submarines meeting near Madagascar. In the days after the Japanese surrender, might he have reached China or Russia, plotting a return to India? He could have challenged Nehru for the leadership and changed the course of Indian history. Or maybe he was already in India, hiding as a holy man? Two ashrams claim him. All nonsense, says Krishna Bose, a former MP and the widow of Netaji’s favourite nephew—he drove the Bose getaway car in 1941, a German roadster that sits outside the Netaji Research Bureau she runs in Kolkata. There is no mystery, and no assassination—the plane crash was an accident. So why have successive governments in Delhi kept the Bose files under seal? Presumably they were unflattering to Nehru and thus to Congress. Campaigning in January 2014, the BJP declared it would declassify all the files. So why only a dribble of information now? Rudrangshu Mukherjee, a historian of Bose and Nehru, says another rare hero of the BJP, Vallabhbhai “Sardar” Patel, loathed Bose. Or perhaps it pays to preserve a certain ignorance about Bose himself. One of Mr Modi’s 100 files, from 1976, finds the Indian embassy in Tokyo under pressure to repatriate Bose’s ashes from the Renkoji temple in Tokyo. At the time bureaucrats concluded that “due to possible adverse reactions from…certain sections of the public, who refused to believe in his death in the plane crash”, it would be wiser to do nothing. Mrs Bose has devoted much of her life to collecting and preserving the historical record. She regrets that politicians are still fiddling with the facts. Another historian suspects a third possibility: sheer ineptitude on the part of the archivists.DOWN a buzzing lane in Bangkok’s Chinatown, a child is being born. Payau, a middle-aged lady perched on a stool, has just finished assembling a plastic doll which she has dressed in silk and adorned with pink lipstick. She will take 4,000 baht ($110) for it, she says, while brushing tangles from its hair. Payau’s doll is not a toy but a luk thep, or “child angel” —a factory-moulded moppet which some believe can be imbued, through a blessing, with the spirit of a child. Luk thep are increasingly being seen out and about in Bangkok, the capital, with their grown-up owners, who feed, water and dress them in the hope of receiving good fortune in return. The fad has not amused Prayuth Chan-ocha, the former general who leads Thailand’s nannying government, which came to power in a coup in May 2014. He implied on January 25th that adults ought not to waste money on plastic kids. Luk thep became fashionable last year, boosted by endorsements from soap stars and other minor celebrities. The trend has burst into the headlines again with Thai Smile, a budget airline, declaring that passengers who object to stewards shoving their little darlings into overhead lockers may now buy them tickets of their own. Child angels are also welcome to their own seats at a forthcoming production of “Disney on Ice”, according to its organiser. A buffet restaurant has announced that luk thep may dine at children’s rates—though patrons must pay for any uneaten food. A backlash is brewing, however. Aviation authorities have realised that nervous travellers may not want to sit next to another passenger’s haunted mannequin. Mental-health officials suggest that Thais who seek spiritual comfort would be better off adhering to established religions. Buddhist bigwigs say they are investigating whether monks who bless dolls are breaking religious codes of conduct. And now police warn that the dolls may be being used to smuggle drugs and contraband (with miscreants betting that security guards will be too tactful—or squeamish—to prod and poke them). Some wonder whether Thailand’s falling fertility rate—at 1.5 children per woman among the lowest in South-East Asia—explains the strong demand for magic dolls. But even if the craze will soon blow over, no government has succeeded in taming rampant superstition in Thailand, where charm-peddling is a lucrative trade and even the royal family uses soothsayers. Child angels are more palatable than necromantic amulets which were once made from bits of stillborn babies and sometimes still turn up in grim emporia. Given a stumbling economy and the coup leaders’ stifling rule, it is no surprise that some Thais think they deserve a little more luck.
