ON JANUARY 19th China declared that its gross domestic product had grown by 6.9% in 2015, accounting for inflation—the slowest rate in a quarter of a century. It was neatly within the government’s target of “around 7%”, but many economists wondered whether the figure was accurate. Online chatter in China about dodgy GDP numbers was fuelled a week later by the arrest of the man who had announced the data: Wang Baoan, the head of the National Bureau of Statistics. The country’s anti-graft agency accused him of “serious disciplinary violations”, a euphemism for corruption. But beyond all the (justifiable) doubts about the figures lies another important question. That is: why does China have a GDP target at all? It is the only large industrial country that sets one. Normally central banks declare specific goals for things like inflation or unemployment. The idea that a government should aim for a particular rate of output expansion, and steer the economy to achieve that, is unusual. In the case of China, which is trying to wean its economy off excessive reliance on GDP-boosting (but often wasteful and debt-fuelling) investment, it is risky. It is inconsistent with the government’s own oft-repeated mantra that it is the quality of growth that matters, not the quantity. In the past, setting a target may not have made much difference. For all but three of the years between 1992 and 2015, China’s growth was above target, often by a big margin. A rare period when targets seemed to affect the way officials tried to manage the economy was from 2008 to 2009, when growth fell sharply (see chart). It would be hard to argue that targets themselves have been responsible for China’s overall (impressive) record of growth in recent decades. Now, however, the economy is slowing. This is inevitable: double-digit growth is no longer achievable except at dangerous cost (total debt was nearly 250% of GDP in the third quarter of 2015). But the government is worried that the economy may slow too fast, and that this could cause a destabilising surge in unemployment. So it has been ramping up investment again, and goading local governments to do the same by setting a high growth target. For a while there were signs that the leadership itself had doubts about the merits of GDP target-setting. In 2013 Xinhua, an official news agency, decried what it called the country’s “GDP obsession”. By the next year, 70 or so counties and cities had scrapped their targets. In 2015 Shanghai joined them, becoming the first big city to break with orthodoxy (each level of government sets its own GDP target, often higher than the national one). Liu Qiao of the Guanghua School of Management at Peking University says the central government ought to follow suit. Last year there were hints that it might. The prime minister, Li Keqiang, said the government would not “defend [the target for 2015] to the death”. And in October, talking about the government’s work on a new five-year economic plan (which will run from 2016 to 2020), President Xi Jinping avoided mentioning a number. That raised expectations that targets might at least be downplayed, if not abandoned. They have not been, however. An outline of the five-year plan, unveiled in November, contained the usual emphasis on growth. And Mr Xi appeared to change his tune, saying expansion must average at least 6.5% a year until 2020. Many economists believe that will require yet more debt-inducing stimulus. A GDP target for this year is all but certain to be announced, as usual, at the annual session of the legislature in March (when the five-year plan will also be adopted). It will probably be higher than 6%. Speculation that the government might set a target range in order to give itself more policymaking flexibility (as the IMF and the World Bank have urged) has ebbed. In December some national legislators complained that local governments were busting their debt ceilings because there was “still too much emphasis on GDP”. So why is there still a target? The reasons are political. In a country so large, central leaders are always fearful of losing their grip on far-flung bureaucrats: setting GDP targets is one means by which they believe they can evaluate and control those lower down. Local officials are also judged by environmental standards, social policies and what the Communist Party calls “virtue”—that is, being uncorrupt and in tune with the party’s latest interpretation of Marxist doctrine. But GDP is usually the most important criterion, having the attraction of being (roughly) measurable. A study in 2013 by Deng Yongheng of Singapore National University and Wu Jing of Tsinghua University in Beijing looked at the careers of officials who had worked as mayors in 283 cities. It found that those who presided over higher growth rates in their cities, relative to the rates notched up by their predecessors, had got better jobs afterwards. Since the study was conducted, there has been little sign of any change in this pattern. Depressingly, the academics found that the more the mayors had increased investment in environmental protection, the lower their likelihood of being promoted had turned out to be. The government finds environmental targets more difficult to set than growth ones. The environment ministry is trying to create a measure of “green GDP” (roughly, output minus the cost of environmental damage) that could be used to assess the performance of local officials. But it had a stab at this before, in 2004, and got nowhere: the damage proved too tricky to calculate. Daily dispatches: China's market mess At higher levels, promotion is determined in part by which faction an official belongs to. But the lower down the hierarchy a government entity is, the more it is likely to be judged by GDP. When Mr Li, the prime minister, suggested that GDP targets might not be all-important, many people complained. One academic says that without such targets, local officials would not know what they are supposed to be doing. At a time when Mr Xi’s anti-corruption campaign is causing many nervous officials to sit on their hands to avoid graft-busters’ attention, party leaders are all the more unwilling to abandon an appraisal system which—however imperfectly—holds officials to account and can goad them into action. As Chinese leaders see it, the target has another use. It provides numerical evidence for their proclaimed efforts to make China rich. Deng Xiaoping set the trend by declaring in 1980 that China would quadruple its GDP of that year by the end of the century (it achieved that goal several years early). Andrew Batson of Gavekal Dragonomics, a research and advisory firm, points out that when Mr Xi unveiled his 6.5% target, he set it in the context of a broader (Deng-like) objective: that of doubling the level of GDP attained in 2010 by the end of the decade. Mr Xi apparently believes that a growth target is necessary in order for China to become a “moderately prosperous society” by 2021, the 100th anniversary of the party’s founding. That is one of what the party calls its two “centenary goals” (the other is for China to become “prosperous and strong” by 2049, the 100th anniversary of Communist rule). These aims were first proclaimed by Jiang Zemin, who was then president, in 1997—inspired, it appeared, by Deng, who was the first to speak of a need to make China “moderately prosperous”. The paradox is that by fixating on growth targets China may end up badly damaging its economy, rather than fulfilling its goals.CHINA is so vast, it quickly becomes the largest market for almost anything it consumes. Such is the case with bottled water. Chinese drink 40 billion litres (70 billion pints) of the stuff each year, up over 13-fold since 1998. That growth has a long way to go if China ever consumes as much per person as Mexico (see chart). But finding clean supplies is difficult; rivers, lakes and even groundwater in China are often foul. Hence the huge demand for a seemingly inexhaustible source of pristine water that is cheap to extract, sells at a premium and can now, thanks to massive investment in infrastructure, be taken to coastal cities: Tibetan glaciers. Tibet already sells Qomolangma Glacier water, named after the Tibetan word for Mount Everest. Last year Sinopec, a state-owned energy group, put another brand on sale at its petrol stations: Tibet 5100. It is bottled 5,100 metres (16,700 feet) up in the Nyenchen Tanglha range. The Tibetan government has licensed 28 more companies to increase the province’s bottling capacity 50-fold by 2020. Assuming companies do not mine the glacier ice itself, they will bottle only the meltwater that flows out of glaciers in summer. It is true that Himalayan glaciers on the Tibet-Qinghai plateau have retreated over the past 30 years by about 15%. But this is because of climate change. Bottling will not cause them to lose mass any quicker. Nor will the bottled-water industry have much impact on the volume of water that flows from Tibet—a crucial source for neighbouring countries as well as China itself. About 1 billion people depend on the giant rivers—the Yellow river, the Brahmaputra, the Indus, the Ganges, the Yangzi, the Mekong and the Salween—that rise in the Himalayas, a region with the largest reserves of fresh water after the north and south poles. The manufacturing of bottled water consumes three times more water than ends up being sold. Yet even the projected expansion of Tibet’s bottled-water output would amount to only a tiny fraction of the region’s runoff. More worrying is the possible threat that the industry will pose to the Tibetan environment. China has an atrocious record of looking after its pristine areas. Liu Hongqiao of China Water Risk, an NGO, says no water company has published any environmental-impact study in Tibet. The bottling industry may spawn other, heavy-polluting ones, on the plateau, for the production of bottles and the plastic they use. Tibet’s government is bribing bottlers with tax cuts, tax holidays and cheap loans. It charges companies only 3 yuan (50 cents) to extract a cubic metre of water, compared with up to 50 yuan elsewhere. But the government in Beijing may have other plans. Alarmed by water scarcity, it wants to reduce groundwater extraction. It has plans for a nationwide cap in 2020 and wants all provinces—even water-rich ones like Tibet—to set quotas for water use. This may make Tibet’s policies unsustainable (which may be no bad thing). In Jilin province in the north-east, the local government had even more ambitious plans than Tibet’s for ramping up mineral-water production. But it was forced to cut them by half because of mandated quotas. Bubbles, it seems, are an integral part of China’s bottled-water business.LOVE, as Ali MacGraw once sobbed, means never having to say you’re sorry. Working in China is the opposite: you have to say sorry quite often. A handwritten sheet of paper, ideally smudged by contrite teardrops, used to do the trick. But these days, it sometimes seems, an apology is worth anything only if it is made on national television. In recent months all sorts of people have unburdened themselves in this way: a leading financial journalist distressed at having helped create the “panic and disorder” in China’s markets; a Hong Kong publisher of muckraking books about Chinese politics, who disappeared from a beach resort in Thailand; a Swede who had for seven years run a group in Beijing offering legal help to Chinese citizens. They and many others have confessed their “crimes” to the cameras and apologised for the trouble they have caused. Westerners, even those addicted to reality TV, find these displays on prime-time news shows appalling. America’s State Department expressed concern this month about the growing number who “appear to have been coerced to confess to alleged crimes on state media”. It does indeed look bad—an echo of Mao’s tyranny, when those accused of wronging the Great Helmsman were forced to kneel in dunces’ caps before braying mobs. So it is worth pondering why the Chinese authorities do it. Two possible answers can be quickly dismissed: these confessions have nothing to do with justice or truth. The judicial process does not require a public apology or admission of guilt. Indeed, any chance of a fair trial is jeopardised by a verdict decided in advance, delivered by the accused himself and widely broadcast.    If the concern were to inform viewers of the true facts of a controversial case, then the confessions would be more credible. Instead, however, people are told, for example, a far-fetched story about Gui Minhai, the Hong Kong bookseller who vanished in October from Pattaya in Thailand. In his televised statement Mr Gui said that he had returned to China voluntarily, to answer questions about a hit-and-run road accident in 2003 in the Chinese port of Ningbo in which a young woman had been killed. So viewers are asked to believe that Mr Gui, who is a Swedish citizen, was smitten by remorse for an accident that happened 12 years earlier. Perhaps, when the lightning bolt struck, he was parasailing, or merely enjoying his beachfront view over a mai tai. Either way, he abruptly forsook the good life to face the music, apparently smuggling himself out of Thailand without troubling the Thai border authorities. Similarly, Peter Dahlin, another apologetic Swede, this month belatedly realised that his legal-aid activities had broken the law and hurt the feelings of the Chinese people. His apology was followed by expulsion from China. A third red herring is the notion that public confession and contrition is something that Chinese, or East Asian, culture demands. Seven decades ago, writing about Japan, Ruth Benedict, an American anthropologist, posited a distinction between “shame” cultures, where the fear of public humiliation helps regulate behaviour, and those, like America and Europe, ruled by “guilt”, and so constrained by the power of individual consciences. The idea is controversial, and in many circles dismissed; but it is true that, across East Asia, public shaming seems an important part of political and even corporate life. Take a Japanese company, Takata, which makes car airbags. After these turned out last year to be defective, its executives faced the press to say sorry, and bowed deeply. Similar rules apply in South Korea: witness the way Chou Tzu-yu, a Taiwanese member of Twice, a Korean pop group, was this month hauled in front of the cameras to apologise for having waved a Taiwanese flag on Korean television—an act her managers fear may damage Twice’s sales in China. Some academics have suggested that shame works better in a system, such as China’s, where maintaining harmony is seen as more important than adherence to a notionally objective idea of right and wrong. But the stocks and the pillory were used in Europe for centuries; in Britain they were abolished only in 1837. And today, in much of the West, the most successful part of the media is that specialising in the shaming of public figures. Similarly, nobody suggests East Asians are immune from guilt. It is the theme, for example, of some of the greatest Japanese films. The main reason for the spate of confessional television in China is, in fact, political: it is a conscious policy of the regime of Xi Jinping, China’s ruler for the past three years. In an illuminating essay last March, David Bandurski of the China Media Project at the University of Hong Kong pointed out that what he called “China’s confessional politics of dominance” has its roots in the Communist Party’s own history, and in the Soviet influences that helped shape it before it took power. Confession and self-criticism have been part of its ruling strategy since its revolutionary leaders lived in caves in Yan’an and plotted against their neighbouring cavemen. Virtually everybody in China—even Deng Xiaoping and, almost certainly during Mao’s rule, Mr Xi himself—has written at least one piece of self-criticism. At the other end of the scale, even Banyan has done it, when he was a student and later reporter in China, with a few eloquent self-flagellations—now (he hopes) gathering dust in some forgotten archive. Imagine a boot stamping on a human face–for ever In writing self-criticism, the secret is to ponder not truth, justice or cultural norms, but what your reader wants. As Mr Bandurski put it: “As in the past, today’s culture of confession is not about accountability, clean government or a rules-based system. It is about dominance and submission.” Mr Xi’s revival of this culture is not accidental. It is a reminder that his party’s tolerance for dissent is lower now than at any time since the early 1990s. One symptom of this is its insistence that China’s people—and foreigners working in the country—must accept that, even if they cannot love him, Big Brother is right.MORE than 30 years ago, a young general swept to power in the fifth of Nigeria’s military coups since independence in 1960. The country he inherited was a mess: bled dry by pilfering politicians within and hammered by falling oil prices without. Last year that general, Muhammadu Buhari, became president again—this time in a democratic vote. The problems he has inherited are almost identical. So are many of his responses. In the eight months since Mr Buhari arrived at Aso Rock, the presidential digs, the homicidal jihadists of Boko Haram have been pushed back into the bush along Nigeria’s borders. The government has cracked down on corruption, which had flourished under the previous president, Goodluck Jonathan, an ineffectual buffoon who let politicians and their cronies fill their pockets with impunity. Lai Mohammed, a minister, reckons that just 55 people stole $6.8 billion from the public purse over seven recent years. Mr Buhari, who—unusually among Nigeria’s political grandees—is said to have just $150,000 and a couple of hundred cattle to his name, abhors such excess. As military ruler he jailed, fired or forced into retirement thousands of bureaucrats whose fingers had been in the till. This time, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) has arrested dozens of bigwigs, including a former national security chief accused of diverting $2.2 billion. The EFCC has a poor record of securing convictions; but a single treasury account has been introduced to try to stop civil servants siphoning off cash. And agencies which may not be remitting their fair share to the state are having their books trawled by Kemi Adeosun, the finance minister. Such measures are doubly important because the economy is swooning along with the oil price. The sticky stuff directly accounts for only 10% of GDP, but for 70% of government revenue and almost all of Nigeria’s foreign earnings. INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability Oil’s price has fallen by half, to $32 a barrel, in the months since the new government came to power, sending its revenues plummeting. Income for the third quarter of 2015 was almost 30% lower than for the same period the year before, and foreign reserves have dwindled by $9 billion in 18 months. Ordinarily there would be buffers to cushion against such shocks, but Mr Jonathan’s cronies have largely squandered them. Growth was about 3% in 2015, almost half the rate of the year before and barely enough to keep pace with the population. The stockmarket is down by half from its peak in 2014. Domestic oil producers are feeling the pinch worst. Many borrowed heavily to buy oilfields when crude was worth more than $100 a barrel, and are now struggling to pay the interest on loans, says Kola Karim, the founder of Shoreline Group, a Nigerian conglomerate. This, in turn, threatens to create a banking crisis. About 20% of Nigerian banks’ loans were made to oil and gas producers (along with another 4% to underperforming power companies). Capital cushions are plumper than they were during an earlier banking crisis in 2009; but, even so, bad debts are mounting and banks that are exposed to oil producers may find themselves in trouble. “It wouldn’t surprise me if one or two went down,” says a senior banker in Nigeria. The government’s response to the crisis has been three-pronged. First, it is trying to stimulate the economy with a mildly expansionary budget. At the same time, it is trying to protect its dwindling hard-currency reserves by blocking imports. Third, it is trying to suppress inflation by keeping the currency, the naira, pegged at 197-199 to the dollar. Only the first of these policies seems likely to work. The budget, which includes a plan to spend more on badly needed infrastructure, is a step in the right direction. Although government revenues are under pressure from the falling oil price, Mr Buhari hopes to offset that by plugging “leakages” (a polite term for theft) and taxing people and businesses more. That seems reasonable. At 7%, Nigeria’s tax-to-GDP ratio is pitifully low. Every percentage point increase could yield $5 billion of extra cash for the coffers, reckons Kayode Akindele of TIA Capital, an investment firm. Mr Buhari also plans to save some $5 billion-$7 billion a year by ending fuel subsidies—a crucial reform, if he sticks with it. Even so he will be left with a deficit of $15 billion (3% of GDP) that will have to be filled by domestic and foreign borrowing. Yet his policies on the currency seem likely to stymie that. The central bank has frozen the naira at its current overvalued official rate for almost a year. The various import bans (on everything from soap to ballpoint pens) are supposed to reduce demand for dollars, but have little effect. Businesses that have to import essential supplies to keep their factories running complain that they have been forced into the black market, where the naira currently trades at 300 or more to the dollar. Several local manufacturers have suspended operations. International investors, knowing that the value of their assets could tumble, have slammed on the brakes and some have pulled money out of the country just as their dollars are most needed (see chart). Nigeria is fortunate in having low levels of public debt (less than 20% of GDP), but it is not helped by high interest rates, which mean that 35% of government revenue goes straight out of the door again to service its borrowings. It would not take much to push it into a debt crisis. Frustratingly, this crunch is one that Nigeria has been through before—under the then youthful Mr Buhari. Then, as now, he refused to let the market set the value of the currency. Instead he shut out imports, causing the legal import trade to fall by almost 50% and killing much of Nigeria’s nascent industry in the process. Between 1980 and 1990, carmaking fell by almost 90%. Today, as in the 1980s, the president is making a bad situation worse.A GROUP of girls are playing catch. They could be ordinary children; but some are cradling babies, and they are surrounded by high walls topped with barbed wire. They are in a refuge, in the city of Meru near Mount Kenya, which houses survivors of sexual abuse. Nearly a third of girls and 18% of boys in Kenya suffer some form of sexual violence before they are 18, according to a study published in 2010 by the UN Children’s Fund (Unicef). Though data barely exist in many poor countries and researchers rarely use comparable methodology, surveys in other African countries, including Tanzania and Swaziland, have found similarly high rates. The World Health Organisation (WHO) puts the global prevalence at 20% among girls and 5-10% for boys. Assuming the data are correct, why is the problem worse in Africa? In the wake of the HIV/AIDS epidemic that swept across the continent in the 2000s, many researchers at first thought child rape was perpetrated by men who believed the myth that sex with a virgin would cure them. But the evidence suggests otherwise. A more chilling effect of HIV/AIDS was to leave many children orphaned and vulnerable to predatory adults, a problem exacerbated in many African societies by the strict obedience expected of children. All around the world, poor children are more likely to be physically or sexually abused, says Christopher Mikton of the WHO. Unemployed, uprooted men are also more likely to violate children. In South Africa, where more than half of young adults are jobless, a survey of 15- to 17-year-olds found that 19% of girls and 20% of boys had been sexually abused. “Periods of rapid social and economic change…appear to be at least correlated” with violence against women and children, says Cynthia Bowman of Cornell University. As in most of the world, a huge stigma is attached to such crimes in Kenya. But even when children plucked up the courage to tell an adult or go to the police, rather than let their parents take the traditional route of resolving things behind closed doors, the crimes were never investigated properly, says Mercy Chidi, who set up the Meru shelter in 2006. “You had to give them money to even leave their desks,” she says. In 2012, helped by a Canadian NGO called the Equality Effect, Ms Chidi filed claims against police in Meru for violating the rights of more than 240 children by not investigating their allegations properly. The high court ruled in the girls’ favour in 2013. Since then, more than 80% of their cases have been successfully prosecuted. Others are still in the courts, or the suspects have fled. But in most Kenyan communities where the NGOs operate, people were “somewhat resigned” to having paedophiles in their midst, says Fiona Sampson of the Equality Effect. They wanted to protect the children, but they did not know how. So the two organisations have expanded their training of police in Kenya as part of a six-month pilot programme. During one school session 140 children danced on tables, singing “No, no, no to children rape.”No one at home PITY poor Staffan de Mistura, the UN’s special envoy for Syria. Talks aimed at ending the five-year civil war that has claimed more than 250,000 lives and displaced 12m people should have started on January 25th in Geneva. But disagreements over who should come and on what terms could not be resolved in time. As The Economist went to press, it looked as if the talks could at last get under way on January 29th. But as the veteran diplomat ruefully conceded on Monday, threats to pull out should be expected: “Don’t be surprised: there will be a lot of posturing, a lot of walkouts and walk-ins…you should neither be depressed [nor] impressed…the important thing is to keep momentum.” Even that limited goal may prove dauntingly hard to achieve. Both of Mr de Mistura’s predecessors gave up after peace conferences they had convened got nowhere. Hopes of some progress this time were raised after a meeting of the 17-country International Syria Support Group (ISSG) in Vienna in November, which was followed by a UN Security Council resolution calling for talks to start in January that would lead to a “credible” transitional government in place by July this year. Fair elections based on a new constitution would be held by the middle of 2017. Besides the start of the talks, it will be a miracle if any of those other milestones are met. Mr de Mistura admits that the participants are united only by mutual loathing. At the beginning of what he sees as a six-month process the groups will be kept in separate rooms, while he shuttles between them in a search for something they can agree on. The immediate cause of the postponement of the talks was a failure to agree on which groups should be invited as representatives of the Syrian opposition. Gamely, Mr de Mistura sent out formal invitations to his diplomatic dance on January 26th. Hotel bookings have been made and a few TV camera crews have turned up in Geneva, but confusion reigns. Under the auspices of Saudi Arabia, a High Negotiations Committee (HNC) has been established to represent the many rebel factions at the talks. But although it excludes both Islamic State and Jabhat Al-Nusra, al-Qaeda’s Syrian affiliate, it includes hard-line Salafist outfits, such as Jaish al-Islam and Ahrar al-Sham, which collaborate with Jabhat Al-Nusra and which explicitly rule out the principles of democratic pluralism outlined in the ISSG’s Vienna communiqué. The military commander of Jaish al-Islam, Zahran Alloush, was killed by an air strike on December 25th, but the group’s political leader, Muhammad Alloush, has been chosen as the HNC’s chief negotiator in Geneva. The Syrian government tends to regard any opposition figure who has ever carried an AK47 as a “terrorist”, but it is supported by its allies Iran and Russia in wanting Ahrar and Jaish kept out of the talks. However, Russia is demanding the inclusion of other individuals and groups, such as the Kurdish Democratic Union Party, whose YPG militias are fighting both the regime and Islamic State to carve out an autonomous region in the north-east of the country along the Turkish border. Turkey says it will pull out if the Kurds are at the table because they are allied with a Turkish terrorist group, the Kurdistan Workers’ Party. Bowing to pressure, Mr de Mistura did not invite the Kurds. A further problem is that parts of the Sunni Arab coalition say they will not attend unless there is a halt to air strikes by the regime and the Russians and the lifting of sieges in rebel-held territory where civilians are starving. They point out that these are confidence-building measures required by the UN resolution. But although Mr de Mistura bemoans the squabbles over participation as a distraction from more important issues, he is pleading for people to turn up in Geneva without preconditions. Hopes for anything more than sporadic local ceasefires are faint, especially since Russia’s air campaign has strengthened the regime of Bashar al-Assad. Russian planes have carried out nearly 7,000 sorties in the four months since they entered the fray, killing many of Mr Assad’s enemies. Government forces last week seized control of Rabiaa, the last big town in western Latakia province held by the rebels, and crucial for their supply lines from Turkey. Intransigent even when faced with imminent defeat last summer, Mr Assad now believes he is winning.Sweaty in Soweto WHEN South Africa’s biggest fitness chain opened its second gym in Soweto last year, residents of the bustling black township signed up in droves. Within months the Jabulani gym had become the most successful of more than 120 Virgin Active clubs to launch in South Africa, drawing Sowetans for squats, lunges and lifts to DJ beats. Virgin Active, a global brand mostly owned by Brait, a South African investment firm, thinks it can replicate this success elsewhere on the continent. It has two gyms in Namibia and has just opened its first in Botswana. A gym in Kenya is due to open later this year, and the firm is looking at Ghana and Zambia as possible future sites. Africans are getting fatter, a side-effect of economic growth. The number of obese and overweight children has nearly doubled since 1990, from 5.4m to 10.3m, says the World Health Organisation. Mass migration to cities has allowed some Africans to go from malnourished to overweight in a generation, thanks to sedentary lifestyles and fatty diets. Many Africans still see a fuller figure as a sign of success, not to mention sexy. South Africa is the plumpest country on the continent, with a whopping 61% of its people overweight or obese, says the South African Medical Research Council. Other middle-income countries such as the Seychelles and Botswana are close behind. African women are especially prone to putting on extra pounds. Diseases such as diabetes follow.   As Africa’s economic growth slows, gyms are adjusting. While Virgin Active runs swanky health clubs with fluffy towels and shoeshine services, its popular Jabulani gym is a no-frills branch with lower fees. A rival chain, Planet Fitness, has found success with a similar lower-cost model. In places such as Dakar, where gyms are few and expensive, residents take to the beach for group workout sessions. Part of the draw is aspirational: having a gym membership is a token of urban life, like a car and a smartphone. For South Africans posting gym selfies, there is even a hashtag: #MkhabaMustFall, using a slang word for a beer belly, and riffing off the “must fall” hashtags seen in campaigns calling for colonial-era statues to tumble and university tuition fees to be axed. Joy Mokoena, 38, who works in marketing, joined a gym after a friend told her she was looking too chubby. Now she brings her two children along while she takes Zumba classes, explaining: “I don’t want them to be fat like me.”The ultimate protest LIKE his fellow Tunisian, Muhammad Bouazizi, who set himself ablaze to protest against harassment by local officials in 2010, Ridha Yahyaoui was acting impulsively when he died on January 16th. Having just been refused a government job, the unemployed 28-year-old scaled a utility pole in Kasserine, an impoverished town in western Tunisia. He reportedly threatened suicide. Perched in the air, consumed by his grievances, Mr Yahyaoui touched the wires and was electrocuted. Bouazizi’s death ignited protests that ended the dictatorship of Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and inspired the Arab spring. Mr Yahyaoui’s is a reminder that democracy has yet to solve many of Tunisia’s problems. The government has struggled to kick-start an economy that still suffers from past abuse and persistent corruption. Islamist rebels in the west and several big terrorist attacks have added to its woes in the past year. Nidaa Tounes, the dominant political party, has recently fractured. But a lack of jobs is the main reason that thousands of Tunisians have returned to the streets. The unemployment rate is over 15%, worse than before the revolution. Around a third of young people are out of work. In rural areas like Kasserine, jobs are extremely scarce. Much of the work available is suitable for low-skilled labourers; it takes graduates, such as Mr Yahyaoui, an average of six years to find a steady job. Half of all graduates are still unemployed at 35, according to the World Bank. The unrest has only made things worse. Three British tour operators have cancelled all bookings to Tunisia until November. Tourism, which (directly and indirectly) accounts for about 15% of GDP and 14% of jobs, was already down due to two deadly attacks on foreign tourists last year. Dozens of hotels have closed for lack of guests. The government has stepped in as the employer of last resort. Tens of thousands of workers have joined the public sector since 2010, raising the number employed by the government to over 600,000. Another 180,000 or so work for public companies, which have also been on a hiring spree. To placate Tunisia’s powerful unions, the government has raised salaries. The public-sector wage bill almost doubled between 2010 and 2014. It now accounts for over 13% of GDP, one of the highest shares in the world. Not only is Tunisia’s public sector big, it is poorly run. A World Bank report notes that “the link between a public employee’s performance and her evaluation, compensation and promotion is weak, particularly since the revolution.” The wounded and other “martyrs of the revolution” are favoured for jobs. So are the unemployed, leading some Tunisians to shun work in the private sector. Public firms, meanwhile, are models of inefficiency. The Tunisian Chemical Group, cited in the report, increased its head count from 5,000 in 2010 to 16,000 in 2012, while production fell from 8m to 2.5m tonnes. Despite its wage bill, the government expects the budget deficit to fall to 3.9% this year. That is optimistic. Moody’s, a credit-rating agency, recently cut its growth forecast for Tunisia to 1.5%, and expects a deficit closer to 5%. International donors want Tunisia to prune the public sector and spend its money more wisely. The government is already cutting subsidies on items such as fuel. But there is also concern about the stability of this lone Arab-spring success story. France recently promised €1 billion ($1.1 billion) in aid over the next five years. To appease protesters, the government announced on January 20th that it would hire 5,000 young people in Kasserine, though it is actually only offering job training. “We do not have a magic wand to give a job to everyone at the same time,” says Habib Essid, the prime minister. That hard truth has not gone down well in Tunisia.
