The Other Classical Musics: Fifteen Great Traditions. Edited by Michael Church. Boydell Press; 426 pages; £25. ANY self-respecting arts-lover living in America or Europe is familiar with a smattering of writers, painters and sculptors from outside the West. But few cultural buffs could name a single composer from, say, China or Turkey, let alone give any detail about them. A collection of essays, entitled “The Other Classical Musics”, shows how much they are missing. Intelligently edited by Michael Church, a British critic, the book looks at the canons of different parts of the world (India and China are deemed worthy of two chapters each, though Latin America is ignored). Written by different scholars, each chapter has a common structure, with a concise outline of the instruments, the style and the social relations behind the music. Lots of beautiful pictures and extracts of musical notation break up the text. The chapters on Indian classical music will be of particular interest to many readers, who may already have a vague understanding of it through the works of Ravi Shankar, a sitar-player (pictured). The book shows important differences between north (Hindustani) and south (Carnatic) Indian styles. For instance, tablas—drums with heads usually fashioned from goat skin—are more commonly used in Hindustani music; Carnatic melodies tend to contain more flourishes. (Shankar played largely Hindustani music.) Such characterisations are helpful for the lay reader; but the contributors also show a keen eye for historical nuance. Many of them question the usefulness of the term “classical”, arguing that what people may now perceive to be traditional has in fact constantly changed over time. In the chapter on classical Japanese music there is a wonderful illustration of two sheets of musical notation, one from 1303 and the other from the present day; their different styles hint at how the form has evolved. Classical Iranian music has likewise seen much change. During the 1950s it fell under the sway of European musical practices, but as the government grew concerned about Westernisation it sponsored efforts to reassert a Persian flavour. As for India, before the 20th century the country’s music was no more than “a variety of musical traditions performed in different places by different social groups”. Some historians argue that Indian “classical” music was really a cobbling together of different traditions by 20th-century nationalists. Alongside other chapters on places like Tajikistan, north Africa and Java, the book has one on European classical music. For many readers this chapter will be rather familiar; but for those who know little about composers like Pérotin (who was born in Paris and active in the late 12th century, when he came to be known as Pérotin the Great) or John Dunstable (c.1390-1453), a celebrated English composer of polyphonic music, it will be just as interesting as the others. And in fewer than 30 pages it offers as good a summary of the Western canon as can be found anywhere. Readers should not try and digest the whole book in one go; far better to use it for reference. Indeed, the best way to appreciate it is to read it while listening to the music under discussion (your reviewer searched for the relevant compositions on YouTube and played the extracts of notation on the piano). There is a treasure trove of underappreciated music out there; this book will convince many to explore it.Dealing with the wildlife WHEN one online reviewer misinterpreted a key sequence in “The Revenant”, Alejandro Iñárritu’s harrowing wilderness-survival drama acquired a nickname: “The Bear Rape Movie”. It is important to clarify, then, that Leonardo DiCaprio’s character, a shaggy-bearded 19th-century frontiersman called Hugh Glass, is not raped by a bear, although ursine sexual assault is just about the only ordeal he is spared. At the start of the film, Mr Iñárritu’s first since his Oscar-winning Broadway farce, “Birdman”, Glass is a member of a fur-trading party that is ambushed by Arikara natives. The ensuing forest battle has the nerve-shredding immediacy of the D-Day set piece in “Saving Private Ryan” (1998), Steven Spielberg’s second-world-war drama. Shortly afterwards, Glass is bitten, clawed, trodden on and flung around (but not raped) by a hulking grizzly, and then left for dead by a treacherous colleague (Tom Hardy). But he forces himself to trek for hundreds of miles to his associates’ fort, via frozen landscapes as hostile and beautifully strange as the surface of an alien planet. Mr DiCaprio has said that his notoriously gruelling experiences on the set of “Titanic” nearly 20 years ago were a breeze compared with making “The Revenant” on location in Canada and Argentina. But his tribulations have paid off. Like Mr Hardy’s recent hit, “Mad Max: Fury Road”, “The Revenant” is a thunderous riposte to those blockbusters in which digitally rendered cities are flattened, but the violence never registers as anything other than what it is: the reorganising of pixels on a computer screen. Watching Mr Iñárritu’s visceral film, the viewer feels Glass’s pain. Every plunge into an icy river, every mouthful of twitching raw fish, every arrow through the throat seems excruciatingly real. It is unfortunate, then, that the director has given in to his fatal weakness for distracting subplots and mystical hallucinations. If Mr Iñárritu had not fallen for padding out his primal revenge yarn to an unnecessary 156 minutes, the overpowering scenes of Glass struggling against the bear, his human enemies and nature itself would have made “The Revenant” into a classic of the action-movie genre.In a piece on historical agony aunts in our Christmas issue ("Whatever should I do?"), we described a British bigamist as having been transported to Australia before Captain Cook "discovered" the place. The two-timer may well have been shipped to another colony, such as America. Thanks to an alert reader for spotting this.HAD you visited the squatter slums of Kai Tak in Kowloon, Hong Kong, in the 1950s, a curious sight might have met your eyes. Among the thousands of tiny dilapidated wooden huts, crammed with refugees from newly communist China, threaded with muddy paths where adults clopped in wooden sandals and children splashed in storm-drains, a prim Englishwoman would be picking her way with care. Her fair hair was brushed in an immaculate shape, her flowered dress suitable for Cheltenham; a large handbag was on her arm. Her large eyes and prominent teeth gave her a look of keen concern. Her name then was Elsie Elliott. Later she was Elsie Tu. Under both names she was a formidable advocate for the rights of the downtrodden in Hong Kong, shaming and tormenting the police, the Legislative Council and successive British governors for more than 30 years. Wherever second-class citizens—that is, Chinese—lacked transport, housing, education, fair wages or a voice, she would be there, on their side.  This transformation surprised even her. She had arrived in the colony in 1951 as a meek missionary’s wife from the north of England, ready to support her husband, Bill Elliott, in the saving of souls. The merry notes of her piano accordion rang out then over the huts of Kai Tak, inviting everyone to be washed in the blood of the Lamb. Otherwise she made no noise, for women in the Plymouth Brethren were consigned to silence. But gradually, surrounded by such privation, she grew restless. Eventually she left both the Brethren and her husband. Christian witness, to her, meant being “good and useful”, the motto she had adopted as a timid, studious schoolgirl. It meant speaking out, too—even, as her pacifist father had hoped, getting into politics. Hong Kong in those days had no social welfare. It was run by British officials and rich businessmen for themselves alone. The poor Chinese who wandered into her tiny church had boils from malnutrition and fungus-encrusted feet; she set up a clinic to treat them. Children, desperate to learn, sat in the street devouring cheap comics; in 1954 she set up Mu Kuang Middle School, which grew from a 30-desk army tent, flapping in winds and summer downpours, to a seven-storey block with 1,300 pupils by 2015. Buying land and buildings, hurdling regulations and dealing with the Education Department introduced her to Hong Kong’s subculture of corruption, in which the ba wong, or triads, extorted protection money from every hut-dweller and even from street hawkers; in which everyone expected backhanders; and where the police were up to theirkhaki shorts in the narcotics trade. Her relentless exposure of the police, in reports and letters to the South China Morning Post (her favourite, “restrained” modus operandi), became an all-out war, especially when after 1963 she sat on the Urban Council. In 1966, when she campaigned against a fare rise on the Star Ferry linking Hong Kong island and Kowloon, the police accused her of inciting violence among the protesters; she proved them liars and became wildly popular, as well as later winning the CBE for her anti-corruption efforts. To her backers she was invaluable, a British gadfly with pretty good Mandarin and passable Cantonese, who could intercede easily with those in power and could neither be silenced nor deported. Love and politics The authorities themselves, in the governor’s office and on the Legislative Council (where she also sat, from 1988 to 1995), were less certain what to make of her. She had no stated ideology, beyond “justice for the people”, but was scornful of the favours shown to Taiwanese and would not censure China. In the run-up to the handover of the colony to China in 1997 she attacked the “disgraceful” reforms belatedly introduced by the British, and belittled the self-styled democrats who attacked the Basic Law agreed on, with some input from her, with the Chinese. In 1995 she lost her seat at the age of 82 to a “pro-democracy” candidate whose hand she refused to shake. Her motivations were in fact rather simple. She hated colonialism, believing that it brought out the worst sort of arrogance in the British. She championed the Chinese because, to her, they were its victims. But she embraced them, too, because she fell in love with—and, in 1985, married—a Chinese patriot from Inner Mongolia, Tu Hsueh-kwei. He had joined her church and co-founded her school; they had taught each other their respective languages. She called him “Andrew” after the apostle who cared for the needy. Through him she absorbed the philosophy and poetry of China, the songs of the Beijing Opera, the habit of patience and an enhanced sense of racial injustice. In return he supported her in every way he could—except publicly, which might have meant deportation. With him she experienced a strange reversal of her first role in Hong Kong. Then, as a missionary wife, it was she who had been silent and second-class, reduced to making the refreshments at meetings. Now it was Andrew who would greet her, after another rowdy day on the Legislative Council, with a cup of tea just as she liked it. But then, reverting to the natural shyness she always felt she had, she would say “Thank you, husband,” and sip demurely, as if the order of things were not inverted; and as if she posed no threat to anyone.Iraq’s armed forces recaptured Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province, which fell to Islamic State in May and is just 100km from Baghdad. The country’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, said that IS would be driven from his country by the end of 2016. IS also suffered fresh reverses in Syria; on December 26th it lost the important power-generating Tishreen dam to a mainly Kurdish force. See article.  Saudi Arabia’s stockmarkets fell sharply after it announced swingeing spending cuts to close a gaping budget deficit. Saudi public finances have been hurt by declining oil revenues. In the middle of 2015 Brent crude was trading at $65 a barrel; now it is under $38. An outbreak of Ebola that rampaged through three African countries officially ended when the World Health Organisation declared that Guinea was free of the disease. The outbreak, which started two years ago, killed some 11,000 people, most of them in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Stockmarkets responded positively to the Federal Reserve’s decision on December 16th to raise interest rates for the first time since 2006. After months of dithering the central bank lifted the range for its benchmark rate by a quarter of a percentage point to between 0.25% and 0.5%. Martin Shkreli was arrested by the FBI on December 17th and charged with securities fraud. Mr Shkreli made the headlines in 2015 when a drugs company he ran bought the rights to a medicine and raised its price by 5,000%. The (unrelated) charges against Mr Shkreli, which he denies, pertain to his time as a hedge-fund manager. Poland’s right-wing government passed a law requiring the constitutional court to approve decisions by a two-thirds majority, and with at least 13 of the 15 judges present. The law will force the court to accept disputed new judges whom the government has appointed. It will also make it much harder to strike down new laws. The opposition staged furious demonstrations. See article.  Spain held an election before Christmas, which resulted in no stable majority. The ruling People’s Party of Mariano Rajoy came first and the Socialists second. Two smaller parties took seats, breaking the traditional two-party system. Brazil’s finance minister, Joaquim Levy, resigned on December 18th. He came into office in January 2015 with a mandate to slash the budget deficit but was thwarted by a severe recession and political turmoil. His successor is Nelson Barbosa, who was the planning minister. A group of Central American countries plus Mexico reached an agreement to allow some of the 7,000 migrants from Cuba who are stuck on Costa Rica’s border with Nicaragua to travel to the United States. Nicaragua had blocked their entry. The migrants will now be airlifted to El Salvador and continue by bus. The number of migrants from Cuba has increased since a diplomatic thaw with the United States began in 2014. Many fear that the rapprochement will end the United States’ policy of accepting émigrés from Cuba if they reach American soil. Argentina lifted exchange controls and allowed the peso to float freely, days after the inauguration of its new president, Mauricio Macri. This forms part of a liberalisation programme to reverse populist policies of the outgoing government of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. See article.  Carlos Rosales Mendoza, the founder of La Familia Michoacana, a Mexican drug gang, was found dead along with the bodies of three other people near a motorway in western Mexico. He was on the most-wanted list of the Drug Enforcement Agency in the United States. A landslide in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen killed seven people and left dozens of others missing. Officials called it an “industrial safety accident”, caused by a collapsing heap of construction waste. An official who had once overseen the site committed suicide. The chairman of one of China’s largest state-owned mobile operators, China Telecom, is being investigated by anti-graft officials. The businessman, Chang Xiaobing, is among several senior executives who have been targeted in an anti- corruption campaign being waged by President Xi Jinping. Japan and South Korea agreed to settle a long-standing dispute over women forced to work in Japanese brothels during the second world war. Japan apologised and said it would pay ¥1 billion ($8.3m) to help victims. The bodies of six American troops killed by a Taliban suicide-bomber near Bagram air base in Afghanistan were flown home. It was the deadliest attack on American personnel in the country in years. A sizeable contingent of troops is to remain in Afghanistan until at least the start of 2017. The season of goodwill extended to America’s House of Representatives, which passed a $1.8 trillion spending measure before Christmas with little argument and thus avoided a government shutdown. Paul Ryan, the new Speaker, was commended for his adroit handling of the bill.More KAL's cartoonsAT THE start of 2016 Brazil should be in an exuberant mood. Rio de Janeiro is to host South America’s first Olympic games in August, giving Brazilians a chance to embark on what they do best: throwing a really spectacular party. Instead, Brazil faces political and economic disaster. On December 16th Fitch became the second of the three big credit-rating agencies to downgrade Brazil’s debt to junk status. Days later Joaquim Levy, the finance minister appointed by the president, Dilma Rousseff, to stabilise the public finances, quit in despair after less than a year in the job. Brazil’s economy is predicted to shrink by 2.5-3% in 2016, not much less than it did in 2015. Even oil-rich, sanction-racked Russia stands to do better. At the same time, Brazil’s governing coalition has been discredited by a gargantuan bribery scandal surrounding Petrobras, a state-controlled oil company. And Ms Rousseff, accused of hiding the size of the budget deficit, faces impeachment proceedings in Congress. As the B in BRICS, Brazil is supposed to be in the vanguard of fast-growing emerging economies. Instead it faces political dysfunction and perhaps a return to rampant inflation. Only hard choices can put Brazil back on course. Just now, Ms Rousseff does not seem to have the stomach for them. Dismal Dilma Brazil’s suffering, like that of other emerging economies, stems partly from the fall in global commodity prices. But Ms Rousseff and her left-wing Workers’ Party (PT) have made a bad situation much worse. During her first term, in 2011-14, she spent extravagantly and unwisely on higher pensions and unproductive tax breaks for favoured industries. The fiscal deficit swelled from 2% of GDP in 2010 to 10% in 2015. Brazil’s crisis managers do not have the luxury of waiting for better times to begin reform (see article). At 70% of GDP, public debt is worryingly large for a middle-income country and rising fast. Because of high interest rates, the cost of servicing it is a crushing 7% of GDP. The Central Bank cannot easily use monetary policy to fight inflation, currently 10.5%, as higher rates risk destabilising the public finances even more by adding to the interest bill. Brazil therefore has little choice but to raise taxes and cut spending. Mr Levy made a game attempt to renovate the building while putting out the fire. He trimmed discretionary spending by a record 70 billion reais ($18 billion) in 2015 and tightened eligibility for unemployment insurance. But it was not enough. The recession dragged down tax revenues. Ms Rousseff gave her finance minister only lukewarm support and the PT was hostile towards him. The opposition, intent on ousting the president, was in no mood to co-operate. Although he was a senior treasury official during Ms Rousseff’s disastrous first term, Nelson Barbosa may be able to accomplish more as finance minister. He has political support within the PT. He also has bargaining power, because Ms Rousseff cannot afford to lose another finance minister. One early test will be whether Mr Barbosa persuades a recalcitrant Congress to reinstate an unpopular financial-transactions tax. A central target should be pensions. The minimum benefit is the same as the minimum wage, which has risen by nearly 90% in real terms over the past decade. Women typically retire when they are 50 and men stop work at 55, nearly a decade earlier than the average in the OECD (a club of mostly rich countries). Brazil’s government pays almost 12% of GDP to pensioners, a bigger share than older, richer Japan. If Brazil is to fulfil its promise, much, much more is needed. A typical manufacturing firm spends 2,600 hours a year complying with the country’s ungainly tax code; the Latin American average is 356. Labour laws modelled on those of Mussolini make it expensive for firms to fire even incompetent employees. Brazil has shielded its firms from international competition. That is one reason why, among 41 countries whose performance was measured by the OECD, its manufacturing productivity is the fourth-lowest. To reform work and pensions, Ms Rousseff must face up to problems that have been decades in the making. Some 90% of public spending is protected from cuts, partly by the constitution which, in 1988, celebrated the end of military rule by enshrining generous job protection and state benefits. Because it is so hard to reform, Brazil’s public sector rivals European welfare states for size but emerging ones for inefficiency. Long a drain on economic vitality, Brazil’s overbearing state is now a chief cause of the fiscal crisis. Waxing and waning: Brazil's economic woes, in charts Overcoming such deep-rooted practices would be hard for any government. In Brazil it is made all the harder by a daft political system, which favours party fragmentation and vote-buying and attracts political mercenaries who have little commitment either to party or to programme. The threshold for a party to enter the lower house of Congress is low; today 28 are represented, adding to the legislative gridlock. Congressmen represent entire states, some as populous as neighbouring Latin American countries, which makes campaigning ruinously expensive—one reason why politicians skimmed off huge amounts of money from Petrobras. It is therefore hard, despite Mr Barbosa’s advantages, to feel optimistic about the prospects for deep reform. Voters hold politicians in contempt. The opposition is bent on impeaching Ms Rousseff, a misguided battle that could dominate the political agenda for months. The PT has no appetite for austerity. Achieving the three-fifths support in both houses of Congress needed for constitutional reforms will be a tall order. Reckless Rousseff And if Ms Rousseff fails to bring about change? Most of Brazil’s borrowing is in local currency, which makes default unlikely. Instead, the country may end up inflating away its debts. Brazil’s achievement has been to lift tens of millions of people out of rag-and-flip-flop poverty. Recession will halt that, or even begin to reverse it. The hope is that Brazil, which has achieved hard-won economic and democratic stability, does not lapse once again into chronic mismanagement and turmoil.A MONTH before the first primary contest in Iowa, the Republican race is more warlike than wonkish. Yet the candidates have found time to write sometimes intricate plans to reform America’s taxes (see article). Though no one blueprint will become law, if America chooses a Republican president, he may well have a Republican Congress to work with. At that point, the winner’s tax plan will seem less like a campaign gimmick and more like a promise to be kept. Republicans are right to seek to reform America’s incoherent, tangled-up tax system. America’s corporate tax is a toxic combination of a high rate—the highest in the OECD—and a series of complex distortions, which encourage bad behaviour such as gorging on debt and stashing cash in foreign subsidiaries. Republicans rightly want to cut the rate and put an end to most of the distortions. Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush would also let businesses deduct the cost of their investments from their taxes immediately, rather than as their assets deteriorate and lose value. This would encourage investment and boost economic growth. The candidates have interesting ideas for helping low earners, too. Mr Bush and Donald Trump want to raise the standard deduction (the amount Americans can earn before paying income tax). That would be a simple way to encourage work and to help low- and middle-income households: a similar policy has proved a success in Britain. Mr Bush would also double the earned-income tax credit, a wage top-up for low-earners, for childless workers. Mr Rubio wants to replace the standard deduction with a universal payment to those in work, which would help even those who earn too little to benefit from an increased tax allowance.  These ideas, though, are mere footnotes to the plans’ central chapters: huge tax cuts for high earners. At 39.6%, America’s top federal income-tax rate is hardly high by global standards. Yet the candidates are racing to see who can promise to cut it most. Mr Bush aims for 28%; Mr Trump 25%. Ted Cruz wants to replace income tax entirely with a 10% flat tax and a value-added tax. Mr Rubio, whose promise of a 35% top rate seems timid by comparison, serves up largesse elsewhere by promising to abolish levies on capital gains and dividends. The first problem with these schemes is their cost. On today’s growth forecasts, even Mr Bush’s relatively moderate plan would reduce revenues by $715 billion, or 13.5%, a year by 2026—more than the projected national defence budget. Paying for Mr Trump’s plan with reduced day-to-day spending (as opposed to mandatory spending on things like pensions and health care) would require cutting budgets by a staggering 82%. The candidates claim that tax cuts will spur the economy, filling the government’s coffers with new revenue. But the pace of any economic acceleration is uncertain. The evidence that income-tax cuts for high earners boost growth is thin at best. Predictions that tax cuts in the early 2000s would cause enough growth to pay for themselves look foolish today. This is no time to be taking chances with America’s budget. Retiring baby-boomers are increasing the cost of providing pensions and health care for the old. There is no appetite among Republicans for defence cuts, and other day-to-day spending has already been cut by 22% in real terms since 2010. If tax cuts were paid for with more borrowing rather than lower spending, they would end up as deadweight for the economy rather than as fuel. The plans would also greatly exacerbate inequality, which has increased in the 15 years since George W. Bush cut taxes for high earners. Under Mr Trump’s plan, for instance, the top 1% of earners would receive a windfall worth 18% of their after-tax income. Middle-earners have to settle for a 5% boost; the bottom fifth, just 1%. This belies Mr Trump’s claim to champion the cause of ordinary working people. The other plans are little better; Mr Rubio’s plan is probably more generous at the bottom than at the top, but he gives middle-income Americans little to cheer about. The Republicans have spent much of Barack Obama’s presidency denouncing debt and deficits. Yet their proposals to introduce unaffordable tax cuts for the rich would send both ballooning. So long as such schemes are a prerequisite for winning the Republican nomination, a party that prides itself on economic management will lack a credible policy.
