CHANTS of “Russia without Putin!” echoed through Moscow four years ago. Vladimir Putin’s choreographed return to the presidency and vote tampering in parliamentary elections brought thousands to the streets; his approval ratings fell to 63%. But after the annexation of Crimea in 2014, those ratings soared to nearly 90% and have not come back to earth since. Mr Putin became “a charismatic leader of the Promethean type: a demigod, a Titan, who brought the people fire,” says Valery Fedorov, head of the state-financed Russian Public Opinion Research Centre (VCIOM). Even a recession, falling real wages and rampant inflation have barely dented Mr Putin’s numbers. For Mr Putin’s fans, his untouchable ratings serve as proof of his righteousness. To some Russian liberals and Western observers, they are evidence that something is wrong with the polling. The practices of state-backed sociologists have been questioned. A fear of sharing political opinions, a legacy of Russia’s totalitarian past, may taint results. But the independent Levada Centre records approval levels for Mr Putin similar to those of state pollsters; so does the in-house sociological service of Alexei Navalny, an opposition leader. In fact, the issue is more complicated. In today’s Russia, where the Kremlin controls most media and politics offers no alternative, polls are more ambiguous than in countries where they measure the support of competing politicians. Instead of offering an assessment of Mr Putin’s actions, ratings reflect “the condition of a complex of collective expectations, hopes, and illusions connected with him”, as the late sociologist Yuri Levada said in 2005. Oil price and Russian politics: a history In the long shadow of the Soviet collapse, the desire of Russians for self-respect is just as powerful as their desire to live well, says Lev Gudkov, the Levada Centre’s director. Mr Putin’s overseas adventurism has satisfied this desire. The president has come to embody Russia (as his deputy chief of staff put it, “No Putin—no Russia”); disapproving of him verges on repudiating the country. His approval ratings measure “the respect, trust and pride Russians have in themselves and their country”, says Mr Fedorov. “Putin is just a symbol.” Nonetheless, discontent is starting to well up. This month protests forced the Krasnodar region to roll back cuts in travel benefits for pensioners. In Moscow, foreign-currency loan holders have stormed bank branches demanding refinancing in roubles. So far, such protests remain diffuse and apolitical. Russians are more likely to blame the prime minister or local officials than Mr Putin, in keeping with the age-old Russian political myth of the good tsar betrayed by evil boyars. Yet as parliamentary elections loom this autumn, Mr Putin has been quietly distancing himself from his party, United Russia, which enjoys considerably less support than he does. Eventually, the frustration may begin to catch up with Mr Putin too. Mr Fedorov forecasts a 10% dip in his ratings this year: “Everything in this life is finite.” Even Prometheus got tied down eventually.If I had a hammer IN 1918 the then three-month-old Moldovan republic gave up the struggle for survival and united with neighbouring Romania. It is a sign of how dire things are today, says Iulian Fota, a Romanian analyst, that people are talking about doing so again. Ever since 2014, when the embezzlement of about $1 billion from three banks forced a taxpayer bail-out that has crippled the economy, the country has been lurching towards collapse. Opposition supporters are permanently encamped in front of the government building. Maia Sandu, a former education minister who is rushing to build a new party, says the situation could lead to violence. No one seems to disagree. On January 20th Pavel Filip, a close associate of Vlad Plahotniuc, the most powerful of the businessman-politicians who dominate Moldova, was voted in as prime minister. His administration is the eighth since 2013. Mr Plahotniuc had wanted the job; the president rejected him, saying there were doubts about his integrity. Mr Plahotniuc’s arch-rival in business and politics, meanwhile, was arrested in October after accusations that he had received $260m in bribes. He denies wrongdoing. As Mr Filip was voted in, protesters stormed into parliament, trying to block him from taking office. They failed. On January 24th tens of thousands demonstrated against the new government. Opposition leaders have demanded a new vote. Western leaders, however, fear that elections would be won by pro-Russian parties and return the country, which has an association agreement with the European Union, to the Russian sphere of influence. Many Moldovans are incensed by reports in the Western press that the current struggle is one between pro-Russian and pro-European parties. For most protesters, the conflict has nothing to do with geopolitics. As Victoria Bucataru of the Foreign Policy Association of Moldova puts it, they are fed up with elites fighting for power while they grow poorer.   Still, if a poll were held today, the two parties generally seen as pro-Russian would together get the biggest share. The Socialists’ election posters feature pictures of Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. Renato Usatii, the leader of the other opposition party, owns a business in Russia. But he says calling him pro-Russian is a slur. “I am pro-Moldovan,” he insists, adding that if he led the country he would not rescind its agreement with the EU. One source close to Mr Plahotniuc says he wants to retire from politics. Others say they have heard this before; they believe he wants to succeed the current president when his term expires in March. Meanwhile Moldova is cut off from the external financing that it needs. Since the theft of the $1 billion, diagnostic audits are supposed to have been done on the country’s three largest remaining banks. Alex Kremer, the World Bank’s representative in Moldova, says he is concerned about delays in the completion of the reports. If it turns out that yet more money has been stolen from the banks, the anger of Moldova’s 3m exasperated citizens may at last boil over.ON A quiet bend of the River Oise, beside a wooded lake, the Ile de Loisirs activity centre usually runs sailing schools and high-wire tree-climbing adventures. Last autumn its dormitories were briefly turned into an emergency welcome centre for 98 Syrian and Iraqi refugees. Today, however, the gardens outside the residential block are empty again, the wooden picnic benches deserted. The refugee families are already gone. Their speedy resettlement shows that France has plenty of capacity to absorb migrants. It also raises the question of why it is that while Germany is coping with a vast flood of Syrian refugees, France is attracting only a trickle. The refugees who turned up in this new town, some 40km (25 miles) north-west of Paris, travelled in specially chartered coaches from Munich last September. Officials from the French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons (OFPRA) had gone to Munich in a gesture of solidarity to persuade refugees to settle in France, to help relieve the pressure on the Germans. Less than 48 hours after Cergy offered to take them in, the first coach pulled up outside the activity centre. “The welcome in Cergy was really great,” says Ali Tarabein, a former seed trader, who fled Syria via Turkey and the Greek island of Lesbos before making a four-day journey overland to Germany. Dozens of locals brought clothes and toys. “Cergy has always been very welcoming to people who come from elsewhere,” says Jean-Paul Jeandon, the Socialist mayor of the town, which is informally twinned with a village in Palestine and another in Senegal. Within two weeks, all primary-aged refugee children were in a local school. Adults, none of whom spoke French, were given language classes while they awaited official papers. By mid-December all the original refugees had been offered housing, five of them in Cergy and others elsewhere in France. Asylum applications in France take an average of two years to process, but officials in Cergy cut through the bureaucratic thicket and speeded things up. It helped that the town is no stranger to new arrivals, with a mix of 130 nationalities. Many refugees were skilled, among them a dentist and an engineering student, and the numbers were manageable. “If we’d had hundreds or even thousands it would have been more complex,” says Mr Jeandon. Yet it is precisely those low numbers that are puzzling, not just in Cergy but in France as a whole. Overall asylum applications rose last year by 22%, but to just 79,000—nothing remotely close to the million-plus who registered in Germany. In 2015, 158,657 Syrians completed asylum applications in Germany, compared with only 3,553 in France. Last year the European Union agreed on a relocation programme to share 160,000 refugees from Italy and Greece. By mid-January France had taken in only 19; another 43 arrived this week. The explanation seems to be a mix of migrants’ relatively weak ties to France, and the limited opportunities in a country with 10% unemployment. “I wanted to go to Sweden, then Germany or England,” says Mr Tarabein, who had friends in those countries and spoke English but not French. He ruled out Britain after friends warned him on Facebook and WhatsApp about the perils of trying to cross from the French port of Calais: “It was too dangerous, I don’t want to die.” As for France, he says he had heard it took months to get papers (France does not allow refugees to work for nine months) and that Syrian refugees there “live on the streets”. It was only when the OFPRA officials promised fast-track settlement that he agreed to take his seat on the coach. Now, relocated to Narbonne, he is trying to bring his wife and three small children from Syria. “It’s Germany that is in an extraordinary situation, not France,” says Pascal Brice, director of OFPRA. If the EU redistribution scheme is not yet working, he says, this is simply because refugees prefer to go to Germany. Yet there is no French political appetite to speed matters up. The xenophobic National Front continues to shape the debate. In a recent poll, 60% of French said they do not want more refugees, and terrorism has hardened sentiment. (Two of those behind the November 13th attacks in Paris posed as asylum-seekers.) Manuel Valls, the prime minister, put it bluntly last week: “The first message we need to send now, with the greatest of firmness, is to say that we will not welcome all the refugees in Europe.” Cergy may turn out to be the exception, not the makings of a solution to ease Europe’s migrant crisis.NOTHING excites the febrile intellects of Brussels more than analysing the theoretical underpinnings of European foreign policy. Entire tracts are devoted to the security strategy of the European Union, its neighbourhood policy, the countless “tools”, “instruments” and “levers” it has designed to help it advance its global concerns. A keen student can lose himself for hours in strategy papers and advisory memos to the policymakers supposedly shaping Europe’s place in the world. When the EU signed a German-inspired deal with Turkey to help stem the flow of refugees late last year, none of this mattered a jot. Presented by European officials as a hard-nosed piece of statecraft, the “action plan” offers Turkey money, the prospect of visa-free travel inside the EU and an acceleration of its membership bid so long as the Turks keep the migrants away. It was one of the most important European foreign-policy initiatives in years, but there was not a sniff of strategy to it. It reeked of desperation. Turkey-watchers in Europe and liberals inside Turkey were united in outrage. The Europeans were averting their gaze as Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, was locking up journalists, harassing the opposition and prosecuting a bloody war against unruly Kurds—in an official EU candidate country, no less. The European Commission even postponed publication of its highly critical annual report on Turkey’s membership bid while Mr Erdogan’s party campaigned in national elections. The deal seemed emblematic of a “realist” turn in European foreign policy. Ideas such as slashing aid to countries that refuse to accept the return of failed asylum-seekers are doing the rounds. Officials in international-development agencies tear their hair out as carefully nurtured relationships in Africa are tossed aside to make way for quick-and-dirty deals to ship back rejected migrants. Southern European countries fret that a plan to open EU markets to Middle Eastern exports (to create jobs for refugees) will crowd out their manufacturers. This is not the Weltinnenpolitik (global domestic policy) that grand thinkers like Jürgen Habermas thought regional clubs such as the EU were well placed to cultivate. Instead, to borrow from the late American neoconservative Irving Kristol, Europeans have started to resemble liberals mugged by reality. It is easy to bleat about human rights when you are living in a peaceful, postmodern paradise; less so when you have millions of illegal migrants barging through your back door. Europeans are hardly new to Realpolitik (the clue is in the word). There has long been a division of foreign-policy labour within the EU, says Michael Leigh of the German Marshall Fund, a think-tank. Larger countries delegated values-based policy to Brussels while they got on with the hard stuff, such as security or access to oil. For every pious expression of support for international justice or condemnation of capital punishment, there was a shabby energy deal or quiet support for a useful dictator. Some feel this category includes the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, which would run directly from Russia to Germany under the Baltic Sea and could undermine the EU’s energy policy, but which has the support of Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor. Tougher than they look Even in its soft and fuzzy days, the EU was not toothless. Its strongest tool—the attraction of membership—combined European interests and values in one package. Enlargement to the east brought stability to the region while strengthening the rule of law and democratic institutions inside candidate countries. (Maintaining them once countries have joined has proved harder, as the recent examples of Hungary and Poland demonstrate.) Globally, Europeans have, in their gentle way, sought to bolster a rules-based order that has enabled their exporters to flourish. That looked like the future, once. But today’s threats lead down a different path. Europe’s power no longer extends outward; instead, the surrounding countries have turned their pathologies on Europe. Enlargement is off the table—even in the Balkans the EU’s main interest is in keeping order, as millions of migrants tramp through a historically unstable region. Russia’s bloody intervention in Ukraine tore up the European belief that borders may not be changed by force—and Europe initially struggled to respond. It dithered again last year as the stream of migrants coming through Greece swelled, eventually leaving Mrs Merkel with little choice but to shower gifts upon Mr Erdogan in the hope of an agreement to stanch the flow. The Turkey deal may yet work (although Charlemagne is struggling to find anyone who believes that it will). If it cuts the number of refugees and the borderless Schengen area survives, a European ideal will have been saved. Optimists think that, even if it flops, the EU’s relations with an important neighbour will have emerged from the deep freeze. Denouncing Mr Erdogan’s power grabs through bloodless progress reports had little effect; now EU politicians can slip their concerns into exchanges on refugees, as some visiting commissioners did this week in Ankara. The crisis may also force the EU to look outward again. Tunisia, notes Jan Techau of Carnegie Europe, another think-tank, is crawling with European diplomats and money, testament to the EU’s desperation to preserve a rare success from the Arab spring. But these are slim hopes. Europe’s vulnerabilities are on full display. Some future Qaddafi will be alert to the concessions he might win by threatening to unleash hordes of migrants upon European shores. Finland and Norway fear that Vladimir Putin may decide to do precisely that by waving through a host of Syrians and Afghans. As for Turkey, had the Europeans woken up to the coming danger last spring, they might not have found themselves compromising their values so grubbily in the autumn. That would have been the strategic thing to do. Time to dust off some of those far-sighted think-tank reports.BLACK British history did not begin in the 20th century. In 1578 George Best, a travelling diarist, wrote of meeting “an Ethiopian as blacke as a cole brought into England”. But it was after the 1940s that Britain’s black population really began to grow, with two waves of immigration. The first, from the 1940s to the 1960s, carried poor Caribbeans to British shores. The second, beginning in the late 1980s, came from Africa, as wealthy Nigerians and Ghanaians arrived alongside rural migrants and refugees from Somalia and Zimbabwe. Britain’s black population is now about 2m, or just over 3% of the total. The census divides it into two main categories: “black African” and “black Caribbean”. Until the turn of the century, Caribbeans were in the majority. But in the ten years to 2011, the African population doubled. And that is not the end of the changes: although Caribbean Britons are substantially better off than their African neighbours, demographic and educational trends suggest that the tables may soon be turned. Thamesmead, an east-London suburb that is home to Britain’s most-concentrated African population, illustrates the group’s struggles. Its bleak residential towers, where Stanley Kubrick shot “A Clockwork Orange”, are overcrowded, says Mabel Ogundayo, a 24-year-old local councillor. Most of its crammed-in residents are tenants; nationwide, less than one-quarter of Africans are owner-occupiers, compared with nearly one-half of Caribbeans. That is partly why Caribbean households are, on average, much better off: in 2009 the Office for National Statistics (ONS) found that the average one had £76,000 ($109,000) in assets, against £15,000 among Africans. Caribbeans also fare better at work. Africans are less likely to be employed, and more likely to toil in low-skilled occupations. Much of this is down to their more recent arrival: although four out of ten have degrees—more than any ethnic group other than Chinese and Indians—many studied at unrecognised foreign universities, and some speak little English. As a result, 41% of African graduates work in non-graduate jobs, compared with 28% of Caribbeans. Their employment rate is dragged down by some groups that have particularly struggled: few from the mainly refugee Congolese or Somali communities are in work, for example. Yet the fact that much of their disadvantage is owing to their recentness suggests that, with time, it will be overcome. Many are richer than the first wave of Caribbeans. New Nigerian immigrants are less likely to be employed than new Jamaicans, but this stops being the case after five years in the country, according to the ONS. And although Africans are more likely than whites to be in low-paid work, the gap disappears once factors such as age, occupation and language have been controlled for. As new generations are minted and old ones learn English, earnings can be expected to rise. There is already progress in schools and universities. In 2014, 68% of Africans got five good grades in their GCSEs, the exams taken at 16, compared with 65% of whites and 59% of Caribbeans. They are far more likely to continue their education—indeed, the poorest Africans are as likely to go to university as the wealthiest Caribbeans. Although there is little difference in performance at primary school, Caribbean children “lack the support that’s needed to deal with the choppy waters of secondary school,” says Tony Sewell, the founder of Generating Genius, a charity. Africans, as newer arrivals, “have the mindset that there’s always something worse [than schoolwork] out there,” he adds. And although discrimination remains real, it is less pervasive than when Caribbeans first arrived in Britain. Archived government papers released last month showed that in 1985 Margaret Thatcher was warned by advisers that grants to black entrepreneurs would end up in the “disco and drug trade”. Back then, 50% of Britons admitted to NatCen, a research organisation, that they would mind if a close relative married a black person. Now, the figure is 22%. (Prejudice has found new targets: 44% say they would be bothered by a relation marrying a Muslim.) Africans remain less integrated than Caribbeans. Eight out of ten Africans choose an African partner, whereas by comparison less than half of Caribbeans settle down with a fellow Caribbean. A child under ten who has a Caribbean parent is more than twice as likely as not to have a white parent. Some believe that Africans’ delay in integrating may actually help to explain their success. West Africans, in particular, have a “separateness and social distance” in areas such as language, dress and religious worship “which seems to carry a protective effect”, says Trevor Phillips, a former head of the statutory Equality and Human Rights Commission. Caribbeans, by contrast, resemble whites in their performance at school—that is, both do pretty badly, after controlling for income. Others dispute the value of “separateness”, arguing that minorities benefit more from mixing. That is where official efforts focus. With second-generation Africans already starting to integrate more quickly, the theory will soon be put to the test.The 40-year journey from anarchy to tourist attraction is almost complete. The place of punk rock’s birth in 1976, the King’s Road in London, is now filled with designer shoe shops; its principal ambassador, John Lydon (aka Johnny Rotten), fronts advertisements for Country Life butter. Nonetheless its “attitude and spirit” survive untouched, insists the mayor of London’s office, which is helping to co-ordinate a year-long punk festival in conjunction with such anti-establishment institutions as the British Library and the Museum of London. God save the queen.  A shot of Baileys for the banks A SAFE pair of hands. That was the City’s reaction to news that Andrew Bailey, a veteran of more than 30 years at the Bank of England, had been appointed chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which oversees the relationship between banks and their customers. His task will be to walk the fine line between rooting out bad practices in the industry and making sure that multinational banks—vital sources of tax for the government—do not take offence and head overseas. HSBC, one of the world’s biggest, is reviewing whether to stay in London or move to Hong Kong. Martin Wheatley, Mr Bailey’s predecessor, was forced out of his job last year by George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer. Mr Wheatley was perceived as too hostile to the banks and also carried the can for a botched announcement of a review of the life-insurance industry; a parliamentary report said the FCA made a “serious error” and “created a false market in life insurance shares”. The FCA’s new head is no stranger to bank regulation. As well as being a deputy governor of the Bank of England, Mr Bailey ran the Prudential Regulatory Authority (PRA), which supervises the health of the financial industry. In layman’s terms, he has moved from making sure that banks don’t go bust to ensuring they don’t rip off their customers. David Buik, a market commentator at Panmure Gordon, a stockbroker, described Mr Bailey as “very steely and a very good listener. I don’t think he will be pushed around.” The selection process, which lasted six months, was tricky, with suggestions that Mr Bailey had to be drafted into the job. In a sign of the last-minute nature of the appointment, his successor at the PRA has yet to be found. Britain has struggled to create a stable regulatory regime for its banks, stirring the alphabet soup of watchdogs every decade or so. As part of the “Big Bang” reforms of the mid-1980s, the Thatcher government set up the Securities and Investment Board, with sub-regulators covering business activities like life insurance and financial advice. Gordon Brown swept that system away when Labour came to power in 1997, replacing all the old bodies with the Financial Services Authority (FSA), which also took over the Bank of England’s role as bank regulator. The FSA’s “light touch” was much trumpeted during the financial boom of the early 2000s but proved wanting when a host of banks ran into trouble in 2007 and 2008. So Mr Osborne rearranged the deckchairs again in 2012, replacing the FSA with the FCA and PRA. The banks have continued to attract scandals, including the fixing of a key interest rate known as LIBOR (five brokers were found not guilty of rigging LIBOR on January 27th; Tom Hayes, a former UBS and Citigroup trader, was convicted of the offence last year). Another long-running saga involves the mis-selling of payment-protection insurance, the fiasco that launched a million unwanted phone-calls. Mr Bailey will hope that no new snafus emerge on his watch. Like good football referees, the best regulators keep out of the headlines. If things go well, Mr Bailey might even be in line for a bigger role: Mark Carney’s successor as Bank governor.
