“THE Labour Party is a bit like an old stagecoach. If you drive it along at a rapid rate everyone aboard is either so exhilarated or seasick that you do not have a lot of difficulty.” So argued Harold Wilson, a Labour prime minister, adding: “But if you stop, everybody gets out and argues about where to go next.” The mantra has held for much of the party’s history. Yet today, when it is in peril as almost never before, Labour’s problem is not that everyone is arguing but that they are rallying around a flawed consensus. That much was made clear by the official account of Labour’s unexpectedly poor result in the general election in May. Written by Margaret Beckett, a former foreign secretary, the report of the Learning the Lessons from Defeat Taskforce (nothing is taken seriously in Labour unless lots of capital letters are involved) pointed to various causes. Party bigwigs duly praised the document. Among the factors it cited were a hostile media and the Conservative Party’s accusation that Labour might do a coalition deal with the secessionist Scottish National Party. Both were valid points, yet the report appeared to minimise the two most convincing explanations for Labour’s defeat: the unpopularity of its then-leader, Ed Miliband, and the lack of trust in the party on the economy. The impression of selective accounting was strengthened when Deborah Mattinson, a former Labour pollster, accused Dame Margaret of overlooking polling from marginal seats like Croydon and Nuneaton. These polls made it clear that Labour failed to disabuse voters of the notion that the party had caused the financial crash, could not run the economy and had a leader incapable of being prime minister. They stressed that Labour needed to appeal to “middle-class voters, not just down-and-outs”, and that having an apparently “weak and bumbling leader” did not help. Ms Mattinson called the final report, in which such concerns were skated over, a “whitewash”. In Jeremy Corbyn the party now has a leader who accentuates both of the weaknesses which, evidence suggests, lost the party the election. Yet it is acting as if Dame Margaret’s ruling was, in fact, rather harsh. MPs remain nominally loyal to Mr Corbyn. Even those who wax suicidal about their predicament refuse to act (for now, at least). Talk of a leadership bid by Michael Dugher, a former shadow cabinet minister, was recently greeted with derision. Labour is a party in denial. Lucky David Cameron.Time to celebrate LOCALS complain that Slough, a town of some 140,000 people just west of London, is known for two things, both miserable. One is John Betjeman’s 1937 poem, “Slough”, which bemoaned the town’s industrialisation: “Come, friendly bombs, and fall on Slough! / It isn’t fit for humans now.” The other is as the setting for “The Office”, an early 2000s television sitcom which portrayed the mindless drudgery of the modern workplace. In the January drizzle, the view from Slough train station does little to dispel such negative impressions. Pedestrians are largely absent; the buildings drab and sometimes dilapidated. An empty construction site serves as a reminder that a plan to develop part of the town centre, first outlined five years ago, has not yet begun. But there are also signs of progress. A jazzy new bus station juts out from the terminal, an incongruous dash of silver. The Curve, a large arts centre due to open (belatedly) this year, stands as a promise of more to come. And there is reason to think more will come. According to a report by the Centre for Cities, a think-tank, which surveyed Britain’s 63 largest urban areas, over the past five years none has seen faster growth in the number of businesses. Indeed, despite its apparent decrepitude, Slough is a remarkably successful place. The report also found that it had the lowest proportion of young benefit claimants, the best school grades and the third-highest wages. Crossrail, a planned high-speed railway service, will arrive in 2019, making Slough easier to reach from central London. Big property firms are beginning to invest there. House prices have grown by nearly 50% since 2009, according to Knight Frank, an estate agent, albeit from a low base. Slough is a town that gets the basics right, says Neil Lee of the London School of Economics. “Lots of people talk about tech cities and creative cities, with entrepreneurs attracted by hipster coffee shops,” he says, “when actually many businesses just need good parking, cheap offices and skilled workers.” Big firms have long been attracted by the town’s rail and road links, as well as its proximity to Heathrow airport. Good local universities and schools provide a skilled labour force; pleasant nearby villages and countryside somewhere unconcreted for senior executives to live. The real shift began around 20 years ago, says Ruth Bagley, chief executive of the local council, when multinational firms began to come to the town in large numbers. Many now have their headquarters in Slough, including the British division of Fiat, a carmaker, which is based in a trading estate that houses some 500 businesses. There are also clusters of pharmaceutical and technology firms. “Large American businesses tend to see Slough as part of West London but with much cheaper real-estate costs,” says Jon Gardiner of Savills, a property consultancy. Data centres and high-frequency traders are attracted by good fibre-optic connections, an existing pool of IT firms and an extremely reliable power supply. Large companies beget smaller ones, many started by Slough’s immigrant population. In the 2011 census, only 35% of its residents classified themselves as white-British. Slough has been refreshed by each major wave of British immigration—most recently from eastern Europe—as well as a small arrival of Poles and Italians after the second world war. Locals are “very welcoming to migrants,” says Ms Bagley, “but the main drive has always been that Slough is an easy place to get a job.” References to Betjeman and “The Office” may bore locals, but a dour reputation has hardly held Slough back. It may even have its benefits: rents are cheaper and more central land is available to develop than in neighbouring towns. Crossrail will probably urbanise the town’s core. One developer reckons he may be able to attract financial-services firms looking to save rent. Moving to Manchester or Birmingham forces staff to relocate, he points out; moving to Slough doesn’t. If he gets his way, local wages could rise yet further.THE city of Cambridge claims to be one of Britain’s most successful. With near-full employment, a renowned university and the largest biotech cluster outside America, its economy is flourishing. Yet the city’s good fortunes have not helped its airport, which from January 31st will be closing down its last scheduled flights. It is the latest in a line of regional airports to do so, including Plymouth in 2011 and Manston and Blackpool in 2014. In spite of a growing economy, smaller regional airports are having a tougher time than ever before. This is not because Britons are staying on the ground. Since the recession, air-passenger numbers have risen by 10% in Britain. A shortage of airport capacity in the London area has forced the government to set up a commission to decide where to build a new runway. But the two front-runners—Heathrow and Gatwick—are unlikely to get theirs ready before 2030 at the earliest. That has given some the idea that regional airports could take some of the extra traffic in the meantime. The government has also been trying to promote regional air travel, to help share the proceeds of growth outside London. It set up the Regional Air Connectivity Fund in 2013 to subsidise new domestic and international routes to airports outside the capital to the tune of £56m ($80m) over three years. But larger airports have disproportionally benefited. The number of passengers using Manchester airport, Britain’s busiest outside London, has risen by more than one-fifth since 2010, to 23m a year. That level of growth has also been seen at other regional airports carrying 6m passengers a year or more, including Birmingham, Edinburgh and Glasgow International. Those carrying fewer than 1m are struggling. Some, like Cambridge and Blackpool, are closing to commercial traffic. Others, like Cardiff and Glasgow Prestwick, have been nationalised by the Welsh and Scottish governments to keep them open. That is because their business models often no longer make sense, says Tim Coombs at Aviation Economics, a consultancy. Airports have high fixed costs, such as air-traffic control and security. They therefore benefit greatly from economies of scale, meaning large ones can undercut smaller rivals by offering airlines lower landing charges. Fast-growing low-cost carriers, such as Ryanair and easyJet, are moving to these larger hubs. Both plan to base more flights at bigger airports in the next few years, worsening the minnows’ woes. Britons’ changing travel habits have also hit small airports. Whereas international passenger numbers have soared by 20% over the past decade, domestic travel (small airports’ mainstay) has dropped by one-sixth. That has helped the likes of Manchester, with flights to over 200 foreign destinations including Dubai, its most popular. But it has hurt airports that act as feeders for Heathrow, where the number of domestic connections has fallen by half since the 1990s, owing to its lack of runway capacity. On January 22nd the government announced another delay to the decision on whether to expand Heathrow or Gatwick. That will not help London’s economy—nor Britain’s small airports.Till minimum-income threshold do us part THE Conservative Party promised ahead of its election victory in 2010 that it would bring annual net migration below 100,000 a year. As the economy has grown, sucking in foreign workers, the government has conspicuously failed to meet this goal: net migration in the year to June 2015 was 336,000, a record. However, one small but socially significant subsection has declined and remained low: immigration by Britons’ foreign spouses. In 2012 the government introduced a new requirement that British citizens and permanent residents meet an income threshold before being allowed to bring in a partner from outside the European Union. The threshold is £18,600 ($26,500), or higher if children are to come too. This gives Britain the strictest policy on family unification of 38 rich countries, according to the Migration Policy Group, an NGO. The rules have been challenged in a case that will be heard by the Supreme Court next month. The income threshold is high: the Migration Observatory at Oxford University calculates that 41% of British citizens would not meet it. And its reach is uneven: whereas almost three-quarters of men clear it, most women do not. In poor parts of the country, such as the North East, twice as many are ruled out as in the wealthy capital. And in London white people are twice as likely to be able to import a partner as non-whites. So far the new rules are reckoned to have affected up to 15,000 children, many kept apart from a parent. The government projected in 2012 that 13,600-17,800 people per year would be prevented from coming to Britain as a result of the changes. Though the true figure is unknowable, the number of spousal visas granted fell by nearly one-third following the rule’s introduction (see chart). Those most affected are Pakistanis, who account for almost one-fifth of such visas. The government has not trumpeted it, but the new policy has an additional motive. Some believe that the ability to bring in spouses from overseas has put a brake on integration, especially among Pakistanis. About three-quarters of spousal visas are issued to women. David Goodhart of Policy Exchange, a think-tank, says that the constant replenishment of first-generation wives has been a bar to integration with British society. Saira Grant of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, which is supporting the appellants at the Supreme Court, argues that “integration is not achieved by an artificial financial threshold”. She says there is no evidence that migrant spouses are a burden to the state. Yet studies suggest family migrants do have lower employment rates than the British average, though more than half work after their arrival. A quirk of the income threshold is that it does not apply to citizens of other EU countries, meaning they can bring their non-EU spouses to Britain without satisfying any income requirement. Some Britons get around the rules by moving to a European country where they meet up with their spouse and, after living there for a short period, returning together to Britain under the EU’s free-movement laws. One of the issues the Supreme Court may examine is whether the foreign spouse’s income might count towards the threshold. At present, some low-earning British expatriates have trouble moving back from abroad with their foreign spouse, even if that partner is a high earner. The court has the power to declare these rules unlawful, though that is unlikely, believes Ms Grant. In the absence of many other ways of reducing immigration, the government will want to cling on to the strict new rules, for better or worse.ON NOVEMBER 1st 2006 Marina Litvinenko cooked a special dinner for her husband, Alexander, to mark the sixth anniversary of their arrival in Britain from Russia (and their first since becoming citizens). In the early hours of November 2nd the spy-turned-dissident started vomiting. In hospital his condition deteriorated: his hair fell out, his skin turned yellow and he threw up parts of his stomach. After 20 days of agony he composed a statement blaming his poisoning on Vladimir Putin. He died of heart failure shortly afterwards. Almost a decade later, on January 21st, a judge-led inquiry concluded that two Russian agents had most likely spiked Litvinenko’s tea with polonium-210, a radioactive isotope, at a meeting in London. They were “probably” acting on Mr Putin’s orders. Sir Robert Owen’s report also indicates that the murder was about more than bumping off an enemy. Its particulars—from the use of a slow-working poison to the trail of radiation through London and the decoration awarded to one of the suspects last year—amounted to an ostentatious sneer at the British state. They sent a message to other opponents: don’t think that Moscow’s jurisdiction is limited to Russia’s borders, or its citizenry. In a statement following the report’s publication, Theresa May, the home secretary, told MPs that she had suspended both men’s assets. Ministers are now deliberating over further asset freezes, visa refusals and diplomatic expulsions. Naming those affected is “very much on the table”, says one senior source. Others, including Mrs Litvinenko, call for more: a comprehensive travel ban on Mr Putin’s coterie of politicians, spooks and oligarchs; a boycott of Russia’s football World Cup in 2018; a public inquiry into the mysterious death of Alexander Perepilichny, a Russian whistleblower who collapsed near his home in Surrey in 2012. If the decision were just about doing right by the Litvinenko family, the government would do the lot. But the wider national interest is a rival consideration. The Foreign Office is cautious about jeopardising relations with the Kremlin on the cusp of Syrian talks in Geneva, whose outcome will affect both the refugee crisis and the threat from Islamic State terrorism, and which may turn on Russia’s influence over its vassal in Damascus. Meanwhile, as of 2014 rich Russians had some £27 billion ($39 billion) invested in London, where they come to bank, shop, educate their children and sue each other. Such interests are well-represented in Conservative circles; at a pre-election fundraising ball Lubov Chernukhin, the wife of Mr Putin’s ex-finance minister, successfully bid £160,000 for a tennis match with David Cameron (in a moment of exuberance the auctioneer threw in the party chairman as a ball boy). Politics is politics. The hard truth is that voters put jobs, investment and counter-terrorist co-operation before the welfare of Russian dissidents. So arguments for a self-interested realpolitik have often prevailed. The government has repeatedly rejected calls by MPs for Britain to emulate America’s “Magnitsky Act”, a public travel ban on Moscow officials connected with the violent death in custody of an anti-corruption lawyer. In 2013 Ms May initially refused a public inquiry into the Litvinenko case, citing “international relations”. The Ukraine crisis, it is true, put some lead in Mr Cameron’s pencil—he was relatively hawkish on the matter of sanctions—but even in 2014 an adviser in Downing Street was snapped holding notes fretting about their effect on the City. Today murky, Kremlin-linked money still sloshes through London’s housing, financial and energy markets, all with the connivance of British bankers, lawyers and estate agents (a government report published in October highlighted “significant” gaps in the country’s offensive against money laundering). Yet the trade-off between principle and realism is more illusory than the government’s actions or words allow. Take the fight against Islamic State. Russia has an entirely different agenda in Syria from that of Britain—indeed, it has allegedly been aggravating the fallout in Europe by sponsoring hard-right, anti-refugee parties—and its intelligence agencies are not in the habit of sharing information with foreign counterparts. Where they perceive a shared interest (over security at the World Cup, for example) they will co-operate with Britain regardless of the health of the diplomatic relationship. And even if none of this were the case, tip-toeing around Litvinenko’s murder would not be the answer; as one minister points out, Mr Putin routinely defies international norms not because he is offended by the West’s assertiveness, but because he thinks it weak. London or Londongrad? The hard-nosed case for tough sanctions is even stronger when it comes to the economy. London’s status as a leading financial hub is not reliant on Russian dosh, which according to a study in 2014 by Open Europe, a think-tank, represents 0.5% of international investments there. Moreover, a cynical failure to respond adequately to the killing would damage that status, which depends on Britain’s reputation for straight dealing and rule of law. For this reason the proliferation of obscure holdings and stolen money in London so concerns the government that it has launched an anti-corruption drive (including a new company-ownership register), boosted the budget of the Serious Fraud Office and is considering making “failure to prevent economic crime” an offence. Whether Britain now does something to dent the Kremlin’s sense of impunity is thus a measure of whether it believes its own schtick. Panjandrums in Westminster are forever asserting that the country’s role as a global entrepôt gives it hard geopolitical influence; that its “soft power” and knack for fair play are among its greatest assets; that trade and the rule of law go hand in hand. How it responds to Sir Robert’s finding—that a thuggish foreign state seemingly murdered a British citizen on the streets of the capital—is a fine test of how much any of this really means. Economist.com/blogs/bagehotThey have choices, you know MONTANA HIRSCHOWITZ remembers exactly when she decided she would seek her higher education abroad: one night when she was ten, and armed robbers broke in and terrorised her family in Johannesburg. Quang Nguyen dates his decision to no particular moment: he simply did not want to spend a big chunk of his classroom time on communist ideology, as is standard in his native Vietnam. Jehanne Aghzadi, from Morocco, had attended American schools all through her childhood; she wanted to continue her studies in English. Joy Lin was looking for a better course than she could find in China, with more social activities on campus and the chance to gain foreign work experience after graduating. All four students ended up at the University of Miami in Florida, for reasons that varied as much as those that pushed them to leave home in the first place: good weather, highly regarded courses in subjects they liked, student aid and in one case a scholarship. But beyond the specifics, they are part of a mass trend. More university and college students than ever are studying outside their home countries. Foreigners now make up a sizeable share of students in some countries and courses—a quarter of all those in Australia, for example, and around a million of those on American campuses. There are 4.5m international students globally, up from 2m in 2000, and that is expected to swell to 7m-8m by 2025, driven by population and income growth in developing countries where local provision is poor. Some places that have not traditionally hosted many foreign students are trying to grab market share. Japan has a goal of 300,000 foreign students by 2020, 60% more than now; Malaysia, of almost doubling numbers to 250,000 by 2025. Foreign study took off in the 1980s, when several rich countries started to offer large numbers of scholarships as part of their aid programmes. Rising incomes in poorer countries added a financial motive. Universities in rich countries are often constrained by their governments in how many locals they can recruit and how much they can charge them. Foreigners, who can be charged more, help pad out budgets and subsidise local students. But not every country lucky enough to have lots of foreign students is doing what is needed to keep them coming.   Today Anglophone countries take the biggest share, since English is quite a useful language to acquire. France is popular with bits of its former empire and pupils from the French-language schools around the world that France’s government subsidises. Germany, which has started to offer postgraduate courses in English and has abolished all tuition fees, even for foreigners, also takes large numbers. America leads in absolute terms, with 975,000 foreign students in 2014-15. Its best universities have long attracted the very brightest foreign minds, especially in the sciences, often luring them with generous scholarships. But for its size its performance is less impressive: just 5% of all students on its campuses are from abroad. One reason is tighter visa rules imposed after the terrorist attacks of 2001; another is that students must seek special permission to work off-campus while studying, and it is hard to stay and work for long after graduating. Longer-term employment visas are also hard to get, so many students without deep pockets choose to go elsewhere so they can defray some of the cost. And most American institutes refuse to pay education agents—consultants who help youngsters, particularly in Asia, to choose institutions and apply to them. According to i-graduate, a consultancy, agents rank America as the most attractive destination, but are less likely to recommend American institutions, as they mostly work on commission. Students usually choose their target country first and then decide which college to apply to. That means national advertising strategies matter, says Mark Reid of the University of Miami. But America has none, leaving individual institutions to promote themselves overseas. Mr Reid and his staff give presentations at international schools and attend trade fairs in around 65 countries each year. This has paid off: the proportion of Miami’s students who are foreign is three times the national average. Latin Americans like living in a Hispanic-majority city. Chinese students became interested in 2009, when Miami broke into the top 50 of the ranking of American universities produced by US News and World Report. Higher learning, down under Australia, by contrast, has long seen international students—and their fees—as a national priority. Education is the country’s second-biggest export industry, behind only mining, worth A$18 billion ($15 billion) in 2015. A quarter of all its students—and in business and management courses, close to half—are from abroad. At a couple of particularly enterprising institutions, Australian-born students are a minority. Australia’s allure faded between 2009 and 2012, partly because of a strong currency but also because racist attacks against Indian students in Melbourne, and the collapse of some poorly run private colleges, tarnished its image overseas. A government crackdown on visa scams and low-quality courses drew attention to uneven provision and slowed visa-processing times for all students, even those applying to elite institutions. As the currency has fallen and visa rules have been relaxed again, applications have rebounded. The tale offers two morals, says David Hetherington of Per Capita, a think-tank in Sydney. First, foreign students need clear visa rules and the right to work while they study. Second, the national brand matters. Canada, where universities until recently had few foreign students, has learned from Australia’s experience. About a decade ago its government decided that universities could bolster their finances by admitting more foreign students paying higher fees, and that after graduation those students would be a valuable source of well-qualified young workers. Immigration rules were always quite favourable, says Paul Brennan of Colleges and Institutes Canada, an industry organisation, but until recently there was no clear path from study to work and then permanent residence. Now, if new graduates can find a job they can automatically stay in Canada for up to three years, depending on the length of their courses. That work experience is then taken into account if they apply for permanent residency. A collaboration between colleges, universities and Canada’s immigration office has brought down visa-rejection rates for Indian students, a target market. A quarter of all foreign students—and half of those from India and China—end up being granted permanent residence. Recent growth in international-student numbers has largely come in shorter college and polytechnic courses, says Mr Brennan. These are popular with Indians who already have degrees but cannot find work—and with youngsters from unemployment-plagued Italy and Spain. The number of Indian students arriving for such courses rose from 1,200 in 2008 to 14,000 last year. Britain, too, sees policy on international students as intertwined with immigration policy, but has taken the opposite tack. Its universities have a cachet among foreigners. Overall, 14% of students on its campuses come from outside the European Union. Another 5% come from other EU countries (under EU rules they are admitted on the same basis as locals, and pay the same fees). In 2013-14 English universities took in £3.3 billion of non-EU student fees, which are not capped by the government, 13% of revenue. Half of those studying full-time for work-focused master’s degrees are from outside the EU, and research by the British Council shows that in some scientific fields, such as electronic engineering and biosciences, the share is over 80%. But in recent years this success story has been threatened by a populist pledge made in 2010 by the Conservative Party, then in opposition, to cut net immigration to 100,000 people a year. With many immigrants entering Britain from bits of its former empire under family-reunion laws, and free movement within the EU, most immigration is outside the government’s power to stop. Non-EU students are the main exception. In power the Conservatives have sought to keep them out by tightening visa rules, raising application costs, restricting students’ right to work part-time during their courses and making it far harder to stay after graduation. They have choices, you know The result is visible in the figures. In 2014-15 the number of new students from outside the EU fell by 3%, even as the number of foreign students worldwide rose strongly. Britain’s three big English-speaking competitors all saw strong growth. Chinese students, who are often leaving to escape the gaokao, China’s vicious university-entrance exam, rather than because they want to earn money in a richer country or emigrate, are still coming. But applications from Indians and Pakistanis, who typically need to work while studying and for a year or two afterwards to afford the fees, have fallen by half. Britain is dangerously exposed to a slackening of demand from China, says Will Archer of i-graduate. He also notes that education agents have become less likely to regard Britain as an attractive destination—even though more of its international students rate their education highly, and more say they are satisfied with their experience and would recommend Britain to other students, than anywhere else. Learning’s allure The quality of education in some countries that have long sent many students abroad is improving. Local hubs such as Singapore and Hong Kong are growing more popular: of Asians who study abroad, the proportion who do so in Asia rose from 36% in 1999 to 42% in 2007. And more students are plumping for “transnational” rather than international study, says Michael Peak of the British Council: mixing and matching local and foreign provision, for example by starting degrees at home and taking just a final year abroad. The trend is most evident in executive education, which is less about the chance to work in a rich country and more about gaining international experience, says Andrew Crisp of CarringtonCrisp, an education-marketing firm. A growing share of MBAs and executive master’s courses are now offered by partnerships or groups of institutions, with students expected to spend time in several different locations. Online education, too, could cut demand for pricey overseas study, if not by replacing it then by allowing students to do part of a foreign institution’s courses more cheaply from home. English-speaking countries have benefited hugely from international students. Those students have subsidised locals, kept courses in the hard sciences viable, acted as informal ambassadors on their return—and eased skills shortages when they have stayed. Some countries have seized the opportunity; others have taken it for granted. More fool them.EVERYONE seems to agree that online auctions are important to the art world’s future. In 2013 Daniel Loeb, an activist investor, seethed over Sotheby’s “inability to even develop a coherent plan for an internet-sales strategy, much less implement one.” Sotheby’s has worked to remedy that, for example by joining forces with eBay and holding five online-only auctions last year. Christie’s holds its own online sales. Add a swarm of startups, and there seem to be ever more web auctioneers selling ever more art. But the ways in which online auctions are not changing art sales are as interesting as the ways in which they are. Sales of art online reached €3.3 billion ($3.6 billion) in 2014, about 6% of all worldwide sales, according to the European Fine Art Foundation (TEFAF). Sceptics used to predict that collectors would be highly reluctant to buy online because they would want to inspect prospective purchases in person. However, David Goodman, Sotheby’s digital and marketing chief, argues that online sales will keep growing, with buyers “comfortable buying more and more things at more and more price points online”. Influential investors agree. Peter Thiel and Jack Dorsey, the respective founders of PayPal and Twitter, are among the backers of a startup called Artsy. It has an extensive online art catalogue and last year it launched a platform for online auctions. Top gallerists such as David Zwirner of New York and Jay Jopling of London are backing Paddle8, another online auctioneer, which says its sales doubled last year. Auctionata, yet another, reports even faster growth. The main effect is to open up the cliquish art world. Any collector who has provided credit-card details in advance can bid in an online Sotheby’s or Christie’s sale. Paddle8 boasts that 39% of visitors to its site are aged 18-34. Though online auctions can lure new collectors, they are not yet stealing much business from conventional art firms. Indeed, says Sebastian Cwilich of Artsy, his firm wants to join forces with galleries and auction houses, not compete with them. In October, for example, it held an auction with Sotheby’s. Paddle8 seeks to complement Sotheby’s and Christie’s, by offering mainly works valued at $1,000-100,000. The greatest threat is to smaller, local auction houses. But Anders Petterson of ArtTactic, a research firm, argues that even these may be saved, if they adapt to the online age. Barnebys, launched in 2011, aggregates items for auction, helping smaller auction houses reach a wider audience. Overall, online firms are doing little so far to disrupt the art market, says Clare McAndrew, who wrote TEFAF’s report. Indeed, some may be making the market even more opaque than before. Paddle8, for example, does not publish final prices after auctions have ended.STEVE JOBS once visited an apple orchard while on a fruitarian diet, and it gave him the idea for the name of the company that he, Steve Wozniak and Ronald Wayne went on to found. Jobs thought the name would make the company seem quirky, approachable and fun. Its popular, highly profitable products have helped make it the world’s most valuable company for nearly five years. However, questions are growing about its shelf life. On January 26th Apple announced profits for its most recent quarter of $18.4 billion, more than any listed firm worldwide has yet made in a three-month period. However, the good news was overshadowed by Apple’s warning of a sharp fall in revenues in the current quarter. In the past six months its shares have fallen by over 20%, more than double the decline in the S&P 500 index, on fears that sales of the iPhone, which provides most of the firm’s revenues and profits, have peaked. Is it only a matter of time before Apple (worth around $550 billion) is overtaken by Alphabet, Google’s parent ($500 billion)? In its rise to greatness, Apple has repeatedly shrugged off bouts of panic among investors, who have suddenly convinced themselves that its glory days are over. The most recent was three years ago, amid fears of rising competition from other smartphone and tablet makers. But each time Apple has bounced back and gone on to greater highs, the job of topping its most recent achievement has become harder. Beating the 231m iPhones that Apple sold in the fiscal year to the end of September will be a formidable task. The smartphone market is ever more saturated. Worldwide sales of phones costing more than $190 will grow by just 3% this year, reckons Strategy Analytics, compared with 64% in 2011. (The average selling price for the iPhone is $691, although carriers usually help subsidise the cost.) Meanwhile, the global economy—and China in particular, upon which Apple depends for a growing share of its sales—is looking more fragile. Recently several Asian suppliers have been sharing stark warnings that orders for iPhone parts, such as chips and cameras, are down. Currency fluctuations have made iPhones significantly more expensive in some markets, like Japan and Australia, which could put them out of reach for new buyers. Sales of iPhones are likely to decline by around 10% this year, according to analysts. But then what? Loyalty among its users is high; perhaps 90% go on to buy another one. According to an analysis by Sanford C. Bernstein, another research outfit, if such users upgrade to a new iPhone every two years, in 2017 Apple will sell them another 185m, not including sales to new users. The installed base of iPhone owners (and thus users of iTunes and Apple’s other revenue-earning services) could easily grow to 534m in 2017, up by 13% from 2015. The iPhone’s future will depend a great deal on how compelling its next incarnation, expected in September, will be. Cheaper versions can also help boost sales. The lower-priced iPhone 5c, which Apple launched in 2013, enhanced the firm’s appeal in China. Tim Bajarin of Creative Strategies, a research firm, thinks that Apple may offer an even more affordable iPhone for the Indian market. There is currently much excitement in India about Apple’s plans to open shops there. But finding suitable locations, and dealing with the red tape involved in opening them, will not be easy. And only a small fraction of India’s population has the means to buy even a cheap iPhone. So, Apple is under pressure to produce another hit product. Sales of iPads have wilted, and Apple’s watch, released last year, has not sold as well as optimists had predicted. Its answer to disrupting television, Apple TV, has proved merely a discretional plaything for wealthy consumers who want a slicker interface and do not mind spending more on films and TV episodes à la carte. Apple faces plenty of roadblocks in making a success of its long-rumoured electric car, which it is reportedly hoping to complete by 2020. Recently the head of that project, Steve Zadesky, left. As an investment, Apple is surprisingly inexpensive. Its shares trade at about 10.4 times forecast earnings, excluding cash, compared with Alphabet and Facebook, which trade at 21.4 and 33 times respectively. That is because many perceive it as a hardware company—vulnerable, like Hollywood studios, to product hits and flops. Apple is trying to change that image and become perceived more as a services company, with stable recurring revenue. Its services division, which includes its app store and music offering, has huge sales, of around $20 billion a year. That business will only increase as the number of users expands and spends more in the Apple ecosystem. So long as it stays fresh in the eyes of consumers, Apple will be able to prove the sceptics wrong—again.
