The War on Alcohol: Prohibition and the Rise of the American State. By Lisa McGirr. W.W. Norton; 330 pages; $27.95 and £18.99. NEARLY a century after America fleetingly banned alcohol, Prohibition seems like a charming absurdity. The rise of moonshine and speakeasies before the Great Depression seems more like Hollywood than history. But Prohibition was no joke for the working classes, writes Lisa McGirr in “The War on Alcohol”, a focused and thought-provoking book. When the 18th Amendment banning the sale of alcohol was passed in 1919, it was targeted at the saloons where men gathered after work for beer and conversation. “I believe that alcoholism threatens the destruction of the white race,” said Charles Eliot, the president of Harvard University. Such sentiments were common among the reformers. Thus began what Ms McGirr, a professor at Harvard, describes as the “boldest effort to remake private behaviour in the nation’s history”. Neighbourhood saloons closed, home distilleries opened and drinking moved underground, to homes and speakeasies and even athletic clubs. The protests of the working classes—“no beer, no work”—went unheard amid the paternalistic zeal of high-minded (and often wealthy) Protestants. An enormous new federal bureaucracy emerged to enforce the ban, often targeting small family operations rather than the large, politically greased criminal rings like Al Capone’s. After the shock wore off, anger ensued. The result, Ms McGirr argues, was political upheaval. Many thirsty working-class Americans, from the Poles to the Germans (whose breweries were targeted), swung behind Al Smith, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1928. African-Americans, long loyal to the Republicans as the “party of Lincoln”, also moved towards the Democrats, not least because the Ku Klux Klan, whose numbers proliferated in the 1920s, had taken on Prohibition-enforcement duties. Smith, the first Catholic presidential nominee, did not win in 1928, but the anger was palpable. “The War on Alcohol” is not as dense as Daniel Okrent’s “Last Call”, which came out in 2010. Instead, Ms McGirr’s interest lies in Prohibition’s lasting effects on society. Despite its reputation as a historical oddity, Prohibition was another development in the growing power of the American state in the early 20th century, she argues. Woodrow Wilson’s Progressivism and Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal also emerged during that period. Prohibition required enforcement, and the prison-staffing apparatus of the 1920s soon became larger than the Bureau of Investigation, the forerunner to the FBI. As one disgruntled newspaper editor put it: “A man’s home used to be his castle. Now, it is the United States government’s castle.” Prohibition ended in 1933, during the first year of Roosevelt’s presidency. “It’s time the country did something about beer,” the new president declared. But, as Ms McGirr points out, the lessons of America’s 13-year misadventure with Prohibition have yet to be learned: “Despite a wide consensus that Prohibition of the liquor traffic was a fundamentally flawed crusade with devastating consequences, its spiritual and policy twin—the war on drugs—has gone largely unchallenged.” Much like the war on alcohol, the war on drugs has “far overshot the ills” that it is trying to fix, all the while showing little success in reducing supply or demand for drugs. A little dram of history might do wonders for America’s politicians.“A HARMLESS drudge.” Of the definitions in Samuel Johnson’s great English dictionary of 1755, that of “lexicographer”, his own calling, is the most famous, an example of the same wit that led him to define “oats” as “a grain, which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.” Why name a language column after a harmless drudge? Because Johnson, despite the drudgery, knew that language was not harmless. Its power to inform and to lead astray, to entertain and to annoy, to build co-operation or destroy a reputation, makes language serious stuff. The Economist’s “Johnson” column began in 1992 and was later revived online. This week it returns to the print edition, and henceforth will appear fortnightly. Many of the topics tackled are fun: swearing and slang, preferences and peeves. Some are more fundamental. Language reveals a lot about human nature: how people reason differently in a foreign language, or to what extent different languages encode a world view, are some of the most exciting and controversial topics in linguistic research. People care intensely about their language, and so languages in the wider world sometimes come into conflict. The perceived arrogance of Castilians to Catalan threatens to sunder Spain; “language police” in Quebec tell restaurant owners to change “pasta” and “grilled cheese” to pâtes and fromage fondant. At the extreme, the passage of a law downgrading Russian in Ukraine helped spark war in that country; Vladimir Putin has used it as evidence that Ukrainian nationalists are bent on wiping out Russian culture there. The war has rumbled on since, with language the most obvious symbol of wider identity and sympathy. So the Johnson column treats topics light and heavy as well as language both English and international. How does the spirit of Johnson himself come into it? The best way to answer is to see how he would fit into today’s “usage wars” over authority and correctness. A language column is expected to tackle questions of right and wrong. There are roughly two views of how to do this: one top-down, based on authority, prestige, writing and stability; one bottom-up, resting on how most people actually use the language, and open to change. The two schools of thought, known as “prescriptivism” (which sets down how the language should be) and “descriptivism” (which tells how it is), have often been at daggers drawn: English teachers and some usage-book writers on one side, and academic linguists, lexicographers and other usage-book writers on the other. In the caricature, prescriptivists are authoritarians with their heads in the sand, insisting on Victorian-era non-rules. The descriptivists are mocked as “anything-is-correct”, embracing every fad, even that Shakespeare should be taught in text-message-speak. To take one example, some prescriptivists say “like” cannot be a conjunction (“tastes good, like a cigarette should”, in a 1950s advert.) Descriptivists point to continuous use since Chaucer. Recruiting-sergeants from both sides can bang on Samuel Johnson’s door. An intellectual writing for an elite audience, he did not shy away from “right” and “wrong”, even “barbarity”, “depravity” and “corruption”, in matters of language.But he declared his task was not to “form” but to “register” (that is, describe) the language; trying to stop change was like trying to “lash the wind”. Above all, his years of drudging at the dictionary had taught him humility: he knew he was sure to commit “a few wild blunders, and risible absurdities, from which no work of such multiplicity was ever free”. Prescribing is not really the opposite of describing. Lexicographers from Johnson’s day on must describe the language, grounding their definitions in real living English. But that is in order to give stronger roots to a book they know people will use for firm guidance. Academic linguists, the arch-descriptivists, are perfectly willing to call some usages wrong and others plain ugly. One can prescribe and preach a high-quality English while accepting variety and change. Stability is not the same as rigidity.  And judgment should be empirical, not dogmatic, open to real usage and willing to change when the facts change. Getting things right is worth the effort, just as it is in politics. As Johnson wrote, “We have long preserved our constitution, let us make some struggles for our language.”The long process to choose America’s presidential candidates got under way, in Iowa. Ted Cruz won the state’s Republican caucuses, upending Donald Trump, who had led recent polling. Mr Trump came second, not far ahead of Marco Rubio, considered to be the viable moderate alternative to the populist front-runners. On the Democratic side Hillary Clinton eked out a win over Bernie Sanders by 0.3 of a percentage point, the thinnest-ever margin of victory in the party’s Iowa caucuses. See article.  Ash Carter, America’s defence secretary, said the Pentagon would ask for $583 billion in the White House’s forthcoming budget. Spending on fighting Islamic State is to double, to $7.5 billion, and support for central and east European countries in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine will quadruple to $3.4 billion.  Facebook moved to ban the private sale of guns through its network and Instagram, a photo-sharing site it owns. Recognising a risk The World Health Organisation declared that a rise in birth defects in Brazil, thought to be caused by the mosquito-borne Zika virus, is a global emergency. The virus probably caused more than 4,000 cases of microcephaly among newborn children in Brazil and has been found in more than 20 countries in the Americas. The WHO thinks the virus is spreading “explosively”. It is thought that a case detected in Texas was probably transmitted through sex. Guatemala put on trial two former military officers charged with letting their soldiers kidnap and rape 11 Mayan women during the country’s 36-year civil war. This is the first time that anyone has been tried for wartime sex-slavery charges in the country where the crimes were allegedly committed. Argentina said it would repay Italian investors who had refused earlier offers of a debt restructuring after the country defaulted in 2001. If Congress approves the deal, the government will pay $1.35 billion, 150% of the face value of the bonds, to 50,000 investors. It hopes this will set a precedent for negotiations with holdout investors in bonds with a face value of $6 billion. The Cuban government is to allow residents of two districts in Havana, the capital, to have broadband connections to the internet. Cafés, restaurants and bars will also be permitted this huge privilege. Siphoned away The Swiss authorities said they would ask the Malaysian government to help them investigate claims that as much as $4 billion has gone missing from Malaysian state-owned firms. A small amount of the money had been transferred to bank accounts in Switzerland. Officials in Singapore said they had frozen “a large number” of accounts as part of investigations into transactions linked to 1MDB, a Malaysian state-investment firm. North Korea declared that it would launch a satellite sometime between February 8th and 25th. Analysts believe the country’s real aim is to test a long-range ballistic missile. Japan has ordered its armed forces to shoot down any missile that threatens to fall on Japanese territory. See article.  Police in China arrested 21 people for their involvement in an alleged Ponzi scheme run by Ezubao, an online firm. The company has been accused of defrauding 900,000 investors of 50 billion yuan ($7.6 billion). See article.  Games of chance Talks in Geneva aimed at bringing an end to the civil war in Syria were suspendedonly days after they began. Opponents of the regime of Bashar al-Assad are demanding a ceasefire, but fighting is instead intensifying, especially around the city of Aleppo. The talks may resume in three weeks. A conference on aid to the region began in London, amid warnings that Lebanon and Jordan are almost overwhelmed by the cost of housing Syrian refugees. South Africa’s president, Jacob Zuma, agreed to pay back some of the $23m in public money that was spent on his private residence, potentially drawing some of the sting from a scandal that may damage the African National Congress in local elections that are due to take place in May.  At least 86 people died in the most brutal attack in months by Boko Haram, a Nigerian jihadist outfit. The attack took place close to the regional capital of Maiduguri, which houses the army’s headquarters. Boko Haram lost control of the city in 2014. If at first you don’t succeed King Felipe of Spain asked the Socialist party, headed by Pedro Sánchez, to form a government. The Socialists control only 90 seats in the 350-seat parliament, which has been deadlocked since an election in December proved inconclusive. In order to become prime minister, Mr Sánchez will have to win the support of Podemos, an anti-austerity movement, and several other parties. It will be tough. The EU reached a provisional deal with America about data protection. Last year a ruling by the European Court of Justice abrogated the “Safe Harbour” agreement that let firms store individuals’ private online data in America. European data-protection agencies gave a cautious welcome to the new “Privacy Shield”. Aivaras Abromavicius, Ukraine’s economy minister, resigned, complaining that the government was doing nothing about corruption. A general election was called in Ireland for February 26th. The governing party led by Enda Kenny, the prime minister, is ahead in the polls. David Cameron presented a draft deal to “renegotiate” the terms of Britain’s membership of the European Union. The prime minister’s agitated Eurosceptic critics in his party and the press said he had failed to match the robust promises he made in the party’s election manifesto last year. A former minister said that possibly a quarter of the cabinet are “certain” to campaign to leave the union in a forthcoming referendum. See article.  Another baffling issue, almost as old as Britain’s EU membership, was cleared up this week when a death certificate was issued for Lord Lucan. The enigmatic aristocrat disappeared in 1974 after his children’s nanny was murdered in London. Decades of speculation about his guilt ensued, as did alleged sightings, but Lucan was never seen again. The court ruling means that his son, Lord Bingham, can inherit the family title and become the 8th Earl of Lucan. In by far the largest foreign takeover bid by a Chinese company to date, ChemChina offered $43 billion to buy Syngenta, which is based in Switzerland and is one of the world’s biggest providers of agricultural chemicals and seeds. It is the second big acquisition in the chemical industry in recent months, after the merger announcement of Dow Chemical and DuPont. Syngenta’s board recommended shareholders accept the bid from ChemChina, which is state-controlled. The deal will be scrutinised by antitrust regulators in several countries, especially America, which accounts for a quarter of Syngenta’s sales. See article.  The decline in oil prices was reflected in a gloomy set of earnings from oil companies. Chevron reported its first quarterly loss since 2002. Exxon Mobil’s annual profit fell by half, to $16.2 billion; it is slashing capital spending by 25% this year. BP posted an annual headline loss of $5.2 billion, its worst ever. See article.  Positive negative The Bank of Japan cut its benchmark interest rate below zero, to -0.1%. Japan has joined the European Central Bank, Switzerland and others by implementing a negative rate, though its policy applies only to new reserves that banks place with the BoJ. Credit Suisse reported an annual pre-tax loss of SFr2.4 billion ($2.4 billion), its first since 2008, mostly because it booked a hefty write-down in the fourth quarter related to the restructuring of its business. Pre-tax profit at the Swiss bank’s investment-banking division was down by 90%. There was more management turmoil at Luxottica, an Italian maker of eyewear and owner of the Ray-Ban and Oakley brands, as its third chief executive in 18 months resigned. Leonardo Del Vecchio, the company’s 80-year-old founder, will again reassert control by taking the CEO’s job on an interim basis. Sumner Redstone stepped down as chairman of CBS, after months of pressure from investors worried about his ability to perform his duties at the American broadcaster. For years questions have been raised about the health of the 92-year-old mogul, whose position as chairman of Viacom, a big media group, has also come into question. Alphabet, the holding company that Google created last year, reported a bumper set of annual earnings. Revenue at its internet and Android businesses climbed to $74.5 billion, pushing operating profit up to $23.4 billion. Its Other Bets projects, such as self-driving cars and smart thermostats, made a $3.6 billion loss, but that was not as steep as had been feared. Alphabet’s share price rose, briefly nudging it past Apple to become the world’s most valuable listed company. See article.  The French finance minister, Michel Sapin, dismissed suggestions that he would reach a deal with Google over paying back taxes, saying that France “does not negotiate” over money it is owed. Critics contend that the agreement Google recently struck to pay £130m ($190m) in back taxes in Britain let it off the hook. Yahoo announced a strategic review of its core internet business, acknowledging that it might examine the option of selling the unit. Yahoo is to shed a further 15% of its workforce to cut costs. It reported a quarterly net loss of $4.4 billion, mostly because it wrote down the value of some of its assets, including Tumblr, a blogging site. Sharp, a struggling Japanese maker of electronics goods, was reportedly holding takeover talks with Foxconn, a Taiwanese firm that assembles the iPhone. Foxconn is one of two suitors to have emerged: a Japanese government-backed fund is also interested in Sharp, though its bid is lower. Once lauded for its fresh ingredients, Chipotle Mexican Grill, a fast-food chain, said the publicity from an outbreak of E.coli at some outlets had hit sales in the last quarter of 2015, contributing to a 44% drop in profit. This week federal health authorities in America declared that the E.coli scare appears to be over. Ferrari’s share price slid after it issued a disappointing earnings forecast. Despite a strong order book, profits at the Italian maker of luxury cars are projected to be only slightly higher than those it made last year. Ferrari’s share price has fallen by a third on the New York Stock Exchange since its IPO there last October. An announcement of a racy new convertible might turbocharge its share price. It’s good to be the king A venture capitalist who wrote an open letter online criticising the launch event for Tesla Motors’ Model X said his order for the car has been cancelled by Elon Musk, Tesla’s founder. Mr Musk tweeted that he was surprised at the fuss over “denying service to a super-rude customer”.More KAL's cartoonsREFUGEES are reasonable people in desperate circumstances. Life for many of the 1m-odd asylum-seekers who have fled Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan and other war-torn countries for Europe in the past year has become intolerable. Europe is peaceful, rich and accessible. Most people would rather not abandon their homes and start again among strangers. But when the alternative is the threat of death from barrel-bombs and sabre-wielding fanatics, they make the only rational choice. The flow of refugees would have been manageable if European Union countries had worked together, as Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, has always wished (and The Economist urged). Instead Germany and Sweden have been left to cope alone. Today their willingness to do so is exhausted. Unless Europe soon restores order, political pressure will force Mrs Merkel to clamp down unilaterally, starting a wave of border closures (see article). More worrying, the migrant crisis is feeding xenophobia and political populism. The divisive forces of right-wing nationalism have already taken hold in parts of eastern Europe. If they spread westward into Germany, France and Italy then the EU could tear itself apart. The situation today is a mess. Refugees have been free to sail across the Mediterranean, register and make for whichever country seems most welcoming. Many economic migrants with no claim to asylum have found a place in the queue by lying about where they came from. This free-for-all must be replaced by a system in which asylum applicants are screened when they first reach Europe’s borders—or better still, before they cross the Mediterranean. Those who are ineligible for asylum should be sent back without delay; those likely to qualify should be sent on to countries willing to accept them. Order on the border Creating a well-regulated system requires three steps. The first is to curb the “push factors” that encourage people to risk the crossing, by beefing up aid to refugees, particularly to the victims of the civil wars in Syria and Iraq, including the huge number who have fled to neighbouring countries such as Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon. The second is to review asylum claims while refugees are still in centres in the Middle East or in the “hotspots” (mainly in Greece and Italy), where they go when they first arrive in the EU. The third element is to insist that asylum-seekers stay put until their applications are processed, rather than jumping on a train to Germany. All these steps are fraught with difficulty. Consider the “push factors” first. The prospect of ending Syria’s civil war is as remote as ever: peace talks in Geneva this week were suspended without progress. But the EU could do a lot more to help refugees and their host countries. Scandalously, aid for Syrians was cut in 2015 even as the war grew bloodier: aid agencies got a bit more than half of what they needed last year, according to the UN. Donors at a conference on Syria in London this week were asked for $9 billion for 2016—about as much as Germans spend on chocolate every year. Far more is needed and will be needed every year for several years. Europe’s money should be used not only to feed and house refugees but also to coax host countries into letting them work. For the first four years of the conflict Syrians were denied work permits in Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon. Recently Turkey has begun to grant them. Donors should press Jordan and Lebanon to follow. European cash could help teach the 400,000 refugee children in Turkey who have no classes. Sometimes the answer is no The next task is to require asylum-seekers to register and be sorted as close to home as possible, probably Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan. Ideally those who travelled by boat to Europe would be sent back to a camp in one of those three countries—to prove that they had just wasted their precious savings paying people-traffickers to take them on a pointless journey. But that would meet legal and political objections, partly because of Turkey’s human-rights record (see our special report this week). So, there should also be processing camps in the first EU country they reach, probably Greece or Italy. The cost of this should fall on the whole EU, since the aim is to establish control over its external borders. Dealmaking is possible. In exchange for hosting large refugee hotspots and camps on its soil, Greece should get help with its debt and budgets which it has long sought to ease its economic crisis. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers Refugees will fall in with this scheme (rather than cross the EU illegally) only if they are confident that genuine applications will be accepted within a reasonable time. So the EU needs to spend what it takes to sort through their claims swiftly. And member states ought to agree to accept substantial numbers of bona fide asylum claimants. Some refugees may prefer Germany to, say, France—and there is little to stop them crossing borders once they are inside the Schengen area. But, if they are properly looked after, most will stay put. The crisis needs a bigger resettlement programme than the one run by the UN’s refugee agency, which has only 160,000 spaces. Countries outside the EU, including the Gulf states, can play their part. Priority should go to refugees who apply for asylum while still in Turkey, Jordan or Lebanon—to reduce the incentive for refugees to board leaky boats to Greece. Ineligible migrants will have to be refused entry or deported. This will be legally difficult, and it is impossible to repatriate people to some countries, such as Syria. But if the system is not to be overwhelmed or seen as unfair and illegitimate by EU citizens, the sorting must be efficient and enforceable. EU governments should sign and implement readmission agreements allowing rejected migrants to be sent home quickly to, say, Morocco or Algeria. If such agreements are impossible (or if, as with Pakistan, governments fail to honour them), the prospect of waiting indefinitely in Greece will make economic migrants who want to reach Germany hesitate before coming. Once these measures are in place, it will become possible to take the most controversial step: halting the uncontrolled migrant flow across Greece’s northern border with Macedonia. It has become clear over the past five months that Europe cannot gain control over the numbers or the nature of the migrant stream while border officials wave asylum-seekers through and bid them safe travel to northern Europe. Since the start of the refugee crisis, we have argued that Europe should welcome persecuted people and carefully manage their entry into European society. Our views have not changed. Countries have a moral and legal duty to provide sanctuary to those who flee grave danger. That approach is disruptive in the short term, but in the medium term, so long as they are allowed to work, refugees assimilate and more than pay for themselves. By contrast, the chaos of recent months shows what happens when politicians fail to take a pan-European approach to what is clearly a pan-European problem. The plan we outline would require a big chunk of cash and a lot of testy negotiations. But it is in every country’s interest to help—because all of them would be worse off if the EU lapses into a xenophobic free-for-all. There is an encouraging precedent, too. When more than 1m “boat people” fled Vietnam after the communists took over in 1975, they went initially to refugee camps in Hong Kong and other parts of Asia before being sent to America, Europe, Australia and wherever else would take them. They arrived with nothing but adapted astonishingly fast: the median household income for Vietnamese-Americans, for example, is now above the national average. No one in America now frets that the boat people will not fit in.
