IMAGINE a world in which tax offices harry people who file their returns promptly; where big supermarket chains pay their suppliers before the goods fly off the shelves and not months afterwards; and where a pre-paid annual gym membership is more costly than paying month by month. It sounds fanciful, absurd even. Yet such a world came a step closer on January 29th, when Japan’s central bank cut the interest rate on bank reserves to -0.1% (see article). Like its peers in Denmark, the euro area, Sweden and Switzerland, the Bank of Japan will charge commercial banks for holding deposits with it. Almost a quarter of the world’s GDP now comes from countries with negative rates. Though they defy convention, they have proved a useful addition to the central-banking toolkit. The lowest deposit rate set by the central bank acts as a floor for short-term interest rates in money markets and for borrowing rates generally. Borrowing costs across Europe have tumbled, helping the fight against deflation and driving down exchange rates. Emboldened, Haruhiko Kuroda, the governor of Japan’s central bank, this week claimed there is no limit to measures to ease monetary policy. On interest rates, at least, that is wrong. The limit may no longer be zero but it does still exist. Tiers are not enough Not so long ago it was widely thought that, if interest rates went below zero, banks and their depositors would simply switch to cash, which pays no interest but doesn’t charge any either. Yet deposits in Europe, where rates have been negative for well over a year, have been stable. For commercial banks, a small interest charge on electronic deposits has proved to be bearable compared with the costs of safely storing stacks of cash—and not yet onerous enough to try to pass on to individual depositors. That has resulted in an unavoidable squeeze on profits of banks, particularly in the euro area, where an interest rate of -0.3% applies to almost all commercial-bank reserves. (As in Switzerland and Denmark, Japan’s central bank has shielded banks from the full effect by setting up a system of tiered interest rates, in which the negative rate applies only to new reserves.) If interest rates go deeper into negative territory, profit margins will be squeezed harder—even in places where central banks have tried to protect banks. And if banks are not profitable, they are less able to add to the capital buffers that let them operate safely. That would put pressure on banks to charge their own customers for deposits. Such pressure is already starting to tell. Banks in Europe have started to pass on some of the cost of negative rates to big corporate depositors. Their only ready alternative to stashing large pots of cash is safe and liquid government bonds, whose yields have also turned negative, for terms of up to ten years in Switzerland. Rich personal-account holders are next. The boss of Julius Baer, a Swiss private bank, said this week that if interest rates in Europe go further into the red, it might have to charge depositors. Retail customers are more resistant to charges, because small stashes can easily be stored in a mattress or a home safe. Savers might stomach a modest fee for making bank deposits, but as rates go deeper into negative territory, they will find ways to avoid charges. Switching to cash is the obvious solution, which is why some have suggested getting rid of banknotes altogether, but it is not the only one. Small savers would use any available form of prepayment—gift vouchers, long-term subscriptions, urban-transport cards or mobile-phone SIM cards—to avoid the cost of having money in the bank. That would be only the start of the topsy-turviness. Were interest rates negative enough for long enough, specialist security firms would emerge that would build vaults to store cash on behalf of big depositors and clear transfers between their customers’ accounts. Firms would seek to make payments quickly and receive them slowly. Tax offices would discourage prompt settlement or overpayment of accounts: one Swiss canton has already stopped discounts for early tax payment and said it wants to receive money as late as possible. Far from being incentivised to lend more, banks worried about shrinking deposits would be warier of extending credit. As avenues to avoid negative rates are closed off, human ingenuity will ensure that others open up. It may not be zero, but there is still a lower bound to interest rates.LIKE many firms with roots in Hong Kong, HSBC has traditionally consulted a feng shui master on the design of its headquarters’ buildings. The bank’s dilemma today is more serious: in which country should its headquarters be? For the past year HSBC has debated moving its domicile, which in turn determines its tax base, lead regulator and lender of last resort. One option is to stay in Britain, with its bank-bashers, latent hostility towards the City of London and ambivalence about Europe. The alternative is to move back to vibrant-but-riskier Hong Kong, where HSBC was founded 151 years ago and was based until the 1990s. It is not an easy choice, but in the end pub grub and stability trump dim sum and political uncertainty. HSBC matters. Regulators judge it to be the world’s most important bank, alongside JPMorgan Chase. A tenth of global trade passes through its systems and it has deep links with Asia. (Simon Robertson, a director of the bank, is also on the board of The Economist Group.) Its record has blemishes—most notably, weak money-laundering controls in Mexico. But it has never been bailed out; indeed, it supplied liquidity to the financial system in 2008-09. It is organised in self-reliant silos, a structure regulators now say is best practice. For Britain, the departure of its best bank would be perverse (if only it could deport Royal Bank of Scotland instead). But HSBC is fed up with Blighty. A levy charged on its global balance-sheet cost 10% of last year’s profits; rules on ring-fencing its retail arm will cost $2 billion. Both are meant to protect Britain from global banks blowing up, but they duplicate other measures aimed at the same problem—silos, capital surcharges, “bail-in” bonds and liquidity buffers. Britain says it will lower the levy. But over time Asia, which accounts for 60% of the bank’s profits, will grow faster than Britain, and so HSBC will too. The tension between HSBC’s ambitions and Britain’s suspicion of giant banks is not going away. Hong Kong is keen for the bank’s return, which would boost confidence after a torrid time for Chinese markets. HSBC’s biggest subsidiary is already based in the territory and supervised by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA), its impressive regulator. By moving, HSBC would not ease its tax bill or capital levels by much. But it would avoid the levy, butt heads with Western regulators less and be closer to its biggest markets. From a dirty old river to a fragrant harbour Time to pack the bags? One objection is that HSBC is already thriving in greater China: it does not need to be domiciled there to succeed. Nor would moving to Hong Kong insulate HSBC from a British exit from the European Union (see article). But the biggest worry is that Hong Kong is small and a territory, not a country. The HKMA has $360 billion of foreign reserves but it lacks the crisis toolkit of a central bank. It cannot print an infinite amount of money without undermining its currency peg and it lacks a credit line from America’s Federal Reserve to supply it with dollars, HSBC’s operating currency. With a balance-sheet nine times bigger than Hong Kong’s GDP, HSBC’s ultimate backstop would be mainland China’s government, whose approach to finance is as transparent as Victoria Harbour. That might deter some customers. It would also annoy America, which might not be keen on HSBC playing a big role in the dollar-clearing system, a privilege that is vital for HSBC’s business. For an Asia-centric bank to be based in London is an anomaly. But, for now, one worth keeping.Letters are welcome via e-mail to [email protected] Science v politics Your perceptive Free exchange on the ideological divisions in economics (January 23rd) put its finger on key factors in the unsettled status of economics today. It is hard to think of a Nobel prize in natural sciences being shared between two recipients of opposing views, as has often been the case in economics. Nor does it boost the credibility of the Nobel prize in economics if two joint econometric recipients subsequently precipitate the Long Term Capital Management collapse and its derivative consequences based on their model. Economists are indeed fortunate to have avoided the fate that befell three Italian seismologists a few years ago, when they were jailed for having failed to forecast an earthquake in their region! There were acrimonious debates following the financial crisis of 2008: one plausible explanation for economists’ misreading was that, given the growing dominance of mathematics in economics, it became difficult to detect economic fallacies. Another is that the traditional division between positive and normative economics has been allowed to deteriorate to the point at which ideological bias has become more salient, raising the risk of error. John Maynard Keynes still best describes the challenge facing the discipline today: “Economics is the science of thinking in terms of models joined to the art of choosing models which are relevant to the contemporary world.” RAYMOND PARSONS It was comforting to see your column addressing the ideological dimensions of a profession that too often takes its own “scientific” aspirations too seriously. As the story indicates, economics lies somewhere between science and politics—victim to the same shifts in language and framework that Thomas Kuhn identified, as well as to the whims and agendas of political ideology. Economics is both a policy tool and a political weapon. Its reach is too central to political visions, and its hypotheses are too dependent on the incalculable crooked timber of humanity for it ever to be a “hard” science. But we can at least be more honest about its theoretical foundations. A “reputation for impartiality” could actually aggravate the controversy, obscuring and masking economists’ biases. A thorough and transparent solution would look more interdisciplinary: presenting empirical findings alongside the economist’s larger policy goals and ideas of a just polity. CONNOR STRANGLER You reminded me of one my father’s favourite quotes: “If all the nation’s economists were laid end to end, they would point in all different directions.” He also often said: “The devil can cite scripture to his purpose.” For economists it is statistics they cite. VIC ARNOLD Because because because… Lexington missed the opportunity to mention Henry Littlefield’s popular thesis that L. Frank Baum’s “The Wonderful Wizard of Oz”, was inspired by the 1896 Bryan v McKinley electoral face-off (January 23rd). Dorothy, or Everyman, wearing silver shoes—ruby in the 1939 film version—(Bryan’s pro-silver stance) travels the yellow brick road (the gold standard), witnesses the oppressed munchkins (citizens), and discovers that the supposedly omnipotent Wizard (a president like McKinley) is nothing more than a fancy façade. Lest the author’s leanings were in doubt, his main character is aided by the Cowardly Lion (Bryan) and has to evade the Wicked Witch of the East (eastern industrialists). The way the current campaign is going we voters mostly still hope that a Sanders v Trump contest is just a figment of our imagination. YACOV ARNOPOLIN The sex discrepancy The gender imbalance among asylum-seekers and potential migrants to Sweden is unusual in Europe, but is far from extraordinary by international comparison (“Oh, boy”, January 16th). Although in the EU, there are 1.06 men for every woman, in Qatar and the United Arab Emirates men outnumber women by two to three times, largely because of immigration (and the heavy reliance of these countries on migrant labour). The solution to Sweden’s predicament may be closer to home: Ukraine, Belarus and Russia, with 0.85-0.86 man for every woman, have the lowest male/female ratios in Europe. The citizens of each of these countries would have good reasons to seek better and safer livelihoods abroad. Is there a case for a targeted refugee-recruitment policy? JAN FIDRMUC Shine bright like a diamond * In your article about Botswana’s decline in diamond revenues you neglected to mention that it has had a textbook approach to managing capital inflows from its diamond industry for more than two decades (“Losing it sparkle”, January 16th). It has maintained a steady fiscal strategy and invested the peaks in diamond revenues offshore to prevent “Dutch disease”. Botswana has accumulated substantial reserves which has provided it a significant cushion to deal with revenue shortfalls arising from the current decline in diamond exports. DAVID FRANKLIN Bad examples * You stated that Venezuela has put in charge of its economy a left wing sociologist who does not think that printing money causes inflation ("Heading for a crash", January 23rd). Why should he? Over the past 7 years, America and Europe have printed almost three trillion dollars and inflation is nowhere in sight. A bicycle built for one I read with interest your article about divorce in China becoming increasingly in vogue, with the corresponding chart showing its incidence per thousand individuals, which also highlighted the decreasing divorce rates in America and Britain (“Divorce: a love story”, January 23rd). Surely a more compelling graph would show the rate per thousand people who are married? Having read your recent analysis on the decline of marriage as an institution, it is possible that Western couples loathe their partners just as much as do the Chinese but simply don’t need to fill out the analogous paperwork to remedy the situation. MATTHEW McBRYAN Crude calculations As your excellent overview on oil states, the rivalry between Saudi Arabia and Iran makes it seem unlikely that they and OPEC can agree on production cuts needed to rebalance supply and demand and raise oil prices (“Who’s afraid of cheap oil?”, January 23rd). As an old Texan, I suggest restoring the past pro-ration action of the Texas Railroad Commission (TRC) whose main function from the 1930s until the 1960s was to keep production constrained in Texas so that American and world oil markets were in balance and price stability was achieved. Texas currently produces about 3.5m barrels per day. If the TRC were to force Texas producers collectively to cut this in half (as they did in the 1950s), this would just balance world markets. The net result could double the total revenue of Texas oil companies, mineral-right owners and the state’s treasury—plus better employment for the strippers you mentioned—all because the world oil price might rise from $30 back to $120. PHILLIP HAWLEY Rather you than me I was glad to see that Parliament refused to ban Donald Trump from Britain (“Petition against Trump”, January 23rd). It leaves open the possibility he might end up over there with you instead of over here with us. STUART BEAL * Letters appear online onlyLONG lines of lorries once blotted the chocolate-box alpine landscape of the Brenner Pass, an important road link between southern and northern Europe. The Schengen agreement, which came into effect in 1995 and has now abolished border controls between 26 European countries, kept those lorries moving. But where trucks go, so do refugees. To stem the flow Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Norway and Sweden have temporarily reintroduced controls. Others have increased spot checks in border regions. Open borders ease the flow of exports as well as individuals. Every year people make 1.3 billion crossings of the EU’s internal borders along with 57m trucks carrying €2.8 trillion ($3.7 trillion) of goods. As well as speeding the passage of Greek olives and German dishwashers, borderless travel allows hotels in the east of Germany to have their sheets cleaned in Poland, where wages are lower, and workers in Italy to commute to Switzerland (also in Schengen though not in the EU), where wages are higher. Reintroducing controls such as checking passports and searching lorries is mostly an irritation, though the costs are mounting. A strategy unit of the French government estimates that in the short term border checks within Schengen would cost France €1 billion-2 billion a year by disrupting tourism, cross-border workers and trade. If Schengen collapses the economic consequences would be more serious, it says: curtailing the free passage of goods permanently would amount to a 3% tax on trade within Schengen. The overall effect of hampering cross-border activity would reduce output in the Schengen area by 0.8%, or €110 billion, over the next decade. Not only will money have to be found to patrol long-abandoned frontiers. Around 1.7m Europeans cross a border to get to work and in some regions as much as a third of the workforce makes this trip daily. Malmo in Sweden and Copenhagen, the Danish capital, have in effect become one big city. Border controls at the bridge that connects them add around 30 minutes each way. A nuisance could become a deterrent to cross-border employment, reducing job opportunities and the pool of labour employers can draw upon. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers The greatest pain will be felt by exporters. Over a third of road-freight traffic in Schengen crosses a border. Delays are creeping up. Around Salzburg in Austria lorries now sit for up to three hours before getting into Germany. Strict EU rules dictate that such waiting times still count as hours behind the wheel for drivers, who are obliged to rest when they hit an upper limit. If waiting becomes a permanent feature DSLV, a German association of shippers, puts the direct costs at €3 billion a year for the EU as a whole, based on a one-hour delay for every lorry. Businesses likely to suffer most include those with perishable goods, such as fruit, vegetables and fish. Others will pass on costs. Suppliers will need to store extra inventory across the continent to ensure customers get deliveries on time. The German chamber of commerce says that once indirect costs, such as renting storage and the impact on transit-trade with non-EU countries, are taken into account the extra costs for Germany alone could run to €10 billion per year. Calculations of potential costs depend on what happens if Schengen disappears: will spot-checks merely increase or will countries reintroduce border posts with barriers and barbed wire? Many firms, particularly those used to sending goods to non-Schengen countries such as Britain, may adapt swiftly to stricter border checks. Far worse than the direct costs to trade, says Guntram Wolff from Bruegel, a Brussels-based think-tank, would be the signal that European integration can go into reverse.
