OF THE top two Republicans in Iowa, one is a universally recognisable type. Short on policy, long on ego and bombast, promising to redeem a nation he disparages through the force of his will, Donald Trump’s strongman shtick is familiar from Buenos Aires to Rome, inflected though it is by reality TV and the property business. The other, Ted Cruz, champion of the caucuses, is the scion of a particular version of America and of a peculiar era in its history; a politician who repels or baffles many of his compatriots, even as others rally to his godly standard. Superficially the senator from Texas is a classic overachiever, whose ability to surmount Himalayan obstacles—such as winning that office in his first-ever political race—bespeaks and fuels an adamantine self-confidence; the sort whose warp-speed ascent is powered by strenuous calculation and fearsome intelligence. Don Willett, a judge and long-term acquaintance, describes Mr Cruz as a “freakishly gifted” lawyer; watching him argue at the Supreme Court, during his stint as Texas’s solicitor-general, was “like watching Michael Jackson unveil the moonwalk.” Like many modern politicians, if not Mr Trump, he is uncannily disciplined. On the trail he tells the same jokes, accompanied by the same gestures and self-satisfied chuckles, reproducing chunks of his book, “A Time for Truth”, verbatim. In good lawyerly fashion, he stretches the bounds of taste and honesty rather than blatantly violating them. Yet for all these formulaic talents, in his outlook and appeal Mr Cruz is an idiosyncratic product of the convulsions that followed the financial crisis and Barack Obama’s election, and of his upbringing. Like many of his core beliefs, his evangelical faith—“To God be the glory”, began his victory speech in Iowa—came from his father Rafael, a Cuban refugee who fled to Texas, turned to drink, then found God and is now a zealous preacher. By all accounts, Mr Cruz’s Christianity is profound and sincere: Chip Roy, formerly his chief of staff, recalls visiting his condo to pick up his suit and spying a Bible and other devotional texts at his bedside. It is audible in his cadences and susurrations, his frequent references to scripture, disgust at the Supreme Court’s defilements, and injunctions to prayer: “Father God, please”, he asks supporters to murmur, “continue this spirit of revival, awaken the body of Christ.” In Iowa, some were plainly impressed. “He’s a man of faith,” purred a cheering woman at a restaurant that poked from the snow of Manchester into the milky sky. Mr Cruz would be the most insistently religious Republican nominee in decades. He would also be the most ardently devoted to the constitution, a fervour itself influenced by his creed—for him, as for the Founding Fathers, Americans’ rights are bestowed by God—and by his background. Before he fled Cuba, Rafael Cruz was tortured, which helps to explain why, for his son, freedom is always imperilled and government constantly on the verge of despotism. To hear him tell it, Obamacare is not just regrettable but tyrannical; gun controls are the high road to the gulag. That vigilance over liberty is widespread in Texas, where he spent most of his childhood (he was born in Canada, which Mr Trump says might disqualify him). He was among a group of teenagers who learned a mnemonic version of the constitution and regurgitated it at clubby lunches. Daniel Hodge, a former colleague and now the governor’s chief of staff, reckons Mr Cruz is a Texan “from his head to his boots”. His lucky pair are made of ostrich skin.  Defying Reagan Calling him a demagogue overlooks the authenticity of these convictions. Better to say that his beliefs, skilfully angled and promoted, have fortuitously chimed with the evolving mood of conservative voters, especially with the emergence of the Tea Party and the backlash against Mr Obama’s agenda and the bail-outs that followed the crash. The fights Mr Cruz picked as solicitor-general—for religious liberty, the death penalty and states’ rights, against abortion and gun control—both reflected his philosophy and set up his long-shot campaign for the Senate. (He is said to have relaxed by playing several chess games at once.) His hardline antics in Washington—most strikingly, his flamboyant effort to “defund” Obamacare, which helped to bring about a partial shutdown of the government in 2013—both served his instincts and laid the ground for a presidential run. Critics say the Obamacare stunt tarnished the Republican brand, jeopardised America’s economy, and had just one beneficiary: Mr Cruz. Yet distancing himself from his fellow Republicans is as central to his pitch as excoriating Hillary Clinton. In his book Mr Cruz quotes Ronald Reagan’s 11th commandment: “Thou shalt not speak ill of another Republican.” Despite Reagan’s status in his personal pantheon, alongside God and the constitution, he does not observe it. In 2013 he likened those who eschewed his kamikaze tactics to appeasers of Nazism; now, on the stump, he lambasts mainstream Republicans as corrupt and pusillanimous. This push to portray himself as the lone ranger of true conservatism seems to be working. “Talk doesn’t do it for me,” said a man wearing an NRA jacket at Bogie’s Steak House in Albia, where, positioned beneath a stuffed deer, Mr Cruz made his usual, casually thuggish attack on the mainstream media: “You’ve got to look at what somebody’s done.” Not surprisingly, however, it has incurred a cost. Politicians often get on better with the public than with people they actually know; to label one ambitious—especially a 45-year-old junior senator running for president—is tautological. But the antipathy inspired by Mr Cruz transcends the routine gripes. It has followed him through the litany of elite institutions in which, for all his digs at the establishment, he has spent his adult life: from Princeton, to Harvard Law School, to a clerkship on the Supreme Court and his bumptious spell on the campaign for George W. Bush in 2000. (His wife, whom he met on the campaign, is a managing director at Goldman Sachs.) He went back to Texas, later to criticise Mr Bush’s bloated conservatism, only after being passed over for jobs in the administration he felt he deserved. He became an outsider, at least rhetorically, after flopping as an insider. As both Bob Dole and Mr Trump recently put it, “Nobody likes him.” Father, son and the ghost of holiness In fact that isn’t altogether fair. David Panton, his room-mate at both Princeton and Harvard, describes him as “a loyal friend” and “extremely polite, kind and respectful”. At least some of his former colleagues like as well as admire him, speaking fondly of his wit, impersonations of characters from “Scarface” and “The Princess Bride” and generosity to underlings. In Texas Mr Hodge remembers him as “the guy who came with his wife to my mother’s 60th birthday party”. But the damning judgment does seem to hold for one influential subset of Mr Cruz’s acquaintances: his Republican colleagues in the Senate. Not one has endorsed him. As he must, Mr Cruz strives to make a virtue of this unpopularity. His strategy rests on mobilising alienated conservatives, in particular the millions of white evangelical Christians who, his team believes, can swing elections when they are galvanised to vote. Conversely his appeal to moderates is limited. He has had little to say to or about the poor, beyond his perpetual gratitude that, when his father was washing dishes for 50 cents an hour, no one was sent by the government to help him. His flagship economic policy is a regressive flat-rate income tax of 10%. Black Americans, anyone concerned about climate change (which he denies) and non-Christians should look elsewhere. Ditto homosexuals: “This shall not stand,” Mr Cruz declares of gay marriage. That grandiloquent but fuzzy pledge exemplifies his gambit: making impossible vows to disoriented voters which are all, at bottom, a promise to reverse history and revive a fairy-tale idea of America. His game-plan may itself betray a form of cognitive dissonance—because, beyond Iowa and parts of the South, those elusive evangelical legions may not exist. If the bet comes off, though, the rest of the world is in for a period of abrasive unilateralism. Mr Cruz demonstrates little more interest in foreign alliances than he does in domestic ones; the only foreign leader he namechecks approvingly is Binyamin Netanyahu. He evinces an unholy relish for “carpet-bombing” Islamic State and making the desert glow. Indeed, the violence of his language might interest a psychoanalyst. He says he would “rip to shreds” the nuclear deal with Iran; after introducing his flat tax, he would abolish the IRS, along with numerous other agencies. His insurgent approach to government mostly involves destroying things. He denounces Mr Trump as a man others in Washington can do business with, and, compared with Mr Cruz, he may well be. One of the scriptural aphorisms Mr Cruz likes to cite is: “You shall know them by their fruits.” He deploys it to support the claim that he would conduct himself in the White House as he has in the Senate. His supporters believe that. “He’ll do what he says he’s going to do,” said a woman holding a baby and wearing a Cruz football shirt at a campaign event in Centerville. If so, the fruits of a Cruz presidency would be confrontation and rancour.The winner came third DONALD TRUMP, flanked by his thoroughbred offspring and wife, showed admirable qualities in Des Moines on February 1st. Acknowledging his defeat by Ted Cruz in the Iowa caucuses, which polls had suggested he would win, the Republican front-runner congratulated “Ted and all the incredible candidates”, thanked his activists, expressed his love for Iowans and said he was “honoured” with second place. He was gracious, touching even. But humility was not what the visibly deflated crowd wanted from Mr Trump. Understanding Iowa’s caucuses Boastfulness is his schtick. Just hours before the caucuses, he delighted a crowd in Cedar Rapids with a promise that, under his presidency, Americans would get so bored of winning they would beg him to lose for a change. No wonder his supporters were downcast at his loss to Mr Cruz, by 24% to 28%—and almost to Marco Rubio, whose 23% surpassed expectations. Mr Trump’s balloon has not popped. Iowa, where 60% of Republican voters are evangelical Christians, had always seemed an awkward fit for an irreligious divorcee. But he now has to win in New Hampshire on February 9th. Campaigning there this week, he was back to his old self in no time: he accused Mr Cruz of having stolen the caucuses and demanded a rerun. Mr Trump lost in Iowa because the contest was more normal than anticipated, as politics usually is. The Republican turnout was high; first-time voters represented 45% of the total and, as expected, many backed Mr Trump. But that effect was mitigated by a big turnout of evangelicals for Mr Cruz. His assiduous effort to get them out on an icy evening made Mr Trump’s campaign look dilettantish. On the Democratic side, similarly, Bernie Sanders, a leftist outsider, hoovered up support from 20-somethings. Yet Hillary Clinton’s superior organisation rallied enough middle-aged voters to foil him—just. Mrs Clinton was adjudged the winner by a handful of votes, which represented an indignity of sorts. Her rival is a dishevelled septuagenarian with, according to the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a hole of at least $3 trillion in his health-care plans. But given that Mrs Clinton has a poor record in Iowa and little prospect of winning in New Hampshire, it was still a good result for her. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar Mr Rubio’s support came mainly from members of the “somewhat conservative” Republican mainstream. Many had previously vacillated between the first-term senator and several like-minded rivals—including Jeb Bush, who won only 3% of the vote. The establishment field is even more split in New Hampshire, between John Kasich and Chris Christie, governors of Ohio and New Jersey, as well as Mr Rubio and Mr Bush. But Mr Rubio is now the favourite to consolidate it and leave New Hampshire as the establishment’s man. If Mr Trump recovers, that augurs a protracted three-horse race—because Mr Cruz is unlikely to fizzle as previous Republican winners in Iowa often have. In New Hampshire he will go easier on the preaching, make the constitution his lodestar and hope for a top-three finish. That this is a realistic ambition also suggests the extent to which the contest remains far from normal. Anti-establishment sentiment is running high; Mr Cruz, Mr Trump and Ben Carson, who are all dedicated to stirring it, took over 60% of the vote in Iowa. So there will be more rabble-rousing, perhaps especially from Mr Cruz. Before Iowa, he had launched an appeal for establishment support, arguing that he alone could stop Mr Trump. The tycoon’s wobble and Mr Rubio’s good result make that seem less plausible. Increasingly, then, Mr Cruz will try to appeal to Mr Trump’s disaffected ranks; he will argue that he alone can foil the establishment.Banana Republican“Ted Cruz didn’t win Iowa, he stole it. That is why all of the polls were so wrong and why he got far more votes than anticipated. Bad!” Aw shucks It’s not brain surgery“Dr Carson needs to go home and get a fresh set of clothes.” Best official campaign item“Make America Great Again” Best unofficial campaign item“Make America Gay Again” Burning Bush$2,800 Participation trophy“If I get one vote, frankly, in Iowa, I’ll consider it a victory.” They really love me“I have the most loyal people, did you ever see that? I could stand in the middle of 5th Avenue and shoot people and I wouldn’t lose voters.” Kill or cure“Voters are sick of me.” Too much information“I’m a Catholic, but I’ve used birth control, and not just the rhythm method.” Bad to the bone“You may have seen I recently launched a Snapchat account. I love it. I love it. Those messages disappear all by themselves.” Heads it’s Hillary“In a case where two or more preference groups are tied for the loss of a delegate, a coin shall be tossed to determine who loses the delegate.”And would you like ribs with your propaganda? CHANNEL-SURFING was no escape. In late January presidential campaigns bought up almost all the advertising on every television channel in Iowa, turning everything from “Sunday Night Football” to “The Big Bang Theory” into brief intermissions between rounds of political WrestleMania. On January 29th, three days before the state’s caucus, 20 hours’ worth of election propaganda saturated Iowa’s airwaves. By January 25th campaigns had spent $53m advertising there; that number will climb once figures for the contest’s final days become available. For all the talk of data-driven outreach and micro-targeted get-out-the-vote efforts, television advertising is still the staple on campaign shopping lists. Yet proof that candidates are getting a return on this investment has long been hard to find. Study after study has shown that few voters are motivated or persuaded by advertising—a finding political scientists have repeated so often that it is now known as the “minimal-effects hypothesis” (MEH). To measure the impact of advertising so far in the 2016 campaign, The Economist divided the Republican field into pairs of candidates in Iowa and New Hampshire. For each of the days in which both politicians scored above 10% in either the state or national polling averages published at RealClearPolitics (RCP), we counted how many ads, both positive and negative, had been aired in that state about each candidate during the previous week. We then compared this ratio with the two contenders’ relative positions in the state’s RCP polling average. If there were any pay-off to media spending, then candidates who appeared in lots of positive ads and few negative ones should have gained ground when compared with their rivals. Polls can be influenced by too many factors to identify the causes of their fluctuations with precision. We tried to control for the impact of news events—such as the revelation of Ted Cruz’s failure to disclose loans he received from Goldman Sachs, or Sarah Palin’s endorsement of Donald Trump—by conducting the study on the difference between each candidate’s national polling average and their polling in Iowa or New Hampshire (where the adverts aired). Even after this, however, the numbers are still affected by campaign rallies, local media coverage and a healthy dose of random variation. We found that paid TV airtime did matter, accounting for a modest 13% of the week-to-week changes in polling. In some cases it was more significant: from January 24th to 30th, TV viewers in Iowa saw 866 more positive spots and 220 fewer attack ads about Mr Rubio than they did about Mr Trump. After adjusting for their standing in national polls, the front-runner’s advantage over the Florida senator duly shrank by 5.1 percentage points. Overall, holding nationwide polls constant, we found that candidates could expect to gain a one-point edge over their rivals in the next week’s early-state polling for roughly every 200 net positive ads about them, or every 500 net negative ones about their opponents. So do these results vindicate the ad men after all? Not entirely. First, the effects of paid media tend to be short-lived: during the current Republican campaign, the impact of positive ads on polling has been 4.4 times greater during the week they aired than in the subsequent week. This suggests that candidates may do well to imitate Mr Trump and skimp on their media purchases until shortly before the election. Moreover, just because adverts seem to have some persuasive power doesn’t make them the best bang for a campaign’s buck. Political scientists have generally found that “ground game” investments, like knocking on doors and get-out-the-vote efforts, deliver a superior payoff. The victory in Iowa of Mr Cruz, who was heavily out-advertised there but was widely considered to have the best caucus-day operation in the state, shows that ruling the airwaves is not the only way to win. A summary of our methodology, along with the underlying code and data, is available here. CORRECTION: A previous version of this story mistakenly referred to a comparison of advertising totals between Marco Rubio and Donald Trump in New Hampshire. The figures were actually taken from Iowa. The article has been updated.IN THEORY it works perfectly. Rather than oblige parents to send their children to the nearest state-run or –funded school, give them a voucher to be spent at a private school of their choice. “The adoption of such arrangements”, argued Milton Friedman in 1955, “would make for more effective competition among various types of schools and for a more efficient utilisation of their resources.” As part of its recovery from Hurricane Katrina, which destroyed many schools in New Orleans, Louisiana undertook one of America’s largest school-choice schemes. According to a new paper by Atila Abdulkadiroglu of Duke University, Parag Pathak of MIT and Christopher Walters of Berkeley, it has not gone well.* Increasing school choice is a favourite policy of Republican governors and state legislatures. Since the party’s bumper election year in 2010 the number of voucher schemes has increased from 25 to 59, according to the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice. The thinking behind this is sound: the well-off already exercise school choice by moving into neighbourhoods with better schools. Why not allow poorer families to do the same? Yet the evidence from the voucher programmes that have been evaluated has been underwhelming: parents like them, but they often do little for their children’s test scores. Louisiana’s scheme, brought in by a conservative governor, added a feature that ought to delight progressives: a lottery to assign the vouchers. In 2014 12,000 students from low-income families applied for more than 6,000 vouchers to attend 126 private schools. Lotteries are loved by social scientists because the winners and losers, distinguished by chance alone, are statistically identical. That means differences in outcomes can reasonably be attributed to the programme rather than, say, differences in family circumstances. It turned out that this was a lottery to lose. The three economists found that those who received vouchers and moved to private schools had worse test scores in maths, reading, science and social studies than those who missed out. Hunting for an explanation, they wondered whether the weakest private schools had mopped up voucher pupils to fill their seats. But this hypothesis did not stand up. Schools in New Orleans have improved dramatically since Hurricane Katrina: high-school-graduation rates have risen from 55% to 73% and drop-out rates have fallen by half. But this has been a victory for central control rather than the market: bureaucrats at the state’s powerful Recovery School District have closed many schools and presided over the opening of many more. More parental school choice seems to have had little to do with it. * “School vouchers and student achievement: first-year evidence from the Louisiana Scholarship Programme” by Atila Abdulkadiroglu, Parag A. Pathak and Christopher R. Walters, NBER.OF THE checks on executive power in the constitution, perhaps the least needed is the amendment limiting presidents to two terms. Americans often invest sky-high hopes in those they send to the White House, choosing someone they believe will correct the flaws of a now-despised predecessor. After their first terms, presidents seeking re-election are frequently helped by the trappings of office. But after eight years the mood sours: Americans then long for change, and for someone younger, more competent or less mired in scandal. The rules of presidential politics have never been applied to someone quite like Hillary Clinton. In the public eye for decades as a First Lady, senator, unsuccessful presidential candidate and then secretary of state, she is neither a serving world leader nor a fresh face. Mrs Clinton risks finding herself an unhappy hybrid: a candidate weighed down by all the disadvantages of incumbency, while enjoying rather few of the benefits. The Iowa caucuses on February 1st—the first electoral contest of the 2016 presidential cycle—saw Mrs Clinton held to a virtual tie by her populist rival for the Democratic nomination, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Iowa is a state that holds horrid memories for Mrs Clinton: it is where Barack Obama beat her in 2008, halting what had seemed her almost regal progress to the Democratic nomination. This year, addressing supporters in Des Moines on caucus night, Mrs Clinton voiced “a big sigh of relief” after her razor-thin win, before rushing to catch a plane for New Hampshire, scene of the next nominating contest. Iowa is not very like most of America. It is 90% white. Many of its Democrats are deep-dyed lefties huddled in college towns surrounded by conservative, God-and-guns farm country. Yet Iowa’s caucuses still offer lessons that will last, starting with the double-edged nature of Mrs Clinton’s strongest suit: her experience. In 2008 Mrs Clinton was thumped by Mr Obama in the eastern county of Poweshiek, notably in the handsome Victorian college town of Grinnell. This time Poweshiek gave her almost half its votes. That improvement was hard won. Mrs Clinton and her husband both visited. Caucus day saw volunteers fanning out from a field office to knock on supporters’ doors. A poster in the office asked volunteers why they backed their heroine. At the top, someone had neatly written: “Because she is the best qualified non-incumbent to run since George Washington.” David Leitson is the head of “Grinnellians for Hillary”, a campaign group at Grinnell College, a campus gripped by Bernie-mania. Ahead of the caucus he made three main arguments to classmates. First, that Mrs Clinton is ready to serve as president “on day one”. Second, that her plans to make college more affordable or regulate big banks overlap with the Sanders agenda but are more feasible. Lastly, that she has been “battle-tested” by years of ferocious conservative attacks—a trial that Mr Sanders would surely face as a nominee, as a self-described democratic socialist who wants to raise taxes, hugely expand the government and break up big banks. Unbidden, many Iowa Democrats describe a tussle between their heads, which tell them that pragmatic, centrist Mrs Clinton offers their best shot at beating the Republicans, and their hearts, which sing when Mr Sanders growls that America is a corrupt oligarchy. Mr Leitson sees no reason why electability cannot co-exist with excitement. Explaining his passion for the Clinton campaign, the undergraduate said: “My heart is in it because my head is in it.” He is a rarity, though: across Iowa, pollsters estimate, Mr Sanders won eight in ten caucus-goers under the age of 30. Mrs Clinton’s salvation was her support among older Iowans, who turned out in larger numbers than the young. Gender specific: Hillary Clinton and female primary voters Not all Poweshiek Democrats found striking the balance between excitement and electability so easy. Rebecca Petig, a mother of four and an elected prosecutor, was surprised to find herself undecided hours before welcoming fellow party members to her own home, which was to serve as an official caucus precinct (unsure about the etiquette of feeding voters, she thought she might offer banana bread and coffee). Ms Petig sighed that Mr Sanders describes politics “as I’d like it to be, but realistically it’s not going to be that way”. She admires Mrs Clinton’s achievements, and expects her to become the Democratic nominee. But unexpectedly, she finds that she cannot hold Mrs Clinton up as a role model for her teenage daughter. The problem is Mrs Clinton’s “baggage”, involving years of alleged scandals and charges of dishonesty. There isn’t anyone else, alas Talk of baggage was rife at the Democratic caucus in Poweshiek’s 8th precinct, held in a Grinnell elementary school. Iowa Democrats caucus in public, showing their preferences by standing in corners of the room assigned to each candidate. Seeking to lure undecided voters to their corner, Sanders supporters did not cite the specific misdeeds of which Republicans accuse Mrs Clinton (most recently involving her alleged mishandling of top-secret government e-mails). Instead Sanders backers called Mrs Clinton part of a sleazy and unequal status quo, especially as the recipient of donations and speaking fees from billionaires and “banks that bankrupted the middle class”. Mrs Clinton has “been around so long, you sort of get fatigued”, conceded Catherine Rod, a wavering voter at the caucus. She listened as a fellow Democrat urged her to cross to the Sanders corner so that “his ideas can get momentum”. But Ms Rod, a retired librarian, worried about the harm that defeat in Iowa might do to Mrs Clinton, fretting: “I don’t want to trash Hillary.” Lots of Democrats feel similarly trapped. They have only one plausible general-election candidate, Mrs Clinton, and understand why lots of Americans are unexcited by her. Assuming that she survives her latest legal woes involving classified e-mails, Mrs Clinton will be the nominee. But Iowa was an early warning. A long, grinding slog awaits.A COUPLE of hours drive south of Arequipa, Peru’s second city, the Pan-American highway drops down from the high desert of the La Joya plain and threads its way through tight defiles patrolled by turkey vultures before reaching the green braid of the valley of the river Tambo. The river burbles past fields of rice, potatoes and sugar cane. It is a tranquil, bucolic scene. The only hint of anything untoward is the five armed policemen guarding the bridge at the town of Cocachacra. Last April the valley was the scene of a month-long “strike” that saw pitched battles between the police and hooded protesters hurling stones from catapults (see picture). Two protesters and a policeman were killed; 150 police and 54 civilians were hurt. The protest was over a plan by Southern Peru Copper Corporation, a Mexican-owned company, for a $1.4 billion copper and gold mine, called Tía María, on the desert bluffs overlooking the valley. Southern, as Peruvians know the firm, says the mine would generate 3,000 construction jobs and 650 well-paid permanent posts and would add more than $500m a year to Peru’s exports. Local farmers insist it would kill their livelihoods by polluting the river. The company denies this: after a previous round of protests in 2011 in which three people died, it redesigned the project to include a $95m desalination plant as a way to avoid drawing water from the river. So far the farmers are winning. Because of the protests, Southern suspended the project. Although his government approved Tía María, Ollanta Humala, Peru’s president, gave it only lukewarm support. Southern is waiting for a new government to take office in July. Even then it will be difficult to win local consent. “The conditions will never exist for the company to operate,” declares Jesús Cornejo, the president of the water-users’ committee in Cocachacra. Nearly all the houses in the valley are adorned with flags saying “Farming Yes, No to the Mine”. Tía María is just one of many conflicts in Peru between mining, hydrocarbons and infrastructure companies and communities. In September three people were killed in a protest over last-minute changes to the design of Las Bambas, a giant copper mine bought in 2014 for $7 billion by MMG, a Chinese group, from Glencore, a Swiss commodities company, and which began production last month. In February 2015 in Pichanaki, in the eastern Andean foothills, one person was killed and 32 were injured when police opened fire on a mob opposed to natural-gas exploration by Pluspetrol, an Argentine firm. In 2012 protests halted Conga, a copper and gold mine in which an American-Peruvian consortium had invested $1.5 billion. In all 53 people have been killed and almost 1,500 injured in social conflicts in Peru, mostly related to extractive industries, since Mr Humala took office in 2011. Peru has foregone investment of $8.5 billion in mining projects blocked by such conflict over the past 15 years, according to Semana Economica, a magazine. Battles over the exploitation of natural resources have become common throughout Latin America. The Observatory of Mining Conflicts in Latin America, a coalition of NGOs, logged 215 of them in 19 countries in 2014, led by Mexico, Peru and Chile (see map). In 2013 Chile’s Supreme Court suspended Pascua-Lama, a gold mine straddling the border with Argentina, over fears that it would pollute rivers; Barrick Gold, its Canadian developer, had already spent $5 billion on the mine. Colombia’s Constitutional Court has blocked exploration of a copper and gold deposit at Mandé Norte, north of Medellín, at the request of Embera Indians and Afro-Colombians in the area. Oil drilling, too, has sparked protests in Ecuador and Peru; so have big infrastructure projects such as hydroelectric dams in Brazil and a proposed road through a nature reserve in Bolivia. But it is mining that has become the biggest source of strife. Slicing off the mountain tops In the 1990s Andean countries opened their economies to private investment. The result was a boom, featuring vast open-cast mines. These often involve slicing the tops off mountains or drying up lakes. In the past people in the Andes tended to welcome mining; disputes were over labour relations. Modern projects have met growing resistance, partly because democracy has taken root in the region. People are more conscious of the projects’ impact on their environment, of the big money that is at stake and of their rights. Opponents of mining often claim it brings no benefit to Latin America, just “poverty…serious environmental harm and…human-rights violations”, as a report by a group of Canadian NGOs put it. Some left-wingers argue that Latin America should abandon large-scale extractive industries altogether, saying they are inimical to development. Modern mining is capital-intensive and generates relatively few jobs (though these tend to be skilled and well-paid). Yet the reality is much more nuanced than critics allow. By providing foreign exchange, tax revenues and investment, mining has helped to speed economic growth and poverty reduction in several South American countries over the past 15 years. In Peru, for example, where poverty fell from 49% in 2005 to 23% in 2014, mining exports amounted to $27.4 billion at their peak in 2011, or 59% of the total. In Chile and (to a lesser extent) in Peru, industries have sprung up to supply mines with equipment, spare parts, software and other services. Tellingly, left-wing governments in Bolivia and Ecuador have backed mining and hydrocarbons projects, in the latter case riding roughshod over opposition. The latest conflicts come as the mining boom has turned to bust. Faced with plunging prices and profits, miners are slashing investment and suspending projects. That in turn has contributed to an economic slowdown in the region. Despite the slump, it remains vital for Latin American countries to find ways of reconciling the interests of diggers, local people and the nation as a whole. This is not easy. Unlike in the United States, minerals in Latin America belong to the state, rather than the private owners of the land under which they lie buried. The state grants mining concessions to companies, which must then reach agreement with the communities whose lives will be disrupted. Most of the benefits accrue to the nation; many of the costs, such as pollution, are borne locally. There is a huge asymmetry of power, resources and information between big miners and peasant farmers and herders high in the Andes. Expectations, which may be unrealistic, are aroused. Modern mines often operate as near-enclaves: local people lack the skills to work there and the scale to supply food and other provisions. Disputes can arise over land purchases, relocation of the population and compensation payments. Water is increasingly a flashpoint. Mines insist that they clean up waste water—and this is usually true. But sometimes things can go badly wrong. In Brazil in November 17 people were killed and thousands of tonnes of mud released into the river Doce when a tailings dam burst at an iron-ore mine that is a joint venture between Vale and BHP Billiton. In Mexico in 2014, 40m litres of copper sulphate from a mine owned by Southern’s parent company leaked into a river. In remote areas of the Andes, companies have come under pressure to supply basic services that the state fails to, such as electricity, schools and clinics. Outside actors, such as political movements and NGOs, may fan conflicts—or help to resolve them. Over the past two decades the balance of power has shifted in favour of local populations. Fourteen Latin American countries are among only 22 to have signed the International Labour Organisation’s Convention 169 on the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples. This requires governments to ensure that these groups are consulted about projects or laws that may affect them. Many governments did not foresee the impact the convention would have, says Carlos Andrés Baquero of Dejusticia, a think-tank in Bogotá. Several countries, including Chile, Colombia and Peru, have written the requirement of prior consultation into law. There is debate as to whether this gives locals a right of veto. In Colombia mining bosses complain that prior consultation has become a means to extort money from companies. Peru has decided that it doesn’t confer a veto, and has applied the law only to Amazonian tribes and not to Quechua-speaking people in the Andes. There the new system has worked to prevent conflicts in most, though not all, of the oil and gas projects over which it has been invoked. The convention has encouraged people to self-identity as indigenous. But many conflicts involve mestizos. The second big change is in regulation. In Peru and Chile all projects are required to submit an environmental impact assessment (EIA). In Peru, this was supervised by the Ministry of Energy and Mines, whose main job is promote investment. “People don’t believe in the rigour of EIAs,” says José de Echave of CooperAcción, an NGO that works with communities affected by mining. Only this year has an autonomous environmental certification agency begun work. Peru devolves half a mine’s corporate income tax to regional and local governments in the area. This has showered some mining districts with more money than they can spend, often fostering corruption. Third, spurred by activists in their home countries as well as by changes in host-country laws and politics, some multinational miners nowadays take environmental and social responsibilities much more seriously than in the past. In many cases mutually beneficial agreements can be struck between miners and communities, provided there is trust and goodwill. Communities “are not necessarily against mining but they are very concerned that their decision-making capacity about their land not be taken away from them,” says Tim Beale of Revelo Resources, a Vancouver-based exploration company. If the mining firm understands that, “it will have a much bigger chance of success.” One example is Gold Fields, a South African company, which developed a medium-sized gold mine in Hualgayoc in northern Peru. The circumstances seemed unpropitious: the project began in 2004, just when mass protests stalled an expansion by Yanacocha, a big gold mine nearby. Gold Fields began by holding many meetings with local people, at which managers explained the project and listened to concerns. The company promised to employ some locals and train others to use the money they received from the sale of their land to set up service businesses. It brought in an NGO to work with herders to improve pastures, dairy cattle and cheese production. It worked with local mayors to install electricity and drinking water. Shut up and listen People protest “because they want things rapidly, they fear missing a golden opportunity,” says Miguel Incháustegui, a Gold Fields manager. He says the keys to achieving social consent were to listen more than talk and to ensure that living standards improve for people in the surrounding area. Mitigating social and environmental risks is not expensive: it typically adds about 1% to a company’s total costs, estimates Janine Ferretti, head of the Inter-American Development Bank’s environment division. But that is not always true. At the Quellaveco copper project in Peru, Anglo American, a British firm, made an expensive offer to pay upfront to restore a river to its original course after the mine closed. The project is now in limbo. Some miners find it hard to change. They see their strengths as understanding geology and managing projects, not engaging in grassroots politics. Others apply best practice in some countries but not in others, notes Mr Beale. Southern seems to be in that group. Pinned to the wall of Mr Cornejo’s office in Cocachacra is a decree issued by Peru’s government in 1967 that gave Southern six months to halt emissions of sulphur dioxide from its nearby smelter and compensate local residents for air pollution. Only in 2007 did it stop the emissions. Tía María is not a stereotypical conflict: Cocachacra is one of the 300 least poor of Peru’s nearly 2,000 districts; it has basic services; and its people are mestizo commercial farmers, not indigenous peasants. Guillermo Fajardo, Southern’s manager for the project, blames outsiders for the violence. Nobody in the area agrees. Certainly, the community is divided, and those who support the mine have faced intimidation; the opponents have the support of a far-left party. The underlying problem is a lack of trust. “The company might be right but the population feels unprotected,” says Helar Valencia, the mayor of Cocachacra. Tía María only has a chance of going ahead if local peoples’ concerns are addressed “with concrete confidence-building measures” such as the government building a reservoir to ease water shortages, says Yamila Osorio, the regional governor. Despite the headlines, more mines go ahead than don’t in Peru, points out Anthony Bebbington, a geography professor at Clark University in Massachusetts. Mainly because it has cheap energy and high-grade ores, many of Peru’s mines are competitive even at today’s prices. Thanks to Las Bambas and other new mines, the country’s copper output is forecast to rise from 1.7m tonnes in 2015 to 2.5m tonnes this year, second only to Chile’s. Ironically, the end of the boom may increase both government and public support for mining. In Arequipa, for example, the regional government’s revenue from mining will fall this year to a tenth of its peak, says Ms Osorio. Although low prices have halted some projects, they potentially offer more time for consultations. Reconciling the national benefits and local costs of mining is ultimately a problem of democracy. The days when big mines could simply be imposed are over. In that regard, something has been learned from the conflicts of the past two decades. Complaints about pollution are “a means of demanding a better state presence”, argues Vladimir Gil, a Peruvian anthropologist, in a study of Antamina, a big copper mine developed in the 1990s. The opposition such projects arouse can be seen “as a petition to achieve greater participation in national affairs”. In some areas governments might reasonably decide that big mining should not be allowed because of its impact on the environment or on farming. That is what Costa Rica has decided; El Salvador is close to doing so. When a project does serve the national interest, it is important that the government backs it. That does not always happen. Carlos Gálvez, the president of SNMPE, a mining-industry lobby in Peru, points out that after this year’s new copper mines and one other project, the pipeline is now empty. To remedy that, he says the next president should defend mining more robustly. Mining is a long-term business. Exploration can take ten years, development of a project another five and construction from three to five, says Mr Galvéz. The minerals bust is a reminder that governments should invest the windfall gains from extractive industries in areas such as infrastructure and education to try to develop less cyclical economic activities. But it is not a reason to put off the institutional changes needed to give mining a sustainable future in Latin America.  CORRECTION: A previous version of the chart accompanying this story suggested that mining accounts for a high proportion of Paraguay's GDP. The figure was incorrect and has now been removed.
