AT 9.30am on a Thursday six Venezuelans wait for a guided tour of the former military museum that is now the mausoleum of Hugo Chávez, the country’s populist president of 1999-2013. Across the road around 120 people are queuing for food at government-controlled prices from a state-run supermarket. The food queue starts at 3am. “Sometimes there’s food and sometimes there isn’t,” one would-be shopper says. In this district of Caracas, once a Chávez stronghold, his aura is fading amid the struggle for daily survival. Long gone are the days when he used a massive oil windfall triumphantly to impose his “Bolivarian revolution”, a mishmash of indiscriminate subsidies, price and exchange controls, social programmes, expropriations and grand larceny by officials. The collapse in the oil price has exposed the revolution as a monumental swindle. The government has admitted that in the 12 months to September 2015 the economy contracted by 7.1% and inflation was 141.5%. Even Nicolás Maduro, Chávez’s hapless heir and successor, called these numbers “catastrophic”. The IMF thinks worse is in store: it reckons inflation will surge to 720% this year and that the economy will shrink by 8%, after contracting by 10% in 2015. The Central Bank is printing money to cover much of a fiscal deficit of around 20% of GDP. The government has run out of dollars—liquid international reserves have fallen to just $1.5 billion, thinks José Manuel Puente, an economist at IESA, a business school in Caracas. While all oil-producing countries are suffering, Venezuela is almost alone in having made no provision for lower prices. This spells misery for all but a handful of privileged officials and hangers-on. Real wages fell by 35% last year, calculates Asdrúbal Oliveros, a consultant. According to a survey by a group of universities, 76% of Venezuelans are now poor, up from 55% in 1998. Drugmakers warn that supplies of medicines have fallen to a fifth of their normal level. Many pills are unavailable; patients die as a result. In Caracas food queues at government stores grow longer by the week. Shortages will get even worse in March, worries a food-industry manager. Violent crime is out of control. Rising discontent brought the opposition victory in an election for the National Assembly in December. Stalemate has followed. Chávez turned the institutions of state—including the Supreme Court and the electoral authority—into appendices of the presidency. The court, packed by the legally dubious naming of 13 new justices by the outgoing assembly, threw out four legislators, depriving the opposition of the two-thirds majority needed to change the constitution. Mr Maduro shows no sign of changing course. Last month he issued an “economic emergency” decree, rejected by the new assembly, that mainly offered more controls. His government seems paralysed by indecision and infighting. In graphics: A political and economic guide to Venezuela Henry Ramos, the speaker of the assembly, has given the president six months to solve the economic crisis or face removal by constitutional means. On paper these include a recall referendum, an amendment to shorten his six-year term or a constituent assembly, which could rewrite the constitution. In practice, the rigged court and the chavista electoral authority can block or stall all of these. So the first step, says Mr Ramos, is for the new assembly to replace the 13 justices. That, too, would be vetoed by the court. Stalemate is costly. Violent scuffles in food queues and localised looting are everyday occurrences. “We are seconds away from situations that the government can’t control. It’s a very thin line,” says Henrique Capriles, a moderate opposition leader who narrowly lost to Mr Maduro in the 2013 presidential election. Most in the opposition and some chavistas believe a negotiated transition is the only way to prevent a descent into bloodshed. The outlines of such a deal are clear. The regime would concede an amnesty for political prisoners and agree to restore the independence of the judiciary, the electoral authority and other powers. In return the opposition would support essential, but doubtless unpopular, measures to stabilise the economy. Mr Ramos says that there are “some conversations” but no formal dialogue. On the street, time is running out. Many in the opposition want Mr Maduro’s resignation as the price for such a deal, and either a fresh election or his replacement by Aristóbulo Istúriz, his new and moderate vice-president. But would Mr Maduro go along? He seems transfixed by the thought that resignation would be a betrayal of Chávez’s legacy. In fact, what remains of chavismo would be better off without him.IT FELT like the first day of school. On February 1st freshly sworn-in legislators belonging to the National League for Democracy (NLD), the party led by Myanmar’s Nobel peace-prize winning campaigner for democracy, Aung San Suu Kyi (pictured, in pink), walked uncertainly through the parliament’s cavernous corridors in Naypyidaw, Myanmar’s capital. Some looked bewildered. Others smiled and chatted with old friends, brimming with excitement. A small kiosk selling souvenirs did brisk business as new MPs bought key rings, fridge magnets and postcards depicting their unfamiliar new workplace. It is part of a sprawling complex of official buildings built by an unelected junta to withstand a popular uprising. Now, for the first time, it is about to be controlled by an elected government. For some, getting to parliament on that opening day had involved an arduous trek. It took two of the MPs 15 days by foot, on horseback and by bus just to reach the airport nearest their village, high up in the mountains near Tibet. Others had endured greater hardship: more than 100 of the NLD’s MPs served time in prison for the crime of belonging to the party. One, Bo Bo Oo, spent 20 years in jail for supplying medicine to students who had fled to a remote area after a failed uprising in 1988. While in prison, he says, he remained convinced that one day the NLD would form a government. Tin Thit, a poet, environmental activist and ex-prisoner, said the day felt “like a dream”. With its promise to transform impoverished Myanmar after more than 50 years of control by the army, the NLD won 80% of contested seats in November. That has created high expectations—unrealistic ones, some fear. “People expect that the NLD will solve all their problems,” says Mr Bo Bo Oo. “But it will take at least ten years before we see real change.” This view is echoed by Tin Oo, a co-founder of the NLD. The 88-year-old ex-general calls parliament’s opening just “a first step” in a long struggle. Behind the throne, or on it So far, procedural issues have dominated the new parliament’s agenda: the swearing-in of new members and the election of speakers for the upper and lower houses. A bigger task looms: choosing the country’s president. The NLD’s victory gives it comfortable majorities in both houses, despite the 25% of seats reserved by law for the army. Each house selects one presidential candidate, as does the army. The winner is chosen by parliamentary vote, with the two others automatically appointed as vice-presidents. The president-elect then chooses a cabinet. The new administration will officially begin work at the end of March, when the term of the current president, Thein Sein, ends. Given the NLD’s bicameral majority, there is no doubt which party will determine who becomes president. But it is still a mystery who that person will be. It is unlikely to be Miss Suu Kyi: the constitution bars anyone with a foreign spouse or children from the job (her sons are British). But she may try to get the constitution changed in her favour. Speaking to journalists on February 3rd, she noted that parliament had until March 31st to choose a president, prompting speculation that she may even be looking for a way to get the constitution revised before then. Whoever ends up getting the job, she has been clear about who will call the shots: she will. Myanmar in graphics: An unfinished peace Miss Suu Kyi’s power will be restrained, however. Despite the NLD’s landslide, the army is still powerful. It controls the home, defence and border-affairs ministries, as well as the country’s security forces and civil service. It can thus frustrate the NLD’s attempts at reform. Revising the constitution may prove even more difficult. That would require a parliamentary supermajority exceeding 75%. The army’s reserved seats give it a veto. Its newspaper said this week that the constitutional provisions regarding the presidency should remain unchanged “for the good of the mother country”. In a national crisis, as defined by the generals, the army can still legally seize control again. Many expect that Miss Suu Kyi will try to avoid confrontation with the army, and that she will even appoint ministers who worked in the outgoing administration. She is likely to focus first on ending conflicts involving ethnic minorities living in border areas. As Khin Maung Myint, an ethnic Kachin MP from northern Myanmar, puts it: “Everything that parliament will do is worthless without peace.” FIGHTER jets roar overhead, spitting out decoy flares. Helicopters clatter past, bearing commandos rappelling down ropes. Warships lurk in the waters beyond. All week the crowds on the beaches of Visakhapatnam, a coastal Indian city, have been thrilled by the dress rehearsal for the Indian navy’s great martial show: the International Fleet Review between February 4th and 8th. The extravaganza will draw ships from more than 50 countries. The last review took place 15 years ago in Mumbai, on the west coast. This time it is being held on the east side—a signal to another rising naval power in that direction: China. India wants to show that in the Indian Ocean, it is supreme. Still, for the sake of good-neighbourliness, China has agreed to participate in the review. Many will be looking out for one vessel in particular: the INS Arihant, India’s first nuclear-powered submarine armed with ballistic missiles (SSBN, in military jargon). The 6,000-tonne boat will provide India with the third leg of its nuclear “triad”—it already has land- and air-launched nukes. But in doing so, it will also risk accelerating a nuclear arms race in Asia (see chart). Arihant has been undergoing sea-trials and weapons tests. Naval chiefs had hoped formally to commission it during the review. But as The Economist went to press, it was not clear whether this would happen. The SSBN programme has suffered delays. Indian submarines have been plagued by accidents. India believes SSBNs are a vital part of its nuclear strategy, which forswears the first use of nuclear weapons. The Indian navy’s latest statement of maritime strategy, published in October, says the country’s nuclear-deterrence doctrine involves having a “credible minimum deterrent” that can deliver “massive nuclear retaliation designed to inflict unacceptable damage” in response to a nuclear strike against India. Because they can readily avoid detection, SSBNs can survive a surprise attack and thus ensure India’s ability to launch a retaliatory “second strike”. Some nuclear theorists argue that submarine-based deterrents promote peace by making the other side more frightened to attack first. But the extension of the nuclear arms race to Asia’s seas may still have worrying implications—all the more if North Korea gets in on the act. It appears determined to find a way of sticking nuclear warheads on the end of its erratic missiles (see article). China is ahead of the game. It has a fleet of four second-generation Jin-class SSBNs and is testing JL-2 missiles to install in them. These weapons have a range of 7,400km (4,600 miles)—too short, for now, to reach the American mainland from the relative safety of the South China Sea. Pakistan, for its part, is in the early stages of a lower-cost approach. This involves arming diesel-powered subs with nuclear-armed cruise missiles with a range of 700km. Interactive graphic: A complete history of the world's nuclear weapons A report for the Lowy Institute, an Australian think-tank, predicts “a long phase of initial instability” as China and India start deploying nuclear missiles on submarines without adequate training or well-developed systems for communicating with them. It says the build-up may aggravate maritime tensions, as China and India seek to dominate local waters in an effort to turn them into havens for their SSBNs. And the submarines may not even provide the security the two countries are looking for. The institute says the Chinese and Indian submarines are noisy. This makes them easier to detect. A more immediate worry to India is Pakistan’s development and deployment of smaller “tactical” nuclear weapons for use on the battlefield. These may make it more likely that any war between India and Pakistan will go nuclear. They also increase the risk of Pakistan’s weapons being used accidentally—or falling into the hands of extremists (such weapons are under the control of lower-level commanders whose professionalism and loyalty may be dubious). Pakistan says tactical nukes are needed because of an Indian doctrine known as “cold start”. Though never formally adopted, “cold start” foresees Indian units being ready to respond to Pakistani provocation (eg, a terrorist outrage) with little or no notice, by seizing parts of Pakistani territory to use as a bargaining chip. India says it will not develop battlefield nukes of its own. Instead, it will rely on the threat of massive retaliation against any use of nuclear weapons by Pakistan. Still, it may be another decade before India has a fully-fledged sea-based deterrent. Arihant’s Russian nuclear-power generator is unsuited to long patrols. Initially, the sub is due to be armed with the K-15 missile, with a range of 750km—not enough to reach big cities in northern Pakistan. Striking Chinese ones would be harder still. From the beaches of Visakhapatnam the world will witness not only India’s ambition, but also the many gaps it has yet to fill in order to achieve it.Update: At about 9.30am local time, North Korean media and the American military command announced separately that an object—satellite or missile—had been launched into space from North Korea.  IN ITS quest for nuclear weapons, North Korea is a master of braggadocio. On January 6th the dictatorship of Kim Jong Un declared that it had detonated its first-ever hydrogen bomb, and had thus “guaranteed the eternal future of the nation”. But even its more low-key announcement this week that it now intends to launch an “earth observation satellite” some time between February 8th and 25th has caused global jitters. It is the oldest trick in the nuclear book to pretend that the testing of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) is nothing but a satellite launch. A rocket that can place a large satellite into orbit can just as easily propel a nuclear warhead to the other side of the world. Japan has placed its forces on high alert. Its defence minister, Gen Nakatani, said they had orders “to shoot down any ballistic missile threat”. South Korea has warned the North that it will “pay a harsh price” if it goes ahead with the launch. America is calling even more loudly for fresh UN sanctions against the North. Even China, North Korea’s ally, said it was “extremely concerned”. Experts are unsure how much progress North Korea is making with its nuclear-weapons project. North Korea’s boasting is certainly no guide. For example, it is highly unlikely that the detonation in January involved a hydrogen bomb, which is more powerful than the atomic sort. The seismic signature of the test, in an underground complex near the border with China where earlier ones were conducted, suggested the device was similar in size to the one used in the previous test in 2013. At most, experts say, North Korea tested a “boosted-fission” device that uses an additive to achieve a bigger bang. Peninsula of provocation: A timeline of clashes between North and South Korea There are also big doubts about the missiles. North Korea’s tests of ICBM-type rockets have a patchy record—despite its claims to the contrary. In October North Korea paraded what looked like a scary ICBM: the KN-08. Some analysts believe this is designed to have a range of about 9,000km (5,600 miles), which means it could reach America’s western seaboard. Whether it works is another matter. North Korea probably does not yet have the ability to fire nuclear weapons reliably at America—though every test will bring it closer to that objective. For all the chorus of international outrage, the only country that can realistically divert Mr Kim from his ruinous nuclear quest is China: it provides North Korea with fuel and food, and is the main conduit for its financial transactions. But it is reluctant to endorse America’s demands for tougher sanctions. However much China may be embarrassed by its wayward ally, it fears the collapse of the North Korean regime more than Mr Kim’s headlong quest for nukes.Sorry RECENT days have witnessed unusual phenomena in Japan. On January 29th, for the first time in its history, the central bank adopted negative interest rates as a way of dealing with the threat of deflation. Then came the public’s equally striking response to a bribery scandal involving Akira Amari (pictured), the economy minister, who had resigned a day before the bank’s move. The government was braced for a drop in its approval ratings, but instead public support for it rose in three polls, to over 50%. Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, may be wondering at his luck. The Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), the biggest opposition party, had been preparing to make hay from Mr Amari’s departure—the fourth such scandal in Mr Abe’s cabinet. But the DPJ is still floundering following its defeat in a general election in 2012. It has yet to find a new message that appeals strongly to voters. Its campaign for an election this summer for the parliament’s upper house is not inspiring. “I do not like the DPJ,” one of the DPJ’s posters imagines a voter musing, “but I want to protect democracy.” Mr Abe’s skilful handling of the Amari affair helped to minimise the damage. After the scandal broke in the Shukan Bunshun, a conservative weekly magazine, Mr Amari appeared confident of the prime minister’s backing. He was mistaken. Money scandals have been rife in Japanese politics due partly to vague rules on reporting political donations. But the magazine’s allegations that Mr Amari’s office accepted ¥12m ($100,000), including envelopes of cash, from the representative of a construction company seeking favourable treatment from a government agency, proved too much. Within a week, he announced his resignation. In his first, disastrous term as prime minister between 2006 and 2007, Mr Abe had allowed ministerial scandals to drag on with damaging effect. Mr Amari’s exit came at an awkward time for Mr Abe as he tries to boost a stubbornly lacklustre economy (though it may get a lift thanks to the Bank of Japan’s interest-rate decision). The scandal has delayed debate in the Diet (parliament) over the government’s budget for the coming financial year, which starts on April 1st, though there is little doubt this will be approved eventually. One of Mr Abe’s boldest attempts to promote structural economic reform (there are not many of them), namely getting Japan into the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)—an ambitious 12-country free-trade agreement that includes America—may also suffer delays. Mr Amari was Japan’s chief negotiator for TPP entry. Without his guidance, it will be far harder for the government to get the terms of accession ratified by the Diet during its current session (due to end on June 1st), says Heizo Takenaka, a former economy minister. Even though farmers are to receive some ¥110 billion ($890m) to help them adapt to lower tariffs, opposition to TPP from the farm lobby is expected to be strong. Mr Amari’s successor is Nobuteru Ishihara, who leads the second-smallest faction of Mr Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party (he is the son an ultranationalist former governor of Tokyo). Backers of economic reform bemoan the younger Mr Ishihara’s relative lack of economic-policy experience and his proneness to gaffes . But apart for his enthusiasm for TPP, Mr Amari was hardly a gung-ho promoter of reform himself. And Mr Abe has his eye on other goals. Such is the opposition’s disarray that there is now even speculation that he may call a snap election for the Diet’s lower house as early as this spring. Though the economy is weak, voters tend to blame China’s slowdown rather than Mr Abe’s policies, says Koichi Nakano of Sophia University in Tokyo. Mr Abe may use his political strength not so much to push for economic reforms, but to change the constitution to make it easier for Japan to operate as a normal military power, instead of being bound by its post-war commitment to pacifism. For this he would need the support of two-thirds of legislators in both houses of the Diet (never mind that he lacks it with the public). With the help of like-minded parties, that may be thinkable if the LDP does well in both the upper-house election and a snap poll for the lower house. A strangely resilient Mr Abe may decide that now is the time to try.IT SEEMS odd for Lee Hsien Loong, Singapore’s prime minister, to tamper with the political system. His country’s style of government has many admirers. Europeans and Americans envy how efficient and clean it is. Authoritarians, not least in China, gaze in awe at the ruling People’s Action Party, in power since 1959 despite facing regular, unrigged elections. The most recent, last September, returned the PAP with some 70% of the votes. One of the world’s best-paid political leaders, Mr Lee is also one of its most successful. Why fix a machine that ain’t broke? Three simple reasons explain why Mr Lee, in a speech to Parliament last month, outlined a set of political reforms. First, this is a tinkering at the edges of the Singapore system, not an overhaul. He borrowed a metaphor from his father, Singapore’s first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew. Constitutions, he said, are like a fine old pair of shoes: “Stretch them, soften them, resole them, repair them.” They will always be better than a brand-new pair. Second, the PAP’s landslide last September means Mr Lee is proposing change from a position of strength. He cannot be accused of panic measures to shore up PAP rule, as he might have been after the previous election in 2011, when the party recorded its worst performance since independence (a mere 60% of the popular vote). And third, Mr Lee, like his father, thinks for the long term. These, he said, are not changes for the next five or ten years but for the decades to come. What he did not say is that the reforms will help the PAP extend its rule far into that misty future. All involve further refinement of the Westminster-style parliamentary system Singapore inherited from Britain. The first covers “non-constituency members of parliament” (NCMPs). These posts date back to 1984. As Mr Lee told it, the PAP, having faced no parliamentary opposition at all from 1965 to 1981, when it lost a by-election, decided to its surprise that it was good for government to have opposition voices represented. (This might also have surprised the late J.B. Jeyaretnam, that solo voice of dissent, who was hounded into bankruptcy, and was dismissed by the elder Mr Lee as a “dud”.) So the government mandated a minimum number of opposition seats—at present nine. Since the opposition never wins enough at elections, the others go to its best-performing defeated candidates. But NCMPs have not been allowed to vote on money bills, for example, or constitutional changes, or on motions of no-confidence (not that such a heresy is on the cards). Now Mr Lee proposes increasing the minimum number of opposition MPs to 12 (Parliament currently has 89 elected members), and to give NCMPs full voting rights. Yet the opposition’s reaction has been churlish. Low Thia Khiang, of its biggest group, the Workers’ Party, said NCMPs were like “duckweed” in a pond—ie, they lacked roots (in a constituency) and were merely ornamental. A greater cause for worry is that the reform may actually reduce the opposition vote. Many Singaporeans want to see the government held more fiercely to account, but are wary of the inexperienced opposition coming anywhere close to office. Indeed, the Workers’ Party campaigned last year not to form a government but to be a stronger opposition. If that outcome is guaranteed, why not vote for the government? Lee Kuan Yew's Singapore: An astonishing record The second proposed change is to so-called “group representation constituencies” (GRCs). These ostensibly ensure that the ethnic-Malay and -Indian minorities are represented. The public-housing estates where most Singaporeans live are subject to ethnic quotas, so everywhere probably has an ethnic-Chinese majority. Much of Singapore is now divided into four-, five- or six-member electoral constituencies, with parties compelled to include minority candidates on their slates. But these winner-take-all GRCs have had other uses: it is hard for small parties to find enough qualified candidates; weak PAP candidates can be swept into parliament on the coat-tails of a cabinet minister; and the distorting effect of Singapore’s first-past-the-post system is magnified, increasing the PAP’s majority. It was only in 2011 that the opposition first won a GRC. It barely clung on to it last year. Now Mr Lee wants to create more single-member constituencies and to reduce the size of GRCs; the opposition still wants them abolished. The third proposed reform is to the largely ceremonial presidency, which since 1990 has been an elected post, with important powers of veto over government appointments and the spending of its vast financial nest-egg. The idea was to introduce a check on the government. Now, however, the worry is probably about the possibility of a rogue president. In the most recent election, in 2011, in a four-horse race, the government’s favoured candidate only scraped home. The election, inevitably, had become political—a contest between the government and its critics. So Mr Lee announced the formation of a constitutional commission to review, among other things, the qualifications a presidential candidate needs—and, presumably, to tighten them. Checks and fine balances Singapore’s leaders like to attribute their country’s phenomenal economic success in part to the political system: one just contested enough to keep the government honest; but not so much that it risks losing power, meaning it can withstand populist temptations and plan for the future. Mr Lee’s proposed reforms are in that vein—making sure that the system has checks and balances, but only ones the government can control. As opposition leaders were quick to point out, they do not even touch some of the main sources of the PAP’s electoral magic: its public-housing programme; a pliant mainstream press; an election commission that is under the prime minister’s office; and a political climate, even now, where dissent seems a terrible career choice. That Singapore has thrived with so little real restraint on the government is also a tribute to the incorruptibility of the Lee family and their colleagues. Whether it can continue to thrive without them, and without more far-reaching political reform, is a gamble.IN 1997 the collapse of several large Ponzi schemes in Albania precipitated mass disorder, the overthrow of the government and the deaths of 2,000 people. The failure, in another country lacking robust financial regulation, of a huge Ponzi scheme is not going to lead to the overthrow of its president, Xi Jinping. But it could cause the government political problems. And it shows that China is as vulnerable as anywhere else to the chaos that can result from financial shenanigans. The company that failed was Ezubao, China’s largest peer-to-peer (P2P) lender (one of its now sealed-up offices is pictured). P2P websites connect borrowers and lenders without a bank’s intermediation. Founded in 2014 by Ding Ning, who, according to state media, had done well for himself manufacturing can-openers, Ezubao quickly became one of China’s best-known new financial firms. Mr Ding spent millions on an advertising blitz, ordered employees to sport luxury brands or glitzy jewellery and was interviewed on the government’s web portal about his company’s contribution to Chinese growth. But it was dodgy from the start. One executive said that “95% of investment projects on Ezubao were fake”. Another called it, accurately, a Ponzi scheme: instead of paying investors out of revenues from business projects, it was paying long-standing investors with the money deposited by new ones, meaning liabilities exceeded assets and the firm was permanently insolvent. When the police arrested its bosses on January 31st Ezubao had over 900,000 investors who had lost about 50 billion yuan ($7.6 billion) between them. No known Ponzi scheme has had so many victims. To evade scrutiny, managers had buried their account books deep underground. Police took 20 hours to dig them out with excavators. Ponzi schemes abound in China. Between 2007 and 2008 the founder of the great ant-farm scam stole $400m from investors in the supposed health benefits of the insects before he was arrested and sentenced to death. Last year in Kunming, a city in the south-west, Fanya Metals Exchange, which mostly traded rare earths, froze $6.4 billion of funds. The chairman disappeared in December (he is thought to have been arrested). Meanwhile police in Guangzhou, according to a newspaper in the southern city, are looking into what has happened to 40 billion yuan deposited with GSM, a firm that no longer exists at its registered place of business. China is probably no more prone to financial fraud than other emerging markets (in 2012 the Reserve Bank of South Africa said it had investigated 222 suspicious schemes). But its scams are larger in absolute terms—and reflect its financial system’s distortions. Chinese banking is dominated by state-owned firms that offer depositors artificially low interest rates and make most of their loans to other big state-owned enterprises. P2P lending (of the sort Ezubao pretended to offer) has rushed into the gaps, matching depositors who want higher rates of return with small firms that cannot get credit from big banks. Total P2P loans quadrupled in 2015, to 980 billion yuan, more than in America. But the business is very poorly regulated. Realising this, the authorities in December proposed a strict set of rules, including banning P2P companies from financing their own projects or guaranteeing a rate of return. But this comes very late. About a third of the 3,600 P2P sites were classed as “problematic” by the China Banking Regulatory Commission at the end of 2015. Many are doubtless proper businesses but financial information in China is not reliable enough to help investors tell pyramid schemes from ventures that are honest. Foiling the phoney pharaohs One of the big questions is whether financial fraud will have a political impact. China’s stockmarket meltdown caused ructions worldwide, but relatively few demonstrations in China itself. The opposite has been true for pyramid schemes. Investors in Fanya staged a “citizen’s arrest” of the chairman at a hotel in Shanghai and drove him to the police station. Protests about Ezubao have broken out in 34 cities and the police were told to prepare for the occupation of official buildings in Beijing. Investors think financial firms are regulated by the government, even when they are not, and blame the state accordingly. “My question is simple,” wrote “Mexican man” on Weibo, a microblogging site. “What on earth were the regulators doing?” Mr Xi might ponder that, too. 
