EACH night at 7pm, many of China’s television channels beam the state broadcaster’s flagship news programme into Chinese homes: a remorseless half-hour diet of where Xi Jinping went today, how well the economy is doing and (for a few minutes at the end) a look at all those people in foreign countries killing each other. Despite China’s transformation over the past 40 years, the evening news has changed very little. Around a tenth of the population still watch it—a remarkable number given the profusion in recent years of livelier news sources in print and online. News Simulcast, usually known by its Chinese name, Xinwen Lianbo, has chronicled the country’s extraordinary metamorphosis with almost unremitting leadenness since it was first aired in 1978. The same opening tune has been used for nearly 30 years (though the orchestra has improved). News is chosen not for its importance or human interest but for its political value in bolstering the Communist Party. It is translated into eight minority languages, just to be sure its message is understood by as many people as possible. The fare has barely changed in decades. A typical programme in the 1980s highlighted the development of a self-opening umbrella and a contest in which happy only children (China had recently introduced a one-child-per-couple policy) performed household chores. Today the backdrop is just more high-tech. Scenes of bullet-trains and microchip makers have replaced those of dreary state-owned factories. Now, as then, reports featuring Chinese leaders—no matter how trivial their activities—nearly always take precedence over other news. A popular rhyming ditty accurately describes the format: “The leaders are always busy, the people are perfectly healthy, the world outside China is extremely chaotic.” Early newscasters—almost always one man and one woman—were chosen for their standard Mandarin pronunciation and stolid demeanour; the same few read the news for decades. These have been replaced with younger, more glamorous presenters (though they still need official permission to change their hairstyles). To make broadcasts seem more newsy, banks of TV screens flicker in what appears to be a newsroom behind. But live reports are rare; they create too big a risk of something embarrassing making it to air. A fraction of households had TV sets when Xinwen Lianbo started broadcasting. But as China entered the age of mass consumption a few years later, TV news became the perfect vehicle for the party to try to guide public opinion. Xinwen Lianbo’s ratings peaked in the mid-1990s, when 200m-250m tuned in. Now the audience is 130m-140m, though the fall is not as big a worry for the party as it might seem: in 2003 China Central Television launched a 24-hour news channel, giving viewers complete freedom to choose when to catch up with the latest propaganda. Xinwen Lianbo still has more viewers than any other TV news on Earth. For many, the programme provides useful clues to the party’s latest thinking, and a chance to see leaders who rarely appear in public. Propagandists have used the news to try to demystify President Xi, says Chang Jiang of Renmin University in Beijing. The president is shown as a man of the people, drinking tea with villagers or kicking footballs. His voice is often heard, notes Mr Chang—perhaps because, unlike his predecessors, he speaks standard Mandarin and is therefore widely understood. Ratings apparently rise when his elegant wife, Peng Liyuan, appears. But such cosmetic innovations are as far as the party will go in tinkering with a brand they consider successful.“I’VE hurt the feelings of the Chinese people.” So said Peter Dahlin, a Swedish citizen, in a televised “confession” after his arrest in Beijing in January. There were several disturbing aspects about the admission, including the likelihood that it was made because of pressure exerted on Mr Dahlin, who ran a Beijing-based legal-advice group (he has since been expelled). But why would the government put those particular words into his mouth? Other countries, especially authoritarian ones, also like to express outrage about the state of their citizens’ emotions. But China is a world leader in this specialised form of righteous indignation. David Bandurski of the China Media Project at the University of Hong Kong has counted 143 instances of the phrase “hurting the feelings of the Chinese people” in the People’s Daily, the Communist Party’s mouthpiece, since 1959, when India became the first to be accused by the party of doing it—during a border dispute. Since then, Japan has upset China most often, with 51 offences, followed by America, with 35. But you do not have to be a rival or neighbour to do it: the tiny Caribbean nation of St Lucia hurt the feelings of China’s 1.3 billion people by reopening diplomatic ties with Taiwan in 2007. How many of them had heard of St Lucia is not clear. Albanian insults aimed at Mao Zedong in the 1970s; the defection of a tennis player to America in 1982; the accidental bombing of China’s embassy in Belgrade in 1999: all have caused emotional scarring. But three things are particularly offensive: being nice to Taiwan (28 occasions of bruised feelings); sympathy with the plight of Tibet (12); and failure to come to terms with the second world war (hence Japan’s multiple offences). Oddly, general complaints about China’s human-rights abuses are usually shrugged off—the People’s Daily has reported only two cases of hurt feelings relating to those. The public’s supposed outrage is a useful tool: it enables the party to put aside its principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. For example, it often complains about Japanese politicians’ visits to the Yasukuni shrine in Tokyo, where war criminals are among those honoured. But the party is rarely keen on letting people express their feelings for themselves. It regards spontaneous public outbursts as a potential threat to the party’s control, loss of which would truly hurt.FIVE years after Western air power helped remove Muammar Qaddafi, the chances of another intervention in Libya are steadily increasing. Islamic State may be retreating in Iraq and under pressure in Syria, but in Libya it is a growing menace. At a meeting in Rome on February 2nd of the international coalition against Islamic State (IS), Libya was high on the agenda. That followed talks in Paris on January 22nd in which General Joe Dunford, the chairman of America’s Joint Chiefs of Staff, agreed with his French opposite number that they were “looking to take decisive military action” against IS in Libya. It has since been confirmed that American and British special forces are already on the ground there in small numbers, making contact with local militias. Unsurprisingly, the same conditions that have made Libya such fertile territory for IS are also making it hard to plan an intervention that would have a good chance of success. The spread of IS has been helped by a 20-month-long civil war in which it has been happy to attack both sides. In the west it faces Operation Dawn, a cobbled-together alliance of Misratan, Berber, Islamist, and other militias that back the so-called National Salvation Government in Tripoli. In the east it faces Operation Dignity, an equally loose-knit coalition of militias and regular military forces that includes some former regime supporters. Operation Dignity is led by General Khalifa Haftar, who backs a rival parliament, the internationally recognised House of Representatives, which is based in the eastern city of Tobruk. It has not all been plain sailing for IS. It suffered a setback in mid-2015 when its attempt to take over the eastern town of Derna met resistance from local tribes, repelled by its brutality, and rival Islamist militias. But since absorbing the most militant members of a powerful local jihadist group, Ansar al-Sharia, it has succeeded in establishing an area of control spreading out about 100 miles (160 km) on either side of Sirte, Qaddafi’s old coastal stronghold, which sits between Tripoli and Benghazi. From Sirte, now described as the new Raqqa (IS’s capital in Syria), IS is expanding east and attacking oil installations at Sidra and Ras Lanuf. The militia-based Petroleum Facilities Guard, although hugely outnumbering the 5,000 or so IS fighters in the area (the UN estimates 3,000, which may be on the low side), appears unable or unwilling to prevent IS from doing further damage to an industry that has seen output fall to less than a quarter of the 1.6m barrels a day being pumped in 2011. The mounting concerns about IS in Libya have spurred diplomatic efforts to end the civil war through the creation of a government of “national accord”. Hopes were raised by a peace deal brokered by the UN that was signed in Morocco on December 17th by delegates from the rival parliaments. Lacking broad support, the agreement was premature. Both assemblies insisted that the signatories represented only themselves. Nevertheless, the UN appointed a presidential council, which in turn named a new government under prime minister Fayez Sarraj, a member of the Tripoli-based parliament, that is now waiting in a hotel in Tunis. The Arab spring, five years on On January 25th the parliament in Tobruk rejected the proposed government, while affirming the peace plan, if changes were made. The most important demand is for the removal of Article 8 of the agreement, a provision that would give the presidential council the right to appoint the heads of the armed forces and the security services. That would threaten the position of General Haftar, who harbours ambitions to be Libya’s next strongman. Supported by outside powers, including Egypt, General Haftar still holds much sway in the east, where his forces have cracked down on dissent. But he has a growing number of critics. Deal or no deal The UN has said that it will not reopen the deal. The parliament in Tripoli has not voted, but its prime minister, Khalifa al-Ghawi, has threatened to arrest the new government’s guards if they enter western territory. It does not help that Tripoli is also the location of the Libyan state’s only functioning institutions: the national bank, the state oil firm and the sovereign wealth fund. “The entire plan is looking pretty forlorn and anaemic,” says Frederic Wehrey of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a think-tank. Divisions within the army may ultimately undermine General Haftar in the east. He is already despised in the west, where he is seen as a scourge of the Islamists. But for now Libya is no closer to a unified command that could bring together its various combatants and ally with Western powers to fight IS. Much of the public distrusts the UN, not least because its former envoy to Libya, Bernardino León, took a job with an official think-tank in the United Arab Emirates, which supports Mr Haftar, after stepping down last year. But they have also grown tired of the fighting. Nearly half the population needs humanitarian assistance, says the UN. Over 1m Libyans are thought to be suffering from malnutrition, and 500,000 have been forced from their homes. Where does this leave the plans for a Western intervention against IS? In Rome John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, suggested that once the unity government is formed outside powers will respond to any request for military help, not least because they want to defeat IS. That assumes, however, that the international pressure on the two parliaments in Tobruk and Tripoli is close to yielding a deal that sticks. But as Claudia Grazzini of the International Crisis Group says, Article 8 is the “cornerstone” of the agreement. Tobruk’s opposition to it, she says, means that all the other guarantees contained within it, such as consensual government based on a separation of powers, “just crumble”. Meanwhile, by targeting oil and petroleum infrastructure, the jihadists of IS are trying to destroy any chance that anyone will be able to put the Libyan state back together. The central bank has burned through much of its foreign reserves paying salaries and subsidies to both sides, while the Libyan Investment Authority’s funds remain frozen. If oil production falls even further, the humanitarian disaster will only get worse. Nobody has any illusions that, on their own, Western air strikes can do more than contain IS. But Ms Grazzini says putting large foreign forces on the ground would be “unwise and risky”, and efforts to pick militias deemed worthy partners might just mean strengthening them in their battles against other local groups. Mr Wehrey agrees on the need to proceed carefully, but says that “we can’t wait” for a unity government to be “pushed over the line”. He is more hopeful that special forces on the ground can work with local militias, such as the Misratans, who have repeatedly asked for military assistance from America as “co-ordinator, broker and referee”. Air strikes, he believes, can play an enabling role and disrupt IS operations. In a situation where there are no good options, doing nothing may be the worst. Barely coping IT IS sometimes dubbed “the Hashemite Kingdom of Boredom”. That may not be very flattering. But while Jordan will never be an economic or political powerhouse, you can do a lot worse than be boring in the Middle East these days. Jordan, after all, shares frontiers with both Syria and Iraq. From its foothold there, Islamic State (IS) has ambitions to expand the borders of its “caliphate”. Jordan itself has bred many a jihadist. Some have climbed to the top ranks of al-Qaeda or inspired it; 2,000 or so have joined IS; others are biding their time at home. Jordan is already home to roughly 1.3m Syrian refugees, not to mention hundreds of thousands of Iraqis and long-term Palestinian residents, many of whom are keen to head to Europe. Moreover, the Hashemite Kingdom is no stranger to the problems that sparked turmoil in other Arab states. People took to the streets in 2011 demanding that the royal court relinquish some of its powers, calling for corruption to be stamped out and protesting about the dire state of the economy. Little has improved since then. But Jordan’s King Abdullah has so far managed to ward off disaster through a combination of skill and good fortune. Abroad, he has managed to keep friends in a divided region. He has resisted pressure from Saudi Arabia, his bulky neighbour and regular grant-giver, which wanted Jordan to let weapons flow across its border to Syria. Instead, he is trying to create a sort of buffer zone to stop the refugee flow from southern Syria by quietly arming some of the rebels there, but not forcefully enough to incur Bashar al-Assad’s wrath. He manages to have relations with Iran, Saudi’s nemesis, too. At home, Jordan has gained from a fear that set in across the region as countries fell apart. The criticisms remain, but “now people just want a safe haven in Amman, a weekend retreat at the Dead Sea and tourists to come to Petra,” says a foreign resident. To be fair, Jordan is doing more than most countries to meet some of its citizens’ demands. For one, its security forces do not shoot at protesters. There is more lip service than real reform, but a new election law has made some people keener on polls, which must take place by the end of next January, says Jumana Ghneimat, the editor of Al Ghad, a local paper. This uneasy peace will not be easy to keep. The king is warning that his country is at “boiling point”. Jordan is refusing to take any more refugees unless foreign donors, gathering in London on February 4th, give more. Angst towards (and despair among) refugees is growing. Jordanians, like the Lebanese and Turkish, have become more and more annoyed at the presence of so many Syrians. They are blamed for a host of ills, from a rising rate of child marriage (for which there is some evidence) to increased crime rates (for which there is none) and unemployment. Though Jordan’s Azraq camp is only a third full, some 20,000 Syrians are stranded at the north-eastern border of the country near Iraq, waiting to cross. Jordan is letting in only a few dozen every day. The government is in a bind, but could help itself. Until very recently it had not allowed any Syrian refugees to work for fear they would stay for good. Rather than see them as a burden, Jordan could look at how they could contribute to economic growth, says Andrew Harper, who heads the UN’s refugee agency in Amman, Jordan’s capital. Improving the economy would ease Jordanians’ gripes. The regional crises have, unsurprisingly, deterred tourists and investors. Only half the number of people visit Petra today as in 2010. The economy depends on charity from the Gulf rather than what it produces itself: unemployment is around 30%. The debt-to-GDP ratio reached 91% last year from 67% in 2010. As prices go up, people are feeling the pinch. Youngsters, who are a majority of the country’s people, are almost absent from politics. The prime minister, Abdullah Ensour, is 77. “The politicians come from a museum,” says Amer Sabailah, a local analyst. “Jordan has taken for granted the people’s fear of the regional situation to keep business as usual.” Muslim Brotherhood types are sidelined too, despite making up the bulk of the opposition. “Elections are a decoration,” says Nimr al-Assaf, a Brother, who says the king has met party members only once since taking power in 1999. The parliament is still fairly toothless. Jordan’s biggest worry is an attack by IS or its sympathisers. But Ms Ghneimat thinks the focus on security alone is misguided. She regularly runs articles criticising the state’s inattention to ideology and radicalisation. The government has only recently started to overhaul religiously intolerant schoolbooks; too many preachers in mosques whip up hatred. Even though 2% of Jordan’s 6.5m people are Christian, around Christmas many imams declared the festival haram (forbidden). “The problem is IS has offered a vision to our young, disenfranchised people,” says Ms Ghneimat. “Jordan will not survive unless our leaders offer the same.”Roses are green IF YOU come home to a vase full of roses on Valentine’s Day in Europe there will be a good chance they were picked a few days earlier on the shores of Lake Naivasha in Kenya. The fertile Rift Valley soil, warm days and cool nights make for perfect flower-growing conditions. The Netherlands still dominates the global horticulture industry, but Kenya is digging itself a growing niche. Its cut-flower exports increased 12-fold to 137,000 tonnes between 1988 and 2014 as buyers realised it was cheaper, and counter-intuitively greener, to fly blooms thousands of miles than to heat Dutch greenhouses. More than 30% of the European Union’s cut-flower imports now come from Kenya. Most are roses. After being cut from inside the pale, plastic greenhouses crouched by the lakeside, the thorny stems are stripped of excess leaves and packaged to customers’ specifications. The bunches are then shepherded into 5°C cold rooms by workers in quilted boiler suits before being driven to Nairobi airport, landing at Amsterdam’s auction or with in-country agents around 48 hours after being plucked. For many farms this is the busiest time of year—Britain’s Mother’s Day and Women’s Day in Russia come just three weeks after Valentine’s. Maridadi Flowers in Naivasha, for instance, will sell around 10.5m roses over the period, 15% of its annual harvest. Others opt to keep production steady. Cultivating plants for such a short spurt of demand is “a dangerous game”, says a farmer: a cold snap could mean flowers take longer to bloom and miss the bouquet-giving season. The industry is one of Kenya’s biggest foreign-exchange earners, alongside tea, tourism and remittances. After a series of exposés of poor conditions, most farms now abide by health-and-safety standards and pay for workers’ medical care. Wages have fallen in real terms over the past decade, thanks to rampant inflation, but the jobs are still sought after: around 150 men and women recently queued up to apply for 20 posts at Nini, a 44-hectare farm employing over 500 people. Flower farms are also managing and recycling water better after being accused of draining and polluting Lake Naivasha. It makes sense for overseas buyers to demand high standards: there’s nothing romantic about environmentally unfriendly roses harvested by miserable workers.SELDOM has facial hair become an object of such frenzied political debate. When France’s popular young economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, returned from his Christmas break sporting a hip beard, it set off political chatter. Was it an attention-grabbing gimmick? A visual symbol of the outspoken minister’s defiance? An appeal to the metrosexual high-tech crowd? Mr Macron, feigning surprise at the fuss, insisted that he had just wanted a break from shaving, and soon after dropped the beard. But the impact lasted: at a time of disillusion with most politicians, there is one dynamic nonconformist leader whom the French find fascinating. The 38-year-old Mr Macron has become the most popular politician on the left, and the second-most popular of any stripe. Yet 18 months ago he was unknown outside the corridors of government. A one-time investment banker and product of the elite civil-service college, the Ecole Nationale d’Administration, Mr Macron became economic adviser to François Hollande after the Socialist’s election as president in 2012. His efforts to coax the president away from his dafter ideas did not always succeed. Mr Macron once called Mr Hollande’s promised 75% top income-tax rate “Cuba without the sun!”; it was implemented, for two years, all the same. It was only after being propelled into government, in 2014, that Mr Macron began to capture the French imagination. His predecessor, Arnaud Montebourg, specialised in irking foreign investors by declaring that France had no need for them. Mr Macron turned on the charm. At ease in Davos or Silicon Valley, and a champion of French high-tech start-ups, he can claim a fair share of the credit for France’s improved image among foreign investors. The great mystery, however, is not that Mr Macron appeals abroad. It is that he has won over the French. Many of Mr Macron’s ideas rub against everything that the French left and its union friends have traditionally stood for. They defend the 35-hour working week; he urges flexibility for firms to negotiate longer hours. They consider Sunday trading an assault on workers’ right to rest; he wants employees to choose. They want to protect incumbents, such as taxi drivers; he knows that consumers like Uber. They are suspicious of wealth (Mr Hollande once said he didn’t like rich people); he urges young French to aspire to become billionaires. “We need to move beyond the conservative left that is afraid of change,” says Mr Macron. This line may offend the orthodox left, but it appeals to France’s broad middle. Mr Macron, who is no longer a member of the Socialist Party and has never been elected, draws as many, if not more, admirers outside his camp. One poll finds that he is the second-most popular politician on the centre-right, ahead of Nicolas Sarkozy, leader of Les Républicains, the centre-right opposition party (see chart). In contrast to the grey heads who populate parliament, Mr Macron also understands his generation: those who use Uber, hold business meetings on Skype in co-working cafés, and shun hotels in favour of Airbnb. “He is in sync with society, not political parties,” says one French tech boss. Mr Macron’s can-do political energy stands out in morose France, home to 10% unemployment and growth last year of just 1.1%. Since the double terrorist attacks of 2015, Mr Hollande now wears a calcified frown. Manuel Valls, the prime minister, declares that “history is fundamentally tragic.” Mr Macron smiles, a lot. This insolent popularity is not to everybody’s liking, especially within government. “He oversteps the mark, because he lacks a political sense,” says one source. Most awkwardly, Mr Macron’s rebelliousness is showing up Mr Valls, who before becoming prime minister in 2014 was himself an insubordinate Socialist moderate. Like Mr Macron, Mr Valls has used his popularity to legitimise charges against Socialist orthodoxy, calling the party “backward-looking” and “haunted by a Marxist super-ego”. As prime minister, Mr Valls has made economic policy more business-friendly, forcing a deregulation bill drafted by Mr Macron through parliament last year (against Socialist rebels). Yet high office has tempered his iconoclasm. For now, it is more useful for Mr Hollande, whose post-terrorism poll bounce has vanished, to have the popular duo inside government. But with presidential elections coming up next year, it also suits him to maintain some tension between them. Mr Hollande is France’s least popular modern president, but still hopes to run for re-election. Managing his would-be rivals will feed into the calculation for an upcoming government reshuffle, when Laurent Fabius, the foreign minister, is expected to move to the constitutional council. The Macron phenomenon suggests something more important too: that there may be a far broader centre ground in France than is usually visible under its polarising two-round presidential system. Last year, for example, Socialist deputies resisted the government’s deregulation bill. Yet 54% of the public now want reforms to accelerate, and one poll says 69% want to loosen the 35-hour working week rules. Hard-line unions are still blocking Sunday opening for some shops. Yet many employees, promised generous overtime pay on Sundays, are in favour. Mr Valls and Mr Macron have helped nudge French public opinion towards the centre. The question is how, politically, to harness the energy of this quiet but emerging French consensus. 
