The wisdom of crowds LISA F. is a 13-year-old Russian-German girl who lives in Berlin. On January 11th she disappeared for about 30 hours. When she resurfaced, she claimed to have been abducted and raped by a group of migrants. Russian media pounced on the story, whipping their audiences into a frenzy. Even the Kremlin got in on it. On January 26th Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, accused Germany of hushing up the case in order “to paint over reality with political correctness”. The charge was that Germany, a victim of Western decadence and the naive refugee policy of its chancellor, could not or would not protect “our Lisa”. In the current political climate, many people in Russia and Germany are eager to believe such a message. Among them are many “Russian-Germans”: ethnic Germans who lived for centuries in Russia but in recent decades have moved back to Germany, where they number about 2m. Many watch Russian television. Thousands of them took to German streets to protest for Lisa. They were joined by German nationalists and some supporters of the NPD, a neo-Nazi party eager to spread any negative rumour about refugees. Berlin’s police, ever conscientious about upholding the law and exercising discretion, kept their initial statements matter-of-fact. They had no evidence of any abduction, but were investigating the possibility that Lisa had engaged in consensual sex earlier on (which might constitute statutory rape). Of two suspects, neither was a migrant. Undaunted, the Russian media continued to peddle conspiracy theories. Germans gradually became outraged by their failure to respect due process. Even Germany’s foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who usually displays an embarrassing eagerness to accommodate Russian vanity, called Moscow’s statements “political propaganda”. Mr Lavrov replied that he interpreted that as an admission of guilt. On January 29th the police explained what had actually taken place. Lisa F. spent the night of January 11th with her 19-year-old boyfriend. She had had problems at school, the prosecutor’s office says, and didn’t dare to go home. Crises of trust wherever one looks.THIS week Horst Seehofer, the premier of Bavaria and an unruly ally of Chancellor Angela Merkel, ruffled German diplomatic feathers by visiting Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president. Mr Seehofer’s trip carried no official weight. But hugging a leader whom Mrs Merkel treats warily further confused Germany’s muddled “eastern policy”, or Ostpolitik. The term dates back to the rapprochement with the communist bloc begun in 1969 by Willy Brandt, West Germany’s first Social Democratic chancellor. It set in motion the normalisation of relations with East Germany and other Warsaw Pact nations, as well as easing tensions with the Soviet Union. Today Social Democrats still credit Ostpolitik for the eventual fall of the Berlin Wall. After German reunification, which required Soviet blessing, the conciliatory spirit spread to the centre-right Christian Democrats, led today by Mrs Merkel. It has also spawned the notion of Russlandversteher (“Russia-understanders”), Germans who mix sympathy for Russia with antipathy for America. The chancellor suspended her belief in Ostpolitik’s underlying principle of “change through rapprochement” after Mr Putin seized Crimea and sent Russian troops to back separatists in Ukraine. She has orchestrated a firm European response that combines tough economic sanctions with dialogue to avoid further escalation. But a ten-minute taxi ride away from Mrs Merkel’s office, in Germany’s foreign ministry, the old Ostpolitik lives on. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the foreign minister, is a Social Democrat. He was also chief of staff for Gerhard Schröder, the Social Democrats’ last chancellor. After losing to Mrs Merkel in 2005 Mr Schröder, a friend of Mr Putin, became chairman of the board of Nord Stream, a German-Russian pipeline that carries Russian gas under the Baltic Sea to Germany. Today Mr Steinmeier reliably plays dove to Mrs Merkel’s hawk. Social Democratic fingerprints are all over plans for a second Baltic pipeline, Nord Stream 2, which is to be built even though the existing one is operating at only half capacity. A deal between Russia and Germany was announced in Moscow last autumn by Sigmar Gabriel, the economics minister and the Social Democrats’ boss. Nord Stream 2 has few friends outside Russia and the Social Democrats. Poland, Slovakia and the Baltic countries are aghast at what they see as a sinister pact to boost German business at the expense of their energy security. Russia could junk its pipelines that run through Poland and Ukraine, leaving them gas-strapped and at the mercy of powerful (and historically unfriendly) neighbours. The European Commission sees it similarly. In 2014 it blocked another pipeline project, under which Russian gas was to run through the Black Sea and central Europe. America, worried that Nord Stream 2 would deprive Ukraine of transit fees, is also opposed. So are many Germans. Norbert Röttgen, a Christian Democrat who leads parliament’s foreign-policy committee, finds the government’s line that Nord Stream 2 is a commercial, not a geopolitical, matter “indefensible”. No doubt this formulation has been forced on Mrs Merkel to keep the peace with her Social Democratic coalition partners. But Mr Röttgen says that Germany’s interests—be it energy independence from Russia or solidarity with the EU—would be better served by opposing Nord Stream 2. Germany’s relations with Poland and Hungary are already troubled by nationalist governments there. By clinging to an Ostpolitik focused on Russia, the Social Democrats are rendering relations with the wider east increasingly fraught.99% of voters can’t be wrong RAMZAN KADYROV has few inhibitions. Last week, just before the first anniversary of the murder of Boris Nemtsov, a liberal Russian opposition leader, by a member of Mr Kadyrov’s security services, the Chechen strongman posted a video on his Instagram page. It depicted Mikhail Kasyanov, a former prime minister, in the crosshairs of a sniper rifle. “Kasyanov is in Strasbourg to get money for the opposition,” Mr Kadyrov commented under the video, in a clear warning to opposition politicians. “Whoever still doesn’t get it, will.” Mr Kadyrov has been ratcheting up the invective for a while. Last month he called liberals “vile jackals” who should be treated as “enemies of the people”. In an article in the pro-Kremlin newspaper Izvestia, Mr Kadyrov offered psychiatric treatment to opponents of President Vladimir Putin. He also staged a large rally in Grozny, Chechnya’s capital, lest anyone doubt his popular support. For many Russians, and not only opposition figures, Mr Kadyrov’s latest antics went too far. Ella Panfilova, a human-rights ombudsman in the Kremlin, said his statements should be examined for signs of “extremism”. The Levada Centre, an independent pollster, found 60% of Russians thought Mr Kadyrov’s threats unacceptable. Konstantin Senchenko, an independent politician from Krasnoyarsk, called Mr Kadyrov “a disgrace to Russia” on his Facebook page. The next day, after threatening calls from Chechnya, Mr Senchenko was forced to apologise profusely. Kirill Rogov, a Russian political analyst, says Mr Kadyrov’s threats epitomise a transformation of Russia’s regime in the face of a shrinking economy. “This is a new type of repression. In the past the regime dealt with its opponents by charging them with economic crimes. Now the stakes have been raised,” he says. Russian repression is unlike that of the Soviet regime, which had a monopoly on violence. Mr Putin outsources his terror to thugs like Mr Kadyrov, who ensures that Mr Putin routinely draws over 99% of the vote in elections in Chechnya. In December 2014 Mr Kadyrov paraded some 20,000 of his own well-armed troops through Grozny, Chechnya’s capital. “Kadyrov can do the dirty work for [the Kremlin] and say things which they cannot yet afford to utter,” says Ekaterina Sokiryanskaya of the International Crisis Group, a think-tank. Mr Kadyrov’s threats arrived just as the Russian government completed its investigation into Nemtsov’s murder. Once groomed for the job of Russia’s president, Nemtsov was assassinated near Red Square in February 2015 by Zaur Dadaev, the former deputy head of a battalion controlled by Mr Kadyrov. The investigation sheds little light on who ordered the killing, or why. The investigator ignored requests from Nemtsov’s lawyers to question Mr Kadyrov or his entourage. The Chechen leader defends Mr Dadaev as a Russian patriot. Rank-and-file security officers resent Mr Kadyrov, seeing him as one of the rebels they fought during the first Chechen war. But Mr Kadyrov enjoys protection from Mr Putin, who responded to his protégé’s latest provocations by calling him an effective worker. The Kremlin awarded Mr Kadyrov a medal the day after Nemtsov’s murder, and he continues to receive ample funding from Moscow. Last year, while overall budget transfers to Russia’s regions declined by 3%, funding for Chechnya rose by 8%. Mr Putin has ordered his cabinet to transfer ownership of a large oil and gas company in Chechnya from federal control to that of Mr Kadyrov’s government. Ever since the Soviet collapse, Chechnya has divided Russian society. Ironically, in the early 1990s when Mr Kadyrov was fighting against Moscow, Russian liberals—including Nemtsov—campaigned against Russia’s Chechen war. Nemtsov collected a million signatures in support of stopping it. Conversely, the rabid nationalists who once cheered Russia’s brutal campaign against the Chechens now see Mr Kadyrov as their hero in a battle against liberals and Westernisers. Mr Kadyrov has turned Chechnya into a caricature of Russian authoritarianism, with his own personality cult and system of extortion, torture and killings to keep the population in line. As Alexander Baunov of the Moscow Carnegie Centre argues, Mr Kadyrov appeals to Russians who consider the current regime too soft. They see in Chechnya a model for Russia’s future. Mr Kadyrov’s impunity brings that one step closer.NAIVETY and paranoia mark the European Union’s attitude to espionage. The EU does not have a spy agency, nor does it have access to the intelligence collected by its members and their allies. That has advantages: EU decision-makers need not worry about keeping secrets (because they do not know any); nor must they grapple with the legal and political practicalities of intelligence oversight—such as what access spooks have to private data. The downside is that they do not see the benefits of espionage, and have a lurid fear (mixed perhaps with envy) of what spy services, particularly American ones, get up to. Yet it is the European Parliament which votes on data-protection rules, the European Commission which negotiates agreements with other countries, and the judges of the European Court of Justice (ECJ) who have the final say on whether those deals meet the right standards. And in October 2015 the ECJ, on the advice of the Commission and to the applause of many parliamentarians, upended the “Safe Harbour” agreement which for the past 15 years had allowed foreign companies to store Europeans’ personal data on American computers. The arrangement had been extremely useful, both for the giants of the internet economy, which could market their services seamlessly on both sides of the Atlantic, and for much smaller businesses—for example those which outsource payroll and other services to American contractors. But it rested on the idea that America protected privacy to European standards. After the revelations of Edward Snowden, an American intelligence contractor who has fled to Moscow, many found that hard to believe: “mass surveillance”—to use the Orwellian term favoured by Mr Snowden’s supporters—of all data held in America seemed a fundamental breach of Europeans’ right to privacy. From an American point of view, that looked like self-indulgent posturing. The Snowden material was grossly misinterpreted. All foreign-intelligence outfits spy on foreigners: the clue is in the name. “Bulk collection” (to use the spooks’ preferred term) is a necessary part of modern intelligence work: all spy agencies that can collect and sieve information from the internet will do so. But America’s spies operate under a level of legislative and judicial oversight that no European country can match. Indeed, since a presidential directive in January 2014, America, uniquely, puts foreign and domestic personal data on the same footing as far as bulk collection is concerned. Moreover, European countries’ spy agencies benefit hugely from intelligence-sharing with America about terrorism, organised crime and the activities of countries such as Russia and China. That politicians fail to acknowledge this to their own voters smacks of timidity and ingratitude. There may be disguised protectionism involved too: European privacy worries mask a degree of envy of America’s digital dominance. Europe has signally failed to develop rivals to Amazon, Apple, Facebook or Google. Against that difficult background, this week’s outline deal on a new agreement to replace Safe Harbour looked like something of a triumph. Under heavy pressure from internet and technology companies on both sides of the Atlantic, and with the prospect of a transatlantic trade war on data looming, both sides have moved. In the new “Privacy Shield”, America has offered to institute safeguards and limits on its surveillance programmes. Europeans will be able to complain individually or at an institutional level about breaches, including to a new ombudsman in the State Department. The new deal will be reviewed annually. Many obstacles lie ahead. Europe’s national data-protection agencies welcomed the deal but said they wanted more details—to be provided by the end of the month. If any one of these regulators is unhappy, it can ban its country’s companies from sending data to America. That would prompt another long legal battle, probably ending in the ECJ. Even if the bureaucrats give grudging approval, privacy campaigners find the Privacy Shield farcical. Given that intelligence agencies operate in secret, how will anyone know—unless another Snowden blows the whistle—that their data are being snooped on unlawfully? The next administration may change the rules. And in any case, why should anyone believe what American spymasters say? A legal challenge to the new deal looms. But once the Commission has issued a beefed-up “adequacy decision”, it will be harder for the ECJ to strike it down. In the meantime, the transatlantic data economy can keep humming. Control all, delete For all its real and imagined flaws, the new deal shows that transatlantic negotiations still work. It gives hope for the ailing Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), a counterpart to the Trans-Pacific Partnership which America and 11 Pacific-rim countries signed on February 4th. It also shows a realistic grasp on both sides of the importance of transatlantic ties. European neuroses madden America just as American swagger intimidates and annoys Europeans. But each side needs the other. Europe is America’s biggest trade partner. America is the keystone of European security. (That was highlighted this week by America’s announcement that it will quadruple defence spending on deterring Russia in NATO’s eastern frontline states.) Perhaps even more important, the Privacy Shield may stop the slide towards the fragmentation of cyberspace along national lines. Since its inception, the internet has struggled to stay a borderless space for ideas and commerce. Countries such as China have established what they see as sovereignty over their computers and networks, protecting themselves from threats such as “information weapons” (also known as “news”). Others are itching to follow. If America and the EU, with their shared history, interests and values, could not reach agreement over safeguarding their citizens’ data, there would be little hope for anyone else.“TO BE, or not to be together, that is the question,” tweeted the president of the European Council, Donald Tusk, on February 2nd as he published a draft plan offering Britain new terms of membership of the European Union. David Cameron, who had hammered out the bargain with Mr Tusk, was clearly feeling less lyrical. Rather than face questions in the House of Commons, the prime minister jumped on a train to visit a German-owned factory in Wiltshire, while his Europe minister took the parliamentary brickbats. Newspaper headlines the following day were hardly poetic. “Who do EU think you are kidding, Mr Cameron?” demanded the Sun. Liam Fox, a Eurosceptic former defence minister, said none of the changes in Mr Tusk’s plan “even come close to the fundamental changes promised to the public”. Mr Cameron, however, claimed that he had got the concessions he promised in 2013 when he sought to close down Britain’s never-ending debate about EU membership by offering an in/out referendum. The proposed deal has four main features. Most prized by Mr Cameron is an “emergency brake” that would allow Britain (with other EU governments’ permission) to restrict EU migrants’ in-work benefits, such as wage-boosting tax credits and housing benefit, for their first four years in the country. Mr Cameron insisted this would “make a difference” to net immigration from the EU, which currently stands at around 180,000 a year and is many voters’ main reason for wanting to leave. Second, a “red card” mechanism would allow national governments to block some EU legislation if 15 or more joined forces. Eurosceptic Tories had wanted a straight veto for Britain, a deliberately implausible demand. In practice, the red card is a red herring: it is hard to imagine circumstances in which 15 countries could be rallied against a plan that had not already been voted down. Britain and other non-euro countries will be allowed to slow some European legislation, as a safeguard against their steamrollering by single-currency members. Finally, Mr Cameron secured a commitment to limit the legal force of the phrase “ever closer union”, a goal enshrined in EU treaties which many Britons do not share. Under the new plan, Britain would be recognised as “not committed to further political integration”. Again, this was in effect already assured by earlier declarations to the same effect. The changes are insubstantial, but the negotiation’s importance is symbolic. Mr Cameron, who has said he would vote to leave an unreformed EU, needed to secure concessions of some sort to justify campaigning to stay in; the deal also aimed to show swing-voters that he could influence Brussels (though some may share the Sun’s take). The European Commission has played along, agreeing that Britain’s migration situation constitutes an “emergency”, though it is no such thing. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union Together with Mr Tusk, the prime minister must now convince the other 27 EU countries to approve the deal at a summit in Brussels on February 18th-19th, before persuading Britons to vote to stay in the union, in a referendum now likely to be held in late June. Mr Cameron’s chances of victory improve the sooner he holds it. He does not want another terror attack or more refugee chaos to turn the referendum into a vote on immigration. His job will be easier if he can win the backing of his cabinet. Theresa May, his Eurosceptic home secretary and one of several would-be successors, indicated her support for the In camp following the deal. Boris Johnson, London’s mayor and her rival, harrumphed that the prime minister was “making the best of a bad job” and was promptly promised a juicy cabinet post. Mr Cameron is also expected to pass a law to state the primacy of Britain’s Parliament over European institutions. These concessions will not stop a few mainly junior cabinet members joining the Outs. But the campaign to leave the EU is divided, and in danger of being hijacked by the right-populist UK Independence Party, which most voters consider faintly loony. The economy is improving (hence all the immigration). Polls suggest Mr Cameron is narrowly on course to win. Poles could prove more troublesome. Though they fear Brexit, eastern European governments do not want a precedent of their people being treated as second-class citizens in western Europe. Mr Cameron booked a ticket to Warsaw on February 5th for a diplomatic push. Now he must avoid a renegotiation of his renegotiation. BRITAIN has a long and undistinguished history of treating its elderly badly. In the 1960s about 40% of pensioners were living in poverty, compared with less than 10% of working-age folk. In an influential study published in 1979 Peter Townsend, a sociologist, argued that pensioners were systematically ignored by politicians and the public, with “barbarous effects” on their standard of living. These days, the elderly are living it up. In 2000-14 spending by the over-75s on dining in restaurants rose twice as fast as similar spending by the under-30s; on cinema and theatre tickets, it rose five times as fast. Over-65s currently account for less than one-fifth of overall consumer spending; this will rise to one-quarter within two decades, says Vicky Redwood of Capital Economics, a consultancy. Businesspeople smell opportunities. A complex billed as London’s first luxury retirement community will open in the spring, with a swimming pool and views over Battersea park from penthouses that are on the market for up to £3m ($4.3m). At first glance it is difficult to see how Britain’s 12m pensioners can afford all this high living. The country’s replacement rate—what public pensions pay compared with pre-retirement earnings—is near the bottom of a 34-country ranking calculated by the OECD, a rich-country club. The basic state pension is just £116 a week, compared with the median full-time salary of £530. Relative to what those of working age earn, it was on a sharp downward trend in 1980-2009 (though it is now rising). State pensions may look measly but oldies have other sources of income. In the past 30 years other welfare benefits, such as those related to housing and disability, have increased by 14% in real terms for the average retired household, against 7% for the non-retired. Private pensions have also done well, since for much of the 20th century stockmarket returns were high. For a retiree in the top income quintile, a private pension now pays out 2.5 times as much as one from the state, up from less than 1.5 times in the early 1980s. After accounting for private pensions, Britain sits at the OECD average for incomes in retirement. Yet even this underestimates the prosperity of the elderly. When measuring incomes, economists often subtract the cost of rent or mortgage payments, to give a better idea of the person’s disposable resources. In a country where housing is particularly expensive—by one estimate only Monaco is pricier—owning a home amounts to a big implicit income boost. Over-65s own 60% of the houses in Britain whose mortgage has been paid off. Into extra time After subtracting housing costs, pensioners’ incomes surpassed those of the non-retired in 2011, finds the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), a think-tank (see chart). Poverty among pensioners is now below that of working-age people without children (and far below those with them). The rise of swanky retirement homes hints at another trend: that the wealthiest pensioners’ incomes are soaring away from those of others. The modern labour market favours workers with brains, not brawn. Across the world pay has risen for the highly educated, who continue to reap rich rewards into old age. Today’s educated elderly are more productive than their predecessors. The skills that complement computers, like creativity and management, do not necessarily decline with age. This is particularly evident in Britain, which relies on the service sector more heavily than almost any other country. With plenty of jobs in finance, the media and the like, 27% of 65- to 69-year-olds with degrees are employed, compared with 14% of those in that age group with only secondary-school education or below. Indeed, retirees are now putting in longer hours than many youngsters: in Britain someone over the state-pension age but under 70 who has a degree is now more likely to be in the labour force than a 16- to 24-year-old with no qualifications. With the growth of the post-retirement labour market, oldsters’ incomes have diverged. Between 1984 and 2014 the gap in disposable income between the richest and poorest retired households grew by one-third, a similar increase to that seen in working households. Pensioners in the top income quintile have seen their earnings from salaries and self-employment rise in real terms by 60% in the past 30 years. The strong performance of private pensions has topped up these earnings. The brainy will continue to benefit. Businesses’ complaints about finding labour are growing, according to surveys by the Bank of England, especially when it comes to skilled workers. Demand for the educated—of whatever age—will keep rising. And so inequality will widen. The IFS forecasts that in 2010-22 the income gap between a pensioner in the 90th percentile and the median one will double. Inequality between older pensioners and new retirees may also be rising. Ian Tonks of the University of Bath reckons that, with low equity returns in recent years (and, with the current market turmoil, no sign of that improving soon), people retiring today will have more meagre pensions than those who hung up their boots at the turn of the millennium. The number of private-sector “defined benefit” pension schemes—in which the worker receives a juicy payout based on his earnings—that are open to new members has fallen by 90% in the past two decades. Wages are still below their pre-crisis peak; as workers struggle to save, pension pots will not grow much. Small wonder then that nearly half of working-age Britons doubt they will save enough money for a “comfortable” retirement; three-quarters believe they will be worse off than their parents. Today’s pensioners are living in a golden age, but the spending spree may not last for long.The new neighbours IN 1997, in his first speech as prime minister, Tony Blair visited the Aylesbury estate in south London and promised to help its “forgotten people”. In 2005 Michael Howard, the leader of the Conservative opposition, went to the estate, by then widely referred to as “hell’s waiting room”, and declared that nothing had changed. Since then Aylesbury has been a barometer for how well governments are tackling urban squalor. In 2016, improvements are not obvious. Graffiti covers much of the estate; rubbish blows past kicked-in doors. Although some things have changed little, the make-up of estates’ tenants has shifted dramatically. Shrinking stock (in the 1970s almost one-third of Britons lived in social housing, whereas now under one-fifth do), along with policy tweaks which prioritise those most at risk, mean that vulnerable people feature more largely. The sick or disabled made up 8% of social renters in 1993-94; they reached 15% in 2013-14. More surprisingly, social tenants have got younger: retirees made up around 40% in 1993-94, but 20 years on the proportion had shrunk to 30%. One explanation is that Margaret Thatcher’s “right to buy” policy, enacted in 1980, allowed residents who would now be of retirement age to acquire their council homes at knock-down prices. Another, according to Mark Clapson of the University of Westminster, is that young people, facing a hard job market and soaring rents, are now more likely to qualify for social housing, whereas pensioners have been getting wealthier (see article). This may also help to explain why social tenants increasingly live alone. In 1994-95 the proportion of one-person households in the social-rented sector was very close to that in the private sector (39% and 38% respectively), whereas by 2013-14 41% of social renters lived by themselves, compared with 26% of private renters. Another change is that a greater proportion of social tenants are now in work: 37% in 2013-14, up from 27% two decades earlier. Alan Murie of Birmingham University thinks it might be explained by newly exacting social landlords, some of whom, he says, exclude people who have been in arrears with rent. Waiting lists for social housing lengthened in 1997-2012 (though they have since fallen back); those on the economic margins may have end up renting privately as an emergency measure, rather than face a long wait. A 2011 law allows councils in effect to force those in need of housing to rent privately rather than join the waiting list for social homes. These demographic changes have had more impact in some places than others, says Mr Murie, who divides Britain’s social housing into three types. The more desirable, modern flats, he says, are probably absorbing some of the new crowd of young, single workers. Pre-war estates—low-rise, spacious and suburban—are still filled with retirees who do not wish to move out. So unpopular post-war estates like Aylesbury—badly maintained high-rise blocks in city centres—are where the poorest and most vulnerable concentrate. Some worry that putting the most marginalised in the same place will lead to worse outcomes than social mixing. The Fabian Society, a think-tank, cites evidence from the British Household Panel Survey that a person’s chances of leaving poverty are reduced if they live in a poor area. A new government policy accelerating the right to buy is likely to change estates’ demography again. Whereas people who buy council stock in suburban estates generally stay there, those who buy in 1960s inner-city estates tend to sell up quickly, often to buy-to-let landlords. Aylesbury residents claim that these landlords fail to maintain their properties; their tenants leave rubbish out to rot and “bring the whole tone down”, says one. Developers who complained about problems on the Lee Bank estate in Birmingham were surprised to find they were caused by private renters, not social ones.IN MANY respects Britain’s mobile-phone market is one of the most successful in the world. About 30 operators compete for business, ensuring that prices are among the lowest for rich countries (see chart). A number of retailers offer an almost infinite variety of bundles of services, and coverage is relatively good too. All of which helps to explain why regulators in Britain and Europe are so opposed to a proposed £10.5-billion ($15.3-billion) merger between the second-largest operator, O2, owned by Spain’s Telefónica, and the fourth-largest, Three, owned by Hutchison Whampoa, based in Hong Kong. On the face of it, such a deal would continue a long-standing trend towards consolidation among mobile operators, both in Britain and other rich countries. It is a mature market, and since 2008 revenues have generally been falling. It has thus made sense for companies to merge, freeing up capital for investment in costly infrastructure and new technology, such as speedy “4G” networks. In Britain, T-Mobile and Orange merged to create the biggest operator, EE, in 2010. EE, in turn, has been taken over by BT, the former state-run monopoly, in a £12.5-billion deal that creates a behemoth covering mobile, fixed-line phones, broadband and television. But enough is enough, apparently. On February 1st Sharon White, the head of Britain’s telecoms regulator, Ofcom, laid out why she opposes the O2-Three merger. The main reason, she said, was that the removal of one of these would so diminish competition that it “could mean higher prices for consumers and businesses”. The concern is that although there are about 30 operators overall, there are only four—EE, O2, Three and Vodafone—that run and maintain the physical infrastructure for mobiles. These are known as Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) in the jargon. The other players, such as Lycamobile, are merely Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs); they rent the infrastructure from the MNOs. Virgin Mobile was created as the world’s first MVNO in 1999. Ofcom contends that the reduction of network providers from four to three will allow them to drive a harder bargain with the MVNOs, perhaps putting some out of business and driving up prices. By contrast, the BT-EE deal was acceptable because the two companies—one primarily fixed-line, one mainly mobile—complemented each other, and the new entity should not harm competition in either the mobile or fixed-line markets. Mergers of this size are automatically referred to the European competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, who shares Ms White’s worries about the O2-Three case. Ms Vestager was due to send out private “statements of objections” to the two companies this week; her office should make a final decision on the matter by April 22nd. She also shares the broader concern that consolidation from four to three network operators leads to higher prices, although there is a fierce debate about this (some say that the case of Austria, for example, which downsized so in 2012, does not bear the theory out). Ofcom’s own research in 25 countries shows that average prices were up to one-fifth lower in markets with four network operators than in those with three. On February 4th Hutchison promised to freeze prices for five years if the O2-Three merger went ahead. Another reason for preferring the four-network model is that the smallest operator of the gang usually operates as the disrupter and innovator. This has been the case with Free Mobile in France and T-Mobile in America. Three has played a similar role in Britain. It was the first to launch a 4G service at no extra cost than 3G, in 2013, as well as a “Feel at Home” service, scrapping roaming charges in 16 countries. As Sam Paltridge, a telecoms expert at the OECD, argues, in the rapidly evolving world of the “internet of things”, companies that innovate will be more important than ever. In this particular case, four’s company and three’s a crowd.Pilgrims in search of a teacher LAST year in one large London school, all 200 pupils taking their GCSE exams—standard tests sat at age 16—were entered for a qualification in religious education (RE), and emerged with results as good as in the other humanities. Yet, according to a teacher there, the school has just announced that its GCSE course in RE will be scrapped and replaced with a one-hour class every fortnight. More schools are smiting their RE lessons. Nearly 1,200 put forward no pupil for an RE qualification in 2014, five times as many as in 2010. Some cite increased pressure on the timetable from other subjects; the fact that RE does not count towards the “English Baccalaureate”, a newish measure for assessing schools, also reduces the incentive to offer it. Two reports by Ofsted, the education regulator, have criticised schools’ attitudes. The quality of the RE curriculum was rated “good” or better in fewer than two-fifths of secondary schools; teaching of Christianity was one of the weakest aspects, it said. This represents a turnaround. For centuries the church ran most education in England, with the state getting involved only in the 19th century. In 1944 the government brought church schools into the state system and began funding them. In return, RE was made compulsory. Since then, the RE syllabus has been set by local religious advisory councils. In 1988 a single national curriculum for schools was introduced, but RE, with its special status, was not included. Alone among school subjects, it is still set by those councils. This means that, in principle, there are 152 different RE syllabuses around England, though in practice many overlap. The subject is still obligatory until the age of 18, though in reality this requirement is ignored, or watered down. The change in schools’ attitudes partly reflects shifts in Britain’s demographic and religious make-up, which is unrecognisable from 1944. Fewer than half the population now calls itself Christian and almost half follows no religion, according to NatCen, a social-research outfit. RE teachers say that where pupils get the chance, they enjoy studying the subject: the number taking it for A-level at age 18 has risen by 110% since 2003, more than for any other arts, humanities or social-science subject. Some further argue that better understanding of different religions helps in the development of social cohesion and opposition to extremism. “The way religion is being dealt with in schools is not meeting the needs of our time,” says Linda Woodhead of the University of Lancaster who, with Charles Clarke, a former home secretary, has co-authored a paper proposing a “new settlement” on the teaching of religion. The government should establish a national RE syllabus or include it in the national curriculum, and drop the widely ignored requirement of a daily act of “broadly Christian” collective worship, they say. Fiona Moss of the National Association of Teachers of Religious Education believes it would be better if the study of RE remained a legal requirement, only better enforced by Ofsted. The government should also include the subject in schools’ performance measures, she says. She points out that a majority of state schools are now independent “academies”, which need not follow the national curriculum. “If they ignore [RE] when it is a law, they are not likely to change just because it is part of the national curriculum,” she says. Meanwhile, it is getting harder to find RE teachers. Last year their recruitment fell 37% short of the number required; more than half have no post A-level qualification in the subject, twice the proportion among history teachers. It is not the only subject facing such a scarcity, but the government seems keener to deal with the shortages elsewhere. Bursaries to entice graduates with masters degrees to teach physics are worth £25,000 ($36,500) a year; for RE they are worth just £4,000.
