Another day, another Kurdish funeral in Diyarbakir “I AM A Turk, honest and hard-working.” So began the oath of allegiance to their country chanted by generations of schoolchildren before the practice was scrapped three years ago. This proud, flag-waving nation takes it as read that Turkishness goes beyond nationality. But what does it mean to be a Turk? Labels of ethnicity, language, religion and social class overlap in complex patterns. As a result, some citizens consider themselves more Turkish than others. The modern Turkish republic emerged from a crucible of war, as the waning Ottoman empire between 1908 and 1922 fought in succession against Bulgarian nationalists and Italian colonisers in Libya, then against the British Empire, Russia and Arab nationalists during the first world war, and lastly against Greece. Genocide or not, awful things happened to Anatolia’s Armenians in 1915-17. There were many, and now there are few; nearly all of Turkey’s remaining 50,000 ethnic Armenians live in Istanbul. After the Greco-Turkish war of 1921-22 Turkey lost some 1.5m Greeks too, in a population exchange that brought half a million ethnic Turks “home” from Greece. More ethnically Turkish or Muslim refugees poured into the new nation, fleeing from Russian revolution or from persecution in the Balkans, the Crimea and the Caucasus. Most of those incomers were quickly assimilated, but not the Kurds, indigenous Muslims whose presence in Anatolia far predates the Turks (who arrived from Central Asia a mere millennium ago). In the 1920s and 1930s the new Turkish republic crushed successive rebellions in the country’s south-east, where Kurds predominate not only within Turkey’s own borders but in adjacent parts of Syria, Iraq and Iran. Repeated counter-insurgencies, accompanied by aerial bombing and widespread pillage, left the region impoverished and depopulated. Yet even though hundreds of thousands were killed, ethnic Kurds still make up 15-20% of Turkey’s people. The young republic was mostly Turkish-speaking and overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim. Assimilation and urbanisation have made it even more so. Yet Turkey retains more of the ethnic and religious diversity of the Ottoman empire than is generally realised. Some 10m-15m of its citizens are Alevis, adherents to a syncretic offshoot of Shia Islam that is unique to Turkey. Other religious minorities include Jaafari Shia Muslims, Jews, Christians and Yazidis. Among the ethnic minorities, apart from Kurds and Armenians, are large numbers of Arabs, Albanians, Azeris, Bosniaks, Circassians, Georgians, Laz and Roma. Turkey is now also home to well over 2m refugees, mostly from Syria but also from Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, Egypt and elsewhere. To Kemal Ataturk and his immediate successors, whose formative experience was Ottoman implosion and foreign invasion, the paramount need was to forge a strong nation from these disparate parts. For long periods and until quite recently, the public use of Kurdish languages was strictly banned. The government encouraged religious uniformity by creating a powerful agency, Diyanet, to oversee the mosques, which preached a single version of Sunni Islam. Other versions and other faiths got no support from the state; indeed, it outlawed the mystical Sufi orders that had heavily inflected Ottoman-era Islam. In their determined push for modernisation, Ataturk’s followers imposed customs and ways of thought that came easily to sophisticates in Istanbul or Izmir but were resented further east. The superior airs of secular, cosmopolitan Kemalists have rankled ever since, particularly with country folk and with immigrants to the big cities. Some speak half-jokingly of a lingering divide between “white” Turks and “black”, marking the gap between those who cherish Ataturk’s legacy and those who resent it as an imposition. Mr Erdogan has capitalised brilliantly on the deep grudge felt by “black” Turks. His credentials include his origins as the son of rural immigrants to a tough, working-class part of Istanbul, having worked as a pushcart vendor of simit, Turkey’s sesame-sprinkled progenitor of the bagel, and a pithy, populist style of delivery. On Republic Day last year, which handily fell just before November’s election, he made a speech evoking times when some people celebrated the holiday “with frocks, waltzes and champagne” while others gazed at this scene “half-starved, with no shoes and no jackets to wear”. Now, he concluded, Turkey is united. Even after two decades of such rhetoric, it goes down well with many voters. Not quite united Yet a look at Turkey’s political map suggests a less than complete picture of unity. The half of the electorate that votes for Mr Erdogan does include some minority groups, but mostly represents the narrower, ethnically Turkish and Sunni Muslim mainstream. Of the three rival parties that make up the parliamentary opposition, the Nationalist Movement, or MHP, is also “properly” Turkish but represents the extreme right. Its most distinctive trait is reflexive hostility to all non-Turks, especially Kurds. “We don’t call it a peace process, we call it a terror process,” says Zuhal Topcu, a party vice-chairman, of the government’s on-off talks with Kurdish rebels. “You cannot sit at a table with them, they have to surrender and be tried.” The largest opposition party, the CHP, sees itself as the direct heir to Ataturk. Pro-Western and centre-left, it embraces secularists of all stripes and has sought to focus on issues rather than identity politics. Yet to the dismay of its own leadership the CHP’s core constituency, as well as most of its MPs, are Alevis. Many in this headscarf-shunning, alcohol-tolerant minority remain strident Kemalists, seeking refuge from what they see as the uncomfortable encroachment of Islamism. The third component of the opposition, the People’s Democratic party, or HDP, is outwardly an alliance of small parties and leftist groups that recently joined forces to cross the 10% threshold for entering parliament. But for all its inclusiveness, most of the HDP’s supporters and candidates are Kurds. The party gets the bulk of its votes in the chronically troubled south-east and few in the rest of Turkey. “It’s a problem,” admits Ayse Erdem, an HDP party leader in Istanbul who is herself an ethnic Turk. “A lot of people can’t bring themselves to vote for a Kurd, they just don’t see them as equal.” Yet to many the problem with the HDP lies not with its ethnic profile but with what they see as its too-cosy relationship with the PKK, a Kurdish guerrilla group that has fought a sporadic insurgency against the state since the 1980s and is officially deemed a terrorist organisation. Plenty of Kurds are also wary of the PKK, both because of its vaguely Maoist ideology and its violent intolerance of rival Kurdish groups. Yet the brutality of Turkish security forces, which in the 1990s destroyed hundreds of villages to flush out rebels, has repeatedly recharged Kurdish nationalism. The PKK’s stated aims have changed over time, and particularly since the capture, trial and imprisonment in 1999 of its charismatic founder, Abdullah Ocalan. PKK leaders now say they seek not an independent Kurdistan but a form of autonomy that Mr Ocalan has described as democratic confederalism. To its credit the AK party has eased away from the Kemalists’ uncompromising rejection of Kurdish claims, loosening official strictures on Kurdish languages, opening a dialogue with Mr Ocalan and agreeing to indirect peace talks with the PKK. A ceasefire during the most recent round, from 2013 until last spring, prompted a construction and investment mini-boom in the still-poor south-east. Hopes rose further last February, when leaders of the AK party and the HDP—which the PKK had tacitly appointed as its interlocutor—announced a ten-point road map for peace. In essence, this required the PKK to lay down its arms and affirm respect for Turkish sovereignty, in return for an amnesty, formal recognition of the Kurds as a distinct people and mutual commitments to resolve issues democratically. There is much finger-pointing about what happened next. AK party supporters maintain that the agreement was merely an informal understanding. Their critics contend that Mr Erdogan, sensing resistance from the army and from diehard nationalists and with elections looming in June of last year, made a calculated decision to scupper the deal. Events in neighbouring Syria, with 2m Kurds scattered thinly along the open plain abutting the Turkish border, also played a part. Five years of appalling civil war provided a chance seized by the PKK’s Syrian affiliate, which ruthlessly crushed rival Kurdish groups and took control of Kurdish areas. Its success at fighting Islamic State impressed Western powers, which provided support last year to relieve the besieged Kurdish city of Kobane. But as the PKK’s Syrian branch carved out an autonomous canton, Turkish officials grew fearful of its growing power. As tens of thousands of Kurdish civilians poured into Turkey to escape IS’s assault on Kobane, the government in Ankara dithered for weeks before allowing in aid. Turkish Kurds were outraged. “We found that Ankara is still so blinkered that it could not see it faced a simple choice: would you rather have Kurds as neighbours or Islamic State?”, laments a Kurdish intellectual. From the government’s perspective the success of Syria’s Kurds is a worrying precedent. The fear is that the PKK, by virtue of its tacit alliance with the West in Syria, will have gained international legitimacy. Back to battle stations For now, talk of peace between Turks and Kurds is over. In June the Turkish air force resumed bombing raids on PKK targets in Iraq. Paramilitary police have clamped curfews on restive Kurdish towns and arrested hundreds of alleged PKK supporters; guerrillas have struck back with roadside bombs and shootings. Well over 600 people have died so far in this round of violence. In electoral terms Mr Erdogan’s switch in tactics has paid off. With pro-AK party television relentlessly showing funerals of slain policemen, patriotic Turks voted for his party in droves in November. Even many conservative Kurds abandoned the HDP. They had seen it as a democratic alternative to the PKK, but felt the party was not distancing itself enough from the guerrillas. Many Kurds, as well as Turkey’s allies, still cling to hopes that the two sides will resume talks. But attitudes among ordinary Turks, which had softened towards the idea of some kind of expanded Kurdish autonomy, are now hardening under the government’s barrage of bellicose rhetoric. With Mr Erdogan’s men apparently convinced that they can win by force, the Kurdish issue seems to be moving into another cycle of despair.NAPOLEON WAS IMPRESSED with Istanbul. If all the world were a single state, he said, this city should be its capital. A generation ago, when it looked musty and neglected, that would have seemed far-fetched, but now this great metropolis at the confluence of Europe and Asia pulses with trans-global traffic. Some 50,000 ships a year traverse the narrow waterway that bisects the city. A colourful mix of Polish package tourists, Indonesian pilgrims, Ghanaian textile traders, Kazakh students and honeymooning Saudis passes through its snaking airport immigration queues, and a polyglot crowd ceaselessly throngs Istiklal Street, attesting to Istanbul’s growing magnetism. In 2010, the city’s Ataturk International airport ranked as the world’s 37th-busiest by number of passengers. By 2014 it had vaulted to 13th place. Istanbul already has a second airport and is furiously building a third, scheduled to open in 2018. When fully operational, it will be the world’s largest, ready to handle 150m passengers a year. The project, worth around $30 billion, has caused plenty of controversy. It is rising amid protected wetlands and faces charges of cronyism in awarding construction contracts. But few Istanbullus doubt the need for a giant new air hub. Measured by “international connectivity”—the frequency of flights to foreign destinations—the city comes fifth in the world, but it is advancing faster than its rivals. London, the leader, became 4% more “connected” between 2009 and 2015, according to Mastercard; over the same period Istanbul’s connectivity grew by a roaring 111%. The city is racing ahead in other ways, too. It already has about 16m people, compared with barely 2m in 1975, and between now and 2018 it will overtake both London and Moscow as the most populous urban area in Europe. According to Euromonitor, a research firm, six of Europe’s ten fastest-growing cities are in Turkey (see chart). Countries such as India and China have witnessed similar urban explosions, but Turkish cities stand out for also offering an impressive quality of life. The proportion of Turks living in cities has swollen from about half the population 30 years ago to 75% today. Between 2000 and 2015 its major urban areas absorbed 15m new residents. Yet despite their rapid growth, Turkish cities are by and large admirably free of squalor and crime. Middle-class parts of Istanbul, Ankara or Izmir, in Turkey’s relatively prosperous west, are indistinguishable from their far wealthier West European counterparts. Yet even the slums in big eastern cities such as Gaziantep and Diyarbakir have proper sanitation, tidy paved streets, parks and well-maintained schools. It was not always thus. Thirty years ago the hills around Turkish cities looked much like Brazil’s, stacked higgledy piggledy with unlicensed shantytowns appropriately known as gecekondu (built overnight). Istanbul had worse public transport, worse water quality and worse pollution than shambolic Cairo; the cheap lignite used for home heating clouded its winter skies in a perpetual acrid fug, and the soupy waters of the Golden Horn, a sea inlet that bisects the European side of the city, were too polluted to sustain fish. A better place to live Istanbul’s skies are now notably clear, and the fishermen who crowd the railings of the Galata Bridge into the wee hours hoist up sardines by the bucketful. The radical change is not just a result of better sewerage and cleaner heating fuel in the form of natural gas piped from Russia. Starting in the 1980s, Turkey made a series of important legislative changes. Various amnesties granted legal title to gecekondu dwellers, making them stronger stakeholders and allowing them to leverage property assets. A sweeping reform in 1984 consolidated big urban areas into powerful municipalities with elected mayors. Further reforms in the 2000s did the same thing at district level. Cities now generate their own revenues, make their own deals with private firms and start their own businesses, though the central government keeps enough of a hold on the purse strings to ensure fiscal discipline. Cumulatively, these undramatic changes have had a remarkable effect. “Local democracy really seems to have worked in this sense,” says Yasar Adanali, an urban planner in Istanbul. “To climb up the ladder in their party or be seen at the national level, municipal managers have to shine.” Mr Erdogan himself rose out of local Istanbul politics, and many of his closest associates came to prominence in the same way. The city’s 39 districts are showcases for their mayors, who compete to provide better services. In most of the city, streets are swept and rubbish collected at least once a day. The Greater Istanbul Municipality, for its part, has the resources to build or sponsor big investments in infrastructure, with notable results. The first underground line of its metro system opened only in 2000, but progress has been rapid, with an underground linking the Asian side of the city to the European one completed in 2013. Yet the picture is not all rosy. Despite all the investment, only 15% of journeys in Istanbul are made by public transport; the city has more congested roads than any other in Europe. Increasingly, too, the growth of Turkish cities has been driven less by careful planning than by business interests, often backed by powerful politicians. Istanbul’s new airport is a case in point. The municipality’s own 2009 master plan provided for it to be built to the west of the city, in flatter lands already connected to Istanbul’s main traffic axis. Ministers in Ankara intervened to move it to the north, amid forested hills that were meant to be preserved for recreation and as the main catchment for Istanbul’s water supply. The giant site was largely public land, but to attract private builders much of it will be turned over to commercial use for hotels, shops and airport services. Connecting the airport to the city will require millions more trees to be felled: as part of the project a new motorway will cut through forests to link to a new, third bridge across the Bosporus. Environmentalists and urban planners argue that the purpose of the motorway is not so much to relieve traffic as to open new areas to property development. Already, Istanbul’s once-green northern reaches are being covered over by gated luxury communities and shopping centres. “With the current planning structure we know there is no way to stop the building,” says Akif Burak Atlar of the Turkish Union of Urban Planners. “The incentives for business and government are too strong.” The consortium of Turkish developers that won the build-own-operate lease for the new airport includes firms thought to be close to the AK party. Foreign financiers, not least the World Bank, have kept away, partly because of a corruption investigation involving several of the firms’ senior executives, launched in 2013 but suspended after the government intervened. Across the country vast areas of state lands, and in some cases city parks, have been handed to private developers. The one that caught the most public attention was Istanbul’s Gezi Park, a rare patch of green in the heart of the city. A century ago this had been the site of an army barracks where Ottoman soldiers protested against encroaching secularism. For symbolic reasons Mr Erdogan strongly backed a project to recreate the long-demolished structure as a faux-Ottoman shopping centre. But the green space held equally strong symbolism for many Istanbullus. The scheme was blocked by a massive urban protest, an eruption of the cumulative anguish felt by many locals about runaway development in which dozens of skyscrapers rose and more than 90 other shopping malls sprouted between looping motorways. “Gezi was just one too many of the crimes that have been committed against Istanbul,” says Mr Adanali.Time to lighten up “WE HAVE A saying that raki is different in the glass,” says Fatih Okumus, noting that Turkey’s colourless national spirit turns milky white when you add water. It is a surprising way for a top adviser to Diyanet, the government’s overseer of mosques, to illustrate the difference between Turkish and what he calls “Arab” Islam. He goes on to explain: “We believe that the Koran is not the same in life as in the book; it needs mediation. In small doses religion is beneficial, but in big doses it’s a hazard.” Mr Okumus says this explains why so few Turks have embraced radical jihadism. Yet his advice should also be taken to heart by Turkey’s current leaders. The rule of the AK party is an example of how you can have too much of a good thing. The repressed voice of Turkey’s conservative working class needed to be heard. The overweening influence of its military had to be contained. The entrepreneurial energy of its businessmen had to be unleashed. And the Kemalists’ obsessive preoccupation with the West, once described by the writer Nuri Pakdil as a national “pain in the neck” caused by looking in only one direction, needed to be redressed. “The Turkish state used to have two phobias, Islam and the Kurds,” says Mr Okumus. “The main thing we owe to the AK party is having normalised Islam.” Overcorrecting the course Alas, under the guidance of Mr Erdogan, Turkey now risks leaning too far in the opposite direction. By propagating a culture of grudge and grievance, Turkey’s president has widened the many cleavages of an unusually complex society. By relentlessly pursuing suspected enemies, he has undermined the rule of law. And by whipping up ethnic Turkish nationalism, he is dashing the hopes of Turkey’s 20m Kurds. On the economic front, the AK party failed to shift strategy when leaner times arrived. It has also grown addicted to kickbacks from cronies that feed the party machine. And Mr Erdogan’s own ambition and disdain for the law are draining confidence. “Big Turkish firms are quietly investing abroad to get their money out,” says a Western consultant who has long been resident in Turkey. “Rich people all have their escape plans.” Turkey’s foreign relations, too, are a story of serial overreach followed by remorse. The AK party allowed wishful thinking about Islamic brotherhood, pan-Turkic ties and cocking a snook at the West to outweigh pragmatism. It turned to the east too suddenly and too hard. It got mired in Syria and entangled with a Russian bear. When it needed friends, there were few to be found. The country’s malaise is partly cultural. Orhan Pamuk, Turkey’s best-known writer, has written eloquently on the national predilection for hüzün, or melancholy. Even the current triumphalism of Mr Erdogan’s hard-core followers is tinged with wary mistrust. Yet not so long ago Turkey was a far more ebullient place, with a purring economy and plenty of friends. There is a reason for the darkening mood. “People are too quick to use the F-word, but honestly I think we can now speak of creeping fascism,” says Mustafa Akyol, a Turkish writer whose early enthusiasm for the AK party has increasingly soured. “We have the cult of a demigod, the labelling of dissidents as traitors and saboteurs, and the mobilisation of the party base against everyone else.” The Western consultant agrees. “I am more worried now than in the 26 years I have lived here,” he says. “There is much more latent violence here than many people realise, the rule of law is breaking down, and it’s getting scary.” In early January, police in Izmir raided a sweatshop where they found Syrian child labourers making fake life jackets. Stuffed with packaging rather than flotation material, the cheap copies were more likely to kill than save anyone. Yet Turkey’s prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, jarringly blamed the UN Security Council for the migrants’ deaths. Turkeyis a nation of enviable potential, packed with cultural treasures, natural beauty, energy and talent. If only Mr Erdogan and his cohorts could see that strength comes from diversity, and from the freedom to express it, that potential might be realised.T-MOBILE touts itself as America’s mobile-phone “Uncarrier”, having vowed to shake up its industry with customer-friendly ideas like ditching annual service contracts. In January, though, a complaint was lodged with regulators alleging that the firm generated unauthorised fees by placing customers on services they hadn’t requested, such as handset-insurance plans. In Britain, broadband providers stand accused of hitting customers with whopping cancellation fees, even when they move to an address outside the area of service. One study found the average early-termination fee to be £190 ($317). Small-value disputes between consumers and companies over contract terms are a fact of life. Ofcom, a British regulator, handles 70,000 telecoms complaints a year; how many are fought over or resolved without recourse to the regulator is anyone’s guess. Colin Rule of Modria, a dispute-resolution technology firm, reckons that 1-3% of e-commerce transactions worldwide generate a dispute (though many of those are between private buyers and sellers on online marketplaces). How bust-ups are handled is evolving. Small-claims courts are ubiquitous, but, as the saying goes, you have to be “a lunatic or fanatic” to use them for a $100 claim. Recent years have seen the rise of the industry ombudsman, particularly in heavily regulated sectors like finance; and the growth of “alternative dispute-resolution” (ADR) bodies, which offer mediation, often online, in an effort to avoid disputes reaching court. “The emphasis is moving from judicial protection to building out-of-court structures that provide effective redress,” says Pablo Cortés of Leicester University. Mr Rule reckons there are 130 outfits hawking dispute-resolution technology and related services. Resolver, a free-to-use website, provides details of thousands of companies’ dispute-handling systems and helps channel complaints to them. Other services batch identical customer claims, for instance over airline delays, and negotiate on their behalf as an informal class. Class action or concealed clauses There remain differences in approach, however. Consumer rights in Europe have grown steadily stronger, and ADR enjoys official support. America offers less encouragement of new approaches, and there the legal pendulum has swung away from the consumer towards business. America is the home of the class-action lawsuit. Though this is a useful way to batch together lots of small, similar claims, businesses have long moaned that class actions are driven by fee-hungry lawyers rather than harmed consumers (who typically get only a small share of any settlement). Firms started to push back by adding into contracts, often deep in the small print, clauses that block participation in a class suit and make private arbitration binding in the event of a dispute. The Supreme Court has sided with this rearguard action. Today such clauses are the norm. The corporate lawyers behind this shift argue that arbitration is cheaper, quicker and more flexible than court action, and that those who prevail get bigger payouts ($5,000 on average). But there are problems with it. It is done behind closed doors; it sometimes costs a lot more than the basic filing fee ($200 and up); and arbitrators have an in-built bias towards corporate defendants, because they bring repeat business. Perhaps not surprisingly, then, arbitration is little-used. A New York Times investigation found that in 2010-14 only 505 consumers went to arbitration over a dispute of $2,500 or less (it’s not known how many saw it resolved to their satisfaction before reaching that stage). The leader in the field, the American Arbitration Association, handles just 2,000-3,000 consumer cases a year, compared with over 10,000 business-to-business cases. Regulators are now pushing back. Having studied the issue, as required by the Dodd Frank act of 2010, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is likely to propose a rule which would ban class-action-blocking arbitration clauses in businesses the agency oversees, such as credit cards and payday loans. Business would challenge any such rule in court, says Alan Kaplinsky of Ballard Spahr, the lawyer who came up with the idea of arbitration clauses. They are “not a conspiracy”, as plaintiff lawyers contend, but “a way to level the playing field”, he argues. The problem is education, he says: consumers shy away from arbitration because they don’t understand the benefits. Europe, where class actions are rare, has taken a different tack. Consumer-protection laws are generally stronger: arbitration clauses are not banned but courts have greatly restricted their use, and the customer can always sue as a last resort. A reasonableness test is applied to the fine print in contracts. Under Britain’s Consumer Rights Act, for instance, key terms, including price, can be subjected to a “fairness test” unless they are both written in plain language and displayed prominently. (Clarity alone used to be sufficient ground to claim exemption from the test.) This more consumer-friendly stance did not just evolve in the courts but was to a large degree the result of a decision by the European Commission more than 20 years ago to make all small print subject to being examined and potentially overturned by the courts. This was set in stone in an EU directive of 1993. More directives have followed. The most recent, approved last year, gives a shot in the arm to ADR, by for instance forcing businesses to inform complaining customers of their dispute-resolution options, such as ombudsmen and private ADR services, and setting minimum standards for how these operate. Firms won’t be forced to sign up to an ADR scheme, but the hope is that most will feel obliged to do so as the directive takes hold. Consumer surveys point to much greater satisfaction with ADR than with courts. Europe also leads the way in developing online mechanisms for mediating the millions of cross-border e-commerce disputes that arise each year. (One estimate puts their number at 750m.) Your Europe, an EU portal, will be launched in each of the bloc’s official languages later this month. This will serve as a hub to receive complaints. Firms operating in the EU will have to provide a link to it on their websites. “The aim is to hold your hand through the process, like TurboTax [a tax-return-filing software],” says Amy Schmitz of the University of Colorado. For all these efforts, some cases will inevitably end up in court. Here, too, new thinking is percolating. In Britain there is growing political and judicial support for replacing the clunky small-claims courts with a new type of quasi-court, dubbed Her Majesty’s Online Court (HMOC). Each case would move through as many as three stages. Only at the third stage, if it could not be resolved by mediation and case officers, would it go before a judge. This triage-before-trial approach would be easier and less costly than the current set-up: documents could be posted electronically, and cases brought without having to hire a lawyer. HMOC is already being touted as a model for other countries. As one lawyer (who may soon have less work) puts it, most consumers would rather be faced with a clearer and cheaper process, and lose quickly, than a victory that is painful, protracted and pyrrhic.FLORENCE is a city more associated with oil on paintings and salads than the stuff that comes out of the ground. Yet every February GE, an engineering conglomerate that makes machinery in the city, gathers oil executives there to discuss the industry. This year there was more than a touch of mea culpa in the air. “The oil and gas industry is in need of its own renaissance,” admitted Harry Brekelmans, head of technology at Royal Dutch Shell, an Anglo-Dutch oil major. A spate of gloomy year-end earnings reports underscored how bad things already were in the final quarter of 2015, in the good old days when oil prices averaged $44 a barrel (on February 2nd they hovered around $30 a barrel). Britain’s BP reported an unexpected loss of $6.5 billion in 2015, one of its worst on record. That followed news of a fourth-quarter loss by Chevron, an American counterpart. Exxon Mobil, America’s biggest oil major, made a relatively healthy $16.2 billion in 2015, but that was still half the prior year’s profit (like Chevron it is losing money drilling for oil in America). Shell’s profits also dived. In Florence an executive quipped that the industry had turned into “a giant non-profit”. Companies are slashing jobs, costs and capital spending to maintain promised dividend payouts. But the lower prices go, the more they borrow to honour those pledges. Exxon Mobil and Chevron piled on $9.6 billion and $10.8 billion of debt respectively during 2015, and BP added $4.6 billion. Standard & Poor’s, a rating agency, downgraded Chevron and Shell this week and is reviewing BP and Exxon Mobil, partly because of their rising debts. A downgrade of the latter would be significant: Exxon Mobil is one of only three American companies whose AAA rating is higher than the government’s. Falling oil prices may have upended the industry but it also has itself to blame for its troubles. Returns of private global oil companies peaked a decade ago, well before crude hit record highs, indicating that they squandered the boom on vanity projects aimed at increasing production, with little thought for profitability (see chart). INTERACTIVE: Explore how oil prices affect OPEC and non-OPEC production and viability In Florence the engineers and geologists who run the rigs, wells and pipelines admitted that costs soared uncontrollably as high prices led them to search for increasingly hard-to-access oil. Shell’s Mr Brekelmans says that between 1996 and 2014 capital costs per barrel quadrupled, clobbering productivity. Partly this was because equipment costs mounted as prices of steel and other commodities rose. But Thierry Pilenko, chief executive of Technip, a French engineering firm, says it was also due to “pure inefficiency”. He says the number of man-hours to operate a piece of equipment doubled in a decade despite computerisation, and even simple valves come with documents 80 pages long. Energy firms have failed to embrace digital systems to improve performance along the supply chain. The industry is riddled with unplanned shutdowns that raise costs. Standards vary so much that one firm ended up with 127 different colours for subsea equipment that only fish would ever see. Tech advocates like GE naturally hope that the latest crisis will spur a “technological revolution”. For now, though, survival is the priority.Another cost to cut? SHAREHOLDERS cheered in December when Dow Chemical and DuPont, the world’s fourth- and fifth-most-valuable chemicals companies, worth a combined $130 billion, announced plans to merge. Their share prices each shot up by nearly 12% in one day. In the hope of persuading competition regulators not to block the merger, Dow and DuPont said that within two years they would split their combined operations into three listed firms, concerned with agriculture, materials science and “specialty” products. But doubts have since grown as to how much this rationalisation will help the resulting firms cope with the pressures the industry is under. Since markets first got wind of the deal, the shares of Dow have dropped by 18%, and DuPont’s by 21%. The S&P 500 fell by 7% over the same period. Deteriorating performance at DuPont, which on January 26th revealed a $253m loss in the fourth quarter of 2015, has shaken Dow’s shareholders. They now fear the tie-up could be too generous to the other company’s investors: on February 2nd Dow said that its profits had increased fivefold, to $3.5 billion, in the same quarter. Hammered out under pressure from activist investors, most notably Trian Partners, a New York hedge fund, the merger is designed to boost investors’ returns by combining the competing businesses of the two, cutting costs in the process. The deal is, in part, a response to the sharp falls in the prices of many chemicals over the past few years (see chart). Although raw materials, such as those derived from crude oil, have also got cheaper, the chemicals firms’ margins have been squeezed. Those on polyethylene have fallen by a third since 2014, with another 25% tumble forecast for 2016. The market for agricultural chemicals is also shrinking, in dollar terms, mainly due to low crop prices and weak currencies in big markets such as Brazil and Russia, says John Kovacs at Capital Economics, a consulting firm. DuPont’s agricultural-science division, which is a big draw for Dow, suffered an 11% drop in sales last quarter. Jeffrey Zekauskas, an analyst at J.P. Morgan, an investment bank, thinks Dow and DuPont may be too optimistic in forecasting more than $3 billion in cost savings by 2018, particularly given the restructuring costs they will incur. And if the resulting three specialist companies do not continue to shift into higher-value-added products, there is a risk that any increased profits from economies of scale will be competed away, as rivals also strengthen through mergers, says Dave Witte, head of IHS Chemical, a research firm. Indeed, there are already signs that this is happening. The Dow-DuPont tie-up was in part a reaction to merger talks between Monsanto, an American agrichemicals giant, and Syngenta, a Swiss rival. They got nowhere but on February 3rd ChemChina offered $43 billion to buy Syngenta, forming the world’s largest maker of pesticides and fertilisers, a formidable competitor to even the merged agrichemicals businesses of Dow and DuPont (see article). Under this pressure, the most sustainable way to boost margins is to focus on higher-tech niches where competition is more limited. Other firms in the industry have already undergone this transition over the past decade. For instance, AkzoNobel, a Dutch group, has concentrated on highly specialised paints and coatings; and Bayer, a German firm that used to be a broad chemicals conglomerate, has specialised in pharmaceuticals. Dow and DuPont were heading in this direction before their proposed tie-up. DuPont has, for instance, sold divisions making relatively low-end stuff like titanium dioxide and Teflon; and last year Dow spun off its chlorine operations in a deal worth $5 billion with Olin. The high-end markets with the best growth prospects are for specialty chemicals used in industries that are doing relatively well, such as health care and aerospace, according to analysts at UBS, a bank. Yet ChemChina’s hunger for more deals will make life tougher for Western firms in these areas, too: China’s latest five-year plan instructs its chemicals industry to focus its expansion efforts on specialty products. Dow, DuPont and others need to focus on climbing up the value chain to deal with this threat.WITH roughly a fifth of the world’s population but less than a tenth of its arable land, China has had to look outside its borders to feed itself. In the past, clumsy and sometimes corrupt state enterprises foraged in Africa and Latin America for farmland and commodities. Now, savvier Chinese firms are looking abroad for advanced technologies that can boost yields and efficiency at home. This week, China National Chemical Corp pulled off a coup that advances China’s national goal of “food security”. ChemChina, as the state group is known, has already made a string of acquisitions in Europe, including Pirelli, an Italian tyremaker. On February 3rd it persuaded the board of Switzerland’s Syngenta, a big maker of pesticides and seeds, to accept its takeover bid. When completed, the $43 billion deal will be the biggest Chinese foreign takeover ever. In accepting its Chinese suitor, Syngenta spurned a rival offer from Monsanto, an agribusiness giant. Syngenta was reluctant to fall into the arms of the American firm, whose aggressive attempts to promote genetically modified foods have caused a backlash in Europe. The combination of two of the industry’s giants would also have met with harsh regulatory scrutiny. The Sino-Swiss deal should see smoother sailing. ChemChina has a much smaller presence in agribusiness than Monsanto. Because Syngenta has operations in America, officials there will probably review the deal for national-security implications. Last month the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States blocked the sale by Philips, a Dutch group, of part of its lighting business to a consortium that included Chinese firms. Even so, it may approve this deal, as it did the controversial acquisition in 2013 of Smithfield, a pork producer, by Shuanghui Group. Ren Jianxin, the politically connected boss of ChemChina, said the right things this week. He vowed that the running of Syngenta would remain in Swiss hands, with Michel Demaré, Syngenta’s chairman (who will be vice-chairman of the new group) cooing that the deal would “minimise operational disruption”. Mr Ren also promised the “highest corporate governance standards” and even hinted that a public flotation of the unlisted ChemChina may be in the offing “in the years to come”.
