  When Cisco was crowned as the world’s biggest company by market value in April 2000, its boss hoped it would go on to become the first firm worth over $1 trillion. But its reign was to prove short-lived: deposed by Microsoft two days later, it never regained top spot. It is now in 53rd place. Cisco may be a cautionary tale for Alphabet, Google’s parent, which on February 2nd usurped Apple to become the world’s most valuable listed company, only to slip back behind the Cupertino-based firm the next day. Come what may, however, Alphabet is now a member of a select club of firms that have led the league over the past quarter-century (see chart). What do these companies have in common? Age doesn’t appear to be a significant factor in determining dominance. Among the dozen are the old and established (like Exxon Mobil, founded as Standard Oil in 1870), and the new and innovative. Apple was 35 years old when it reached the summit in 2011. Google turned 17 in September. Just two non-American firms have claimed the title. Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, a Japanese utility, was the world’s most valuable quoted firm between 1992 and 1996. The other, PetroChina, beat Cisco to that $1 trillion valuation in 2007. Some companies claim their crowns thanks to irrational exuberance: Cisco’s share price was 230 times earnings at its peak. Alphabet currently trades at 34. Apple, meanwhile, has a price-earnings ratio of just 10, which suggests that investors doubt its remarkable run of profits will last. Were it to trade in line with the S&P 500 p/e ratio, it would be worth $900 billion. Tech-boosters would doubtless love to see a prolonged bout of jostling for top spot between Alphabet and Apple (which before this week had held on to its crown for 653 consecutive days). But an obvious threat to both comes from a company that isn’t even listed yet: Aramco, Saudi Arabia’s state-owned oil giant, which is almost certainly the world’s most valuable firm and is toying with an initial public offering.THE grand mufti of Saudi Arabia recently added a surprising new item to the familiar list of worries plaguing his region. Chess, he pronounced, is “a waste of time and money and a cause for hatred and enmity between players.” Without disputing the mufti’s judgment, Schumpeter would like to add a different worry: succession in family businesses. Like chess, poorly planned succession is a “waste of time and money and a cause for hatred and enmity”; unlike chess, it has the potential to undermine some of the country’s foremost economic institutions. Succession is a problem for family businesses the world over. The Family Business Institute calculates that only 30% of such businesses survive into the second generation, only 12% into the third generation and only 3% into the fourth. But the problem may be bigger in the Gulf than anywhere else. Around 80% of the companies in the region, producing more than 90% of its non-oil wealth, are family-owned or controlled. The number of relatives clamouring for a job in these firms is surging, partly because the population is so young (the average age of citizens in the Middle East and north Africa is well below the global average) and partly because governments are desperate to shift workers from the public to the private sector (in the United Arab Emirates 90% of employed citizens work for the state). These family firms are mostly fairly recent creations—the products of the oil and property booms of the 1970s and 1980s that turned people who were lucky or well-connected enough to own prime bits of land into moguls. Over the next decade up to half the region’s business families, controlling assets worth perhaps a trillion dollars, will hand the reins to the next generation. That is a worrying prospect. A proper succession requires good governance. Yet too many of the region’s businesses blur the line between what belongs to the firm and what belongs to the family: they spend company money as if it were their own and employ family members without subjecting them to proper vetting. And if disputes occur, the region’s courts are not equipped to cope. The World Bank reports that they take an average of 575 days to resolve a commercial dispute. An estimated 70% of Saudi families have at least one succession problem tied up in court. The two most obvious results of a botched succession are incompetent leaders and feuds. Family tradition often conspires against merit: families routinely favour the eldest son regardless of his ability. Locals say there are examples of incompetents “all around”, though they are reluctant to name names. The scope for feuds is increased by the complexity of family structures, thanks to high fertility rates and occasional polygamy. Abdulaziz Al Ghurair, chairman of the Family Business Network, a regional body, predicts that more than half the businesses will split over succession. A less obvious consequence is what might be called “functioning dysfunction”: companies get around incompetent heads by creating parallel structures so that the real power is held by people with minor titles, or by avoiding naming a CEO at all. One of the most famous family disputes was reportedly solved by royal intervention. Two relatives, Abdullah and Majid, inherited joint control of Al-Futtaim Group, a Dubai-based empire, part of which now operates the Mall of the Emirates with its famous ski slope. The dispute proved so damaging that Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, then crown prince and now emir, stepped in, locking them in a room and refusing to let them out until they had divided up the empire. But even the most enlightened royal intervention is no substitute for reliable rules. Badr Jafar, the 36-year-old head of Crescent Enterprises, a conglomerate, is leading a campaign to provide just such rules. He argues that regulators should compel companies to make a clearer distinction between corporate property and family property. But he adds that companies need to change from within. They should borrow mechanisms that are popular with family companies around the world—such as family constitutions, family meetings and family offices—and adapt them to local traditions. Mr Jafar is the perfect man to make this pitch: his company is based in Sharjah, one of the most conservative emirates, but he was educated at Eton and Cambridge. He has helped establish a pressure group, the Pearl Initiative, to support the case for better corporate governance. He has secured the support of global organisations, including the World Economic Forum. Capitalism with Gulf characteristics Mr Jafar can also point to several notable advances in the region, some of which predate his activities. W.J. Towell, an Omani company that employs 150 family members, has introduced regular family gatherings to promote family cohesion. The Zamil Group, a Saudi conglomerate with more than 100 family members on the payroll, demands that both family and non-family executives go through a “future leaders programme”, which uses psychometric tests to assess their abilities. The Abdullatif Alissa Group, another Saudi conglomerate, has gone even further, replacing all family members with professional managers and limiting the family’s role to board membership. A growing number of companies are creating family offices to help make the distinction between family and corporate resources. Ten years ago almost nobody was talking about this subject, says Mr Jafar. Today 50% of business families “have it on their minds, 30% in their mouths and 20% on paper.” With luck, even more companies will put it on paper soon. Corporate governance might sound like an ineffective way to take on serious problems such as Islamist extremism and state breakdown. But the region has no chance of escaping from these conflagrations without improving its economy and creating jobs for the young. The last thing it needs is for companies to be ruined by incompetent heirs or torn apart by pointless disputes.HSBC—one of the two most pivotal banks in the global financial system, according to regulators, alongside JPMorgan Chase—exudes permanence. Its buildings are guarded by lions cast in bronze which passers-by touch for luck. HSBC has never been bailed out, nationalised or bought, a claim no other mega-bank can make. It has not made a yearly loss since its foundation in 1865. While its peers took emergency loans from central banks in the crisis of 2008-10, HSBC, long on cash, supplied liquidity to the financial system. Yet behind that invincible aura lurks an insecurity: where is home? When Western and Indian merchants founded the bank in Asia in 1865, they considered basing it in Shanghai before settling on Hong Kong. Faced with wars, revolutions and the threat of nationalisation, the bank has chosen or been compelled to move its headquarters, or debated it, in 1941, 1946, 1981, 1986, 1990, 1993, 2008 and 2009. HSBC believes its itinerancy explains its survival. Countries and regimes come and go. The bank endures. Now it’s decision time again. The results of a ten-month review of its domicile are likely to be announced on February 22nd. The main choice is between staying in London—where HSBC shifted its holding company in 1990-93, in anticipation of the return of Hong Kong to Chinese sovereignty in 1997—or going back to its place of birth. The decision is partly about technicalities: tax, regulation and other costs. But it also reflects big themes: London’s status as a financial centre, the dominance of the dollar and Hong Kong’s financial, legal and political autonomy from mainland China, which is supposedly protected until 2047 under the pledge of “one country, two systems”. HSBC’s most recent move, from Hong Kong, was announced on the radio by China’s premier of the day, Li Peng. Its return would be news too, a coup for China when its economic credibility is low. For Britain, the departure of its largest firm would be an embarrassment. That HSBC is considering moving at this moment may seem astonishing; it is knee-deep in a restructuring. Since taking the helm in 2011 Stuart Gulliver has reversed the empire-building that took place in the 2000s to refocus the bank on financing trade. He has sold 78 businesses and almost halved the bank’s exposure to America. Vast sums have been spent on compliance systems after the bank was fined for money-laundering in Mexico. The group’s return on equity hovers at 8-11%—poor by its standards but on a par with JPMorgan Chase. Outside Asia, returns are about 5%. To raise them, Mr Gulliver is inflicting a new dose of austerity, with big cuts at its investment bank. Retreat from the Western hemisphere has freed resources for Asia, where risk-weighted assets have soared by half since 2010. HSBC’s seesawing skew towards Asia is one of four factors that explain its 151-year quandary over where it should be based. The others are the ethnicity of its managers, Britain’s love-hate relationship with finance and the status of Hong Kong. In the 1980s all four pointed to London. The bank was diversifying into America and Europe (by 2004 Asia yielded just a third of profits). London felt natural to the cadre of expatriate Brits that ran it. Britain was welcoming, particularly after HSBC bought Midland, a local lender. And HSBC was cushioned from the danger that China would rip up the agreement over Hong Kong. “As night follows day...we would become a Chinese bank,” the bank’s chairman at the time said about keeping its domicile in the territory after 1997. Three of the four factors now point back towards Asia. Asia yields 60% of profits. This could rise to 75%. Mr Gulliver plans a big push in the Cantonese-speaking Pearl River delta. Rising interest rates would boost lending margins most in Asia, which has a surplus of deposits, which need not be repriced as quickly as debt. HSBC is far more Asian than its Western rivals (see chart). Not even a hard landing in China, a banking crisis there or a devaluation of the yuan would alter that. HSBC’s management is now multi-national, although its board has too few Asians on it. (Simon Robertson, its deputy chairman, is also a director of The Economist Group.) AIA, an insurance firm, moved to Hong Kong after it was spun out of American International Group in 2010. It shows it is possible to domicile a big finance firm there that is not Chinese-run. And Britain has got hostile. Briefly after the crisis public and elite opinion distinguished between the British banks that blew up and those that did not. Having a bank so plugged into emerging markets was seen as strategically helpful. But now HSBC (cumulative profits of $101 billion since 2007) is often lumped in with the likes of Royal Bank of Scotland (cumulative losses of $80 billion), a target of attacks from foaming parliamentary committees and a hatchet-wielding media. Critics worry that British depositors and taxpayers subsidise the bank by funding its foreign operations and implicitly guaranteeing its liabilities. This is the rationale behind Britain’s levy on banks’ global balance-sheets, which costs HSBC $1.5 billion a year, or about a tenth of profits. It also underpins the requirement that banks ring-fence their British retail arms, which will cost HSBC $2 billion. Yet these policies duplicate others designed to tackle the same problem, including capital surcharges, stress tests, living wills and a push to “bail in” bondholders when disaster strikes. And they ignore HSBC’s safety-first structure. It has more cash than it owes in debt (bonds and loans from other banks). It is already run in self-reliant geographic silos. And 68% of its deposits are raised outside Britain. Arguably the subsidy flows in the other direction, from Asian savers who are providing cheap funds to Britain’s financial system. George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor, has belatedly turned on the charm. In July he tweaked the levy and the tax regime—although not by enough to make much difference to HSBC over the next five years. The financial watchdog has been shaken up, and Mark Carney, the boss of the Bank of England, which has ultimate responsibility for the banks, has hinted that they have enough capital. But unless the government concedes that the size of HSBC’s global balance-sheet is not a gauge of its risk to Britain, HSBC will worry that its size is capped. Asia will grow faster than Britain, and thus so will the bank’s assets. If the bank is too big for Britain today, with assets equivalent to 89% of GDP, what will it look like in 2030? A British exit from the European Union would complicate things further, requiring HSBC to beef up operations in France or Germany (although it would have to do this whether based in London or Hong Kong). What about the fourth factor, Hong Kong? It has changed a lot since Mr Gulliver first lived there in the 1980s. The skyscrapers of China’s opaque lenders, Bank of China and ICBC, now loom over HSBC’s building, beneath which pro-democracy protesters camped during the Occupy Central movement in 2012. Hong Kong’s government would welcome the bank back, as would its regulator, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). Moving to Hong Kong would probably cut HSBC’s tax bill and capital requirements a bit and the degree of regulatory and political friction a lot. It might also help HSBC’s ambitions on the mainland, although it already has a privileged spot there—the largest presence of any foreign bank. Like Hong Kong, HSBC wants to be close to China but not integrated with it. Head-to-head competition with the coddled mainland banks would be suicidal. The logistics of a move would be less daunting than you might think. Half of HSBC’s business already sits in a subsidiary in Hong Kong that the HKMA regulates. HSBC’s shares are listed in Hong Kong as well as London. But how could the territory safely host a bank nine times as big as its GDP? Hong Kong officials say there are three lines of defence. First, they set more store than Britain on HSBC’s innate strength: its culture, capital and vast pot of surplus cash. Second, they believe that in a crisis its geographical silos would get assistance from the local central bank: the Bank of England would help the British arm, the Federal Reserve the American one, and so on. Last, there are the HKMA’s foreign reserves of $360 billion. They exist to protect the currency peg with the American dollar and “the stability and integrity” of its financial system. Were HSBC ever to cock up as badly as, say, Citigroup has, it might take $50 billion to re-capitalise it—within Hong Kong’s capacity. A liquidity run so bad that it drained even HSBC’s cash pile could be harder for the HKMA to manage. It runs a currency board so cannot print Hong Kong dollars in unlimited quantities. HSBC largely operates in American dollars, which the HKMA cannot create, and unlike the Bank of England, the HKMA does not have a dollar swap line from the Fed. Wrinkles like this mean that HSBC would ultimately rely on the unspoken backing of mainland China, with its vast financial resources. Speaking anonymously in August, a mainland official formerly in charge of financial matters said Chinese regulators would expect to have a say over HSBC. China desperately wants a global bank to represent its interests. Mainland officials might be tempted to meddle. That might annoy American officials, who have become chauvinistic about access to their financial system since the 9/11 attacks and the 2007-08 crisis. HSBC manages about 10% of the world’s cross-border dollar payments. Its ability to do so is essential to the bank’s operations. In the event, say, of a military skirmish between America and China, it is not impossible there would be a backlash from Congress and New York’s populist regulator against a “Chinese” bank having such a privileged role in the dollar system. In 2014 regulators briefly prevented BNP Paribas, a French bank, from clearing dollar transactions. A move to Hong Kong is thus a risk for HSBC. It is a bet that China will grow, but that its legal and financial systems will remain backward enough that Hong Kong will still have a vital role as the mainland’s first-world entrepot. It is a bet that even as they meddle in Hong Kong’s politics and on occasion break its laws, mainland officials will ultimately respect the principle of “one country, two systems”. It is a gamble that America will resist its worst urges. In Hong Kong HSBC would be a catastrophic mistake away from losing its independence—but then the bank has never made a catastrophic mistake. Viewed from an insular Britain, Hong Kong is dangerous and alluring, just as it was 151 years ago. MANY a gloomy pundit, Buttonwood included, has been tut-tutting about equity valuations in America for the past year or two. After all, by historical standards, they are high. Yet there is no shortage of cheerleaders to explain why equities are not such a bad deal after all. A notable one now is Olivier Blanchard, until recently the chief economist of the IMF. He and Joseph Gagnon, a colleague at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, a think-tank, have published a blog post* arguing that American equities are not overvalued, in particular compared with the values seen ten years ago. Alas, there is reason to quibble with the data underpinning the post. It refers to the cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratio compiled by Robert Shiller of Yale University, which averages profits over ten years. Mr Shiller has calculated the ratio back to 1881. The average since then is 16.7, so the current ratio, 24, suggests shares are 44% overvalued by historical standards. But the Peterson post compares current valuations with the 60-year average of 20, arguing that accounting and tax changes and the impact of the Depression make earlier numbers a poor guide. This makes equities look only 20% overvalued. Then there is the way that the post estimates future returns. One approach is based on dividends; the authors assume future dividend growth of 2.2%, matching real GDP. But why assume that real dividends keep up with GDP? The London Business School keeps a database on the actual growth rate of dividends over time. Since 1900 American dividends have grown at 1.67%, well below real GDP growth (of around 3% a year). And America is an outlier: the dividend growth rate for all the countries covered is just 0.57%. Why the shortfall? Economic growth does not arise entirely from quoted companies; many fast-growing firms have yet to list. And then there is new share issuance. Research shows that earnings have long been diluted by around 2% a year before existing shareholders get their hands on them. Despite the rise of buy-backs this is still happening, thanks to the use of share awards as incentives for managers. Assume the dilution effect is only three-quarters of what it was (ie, 1.5 points off the assumed GDP growth rate). That still brings future dividend growth down to 0.7%, making equities less alluring than Messrs Blanchard and Gagnon think. The authors also use a valuation approach based on the relationship between the earnings yield (the inverse of the price-earnings ratio) and the real bond yield. Cliff Asness of AQR, a fund-management group, examined this issue in a paper about the “Fed model”, a similar method which bulls used during the internet bubble to argue that equities were cheap. Mr Asness found the model was a poor guide to the subsequent performance of equities. What really matters is the p/e ratio. “Long-term expected real stock returns are low when starting p/es are high and vice versa, regardless of starting nominal interest rates,” he wrote. Worries about growth have prompted central banks to keep rates near zero since 2009. If future growth prospects are poor, then estimates of future profits and dividends need to be revised lower. Equity valuations, in other words, do not have to rise just because rates are low. Japan provides a good illustration of all this. Its government-bond yields have been low for two decades. Has this made Japanese equities a great investment, as the reasoning of Messrs Blanchard and Gagnon would imply? Not a bit of it. By the mid-1990s, there had been a big shift in the relative valuation of equities and bonds (see left-hand chart). But over the past 20 years, the return on Japanese bonds has easily outstripped returns on equities (see right-hand chart). America is not Japan, but its foundering stocks and falling bond yields look eerily familiar.One man’s vulture is another man’s victim IT MAY have taken 14 years, but the holders of $900m of bonds on which Argentina defaulted in 2001 should soon be repaid. On February 2nd Alfonso Prat-Gay, Argentina’s new finance minister, announced a deal with Italian bondholders worth $1.35 billion, or 150% of the principal. The “pre-agreement” (it still has to be approved by Argentina’s Congress) is fairly small: it covers only 15% of the “holdouts” who rejected restructurings in 2005 and 2010. But it sets an important precedent. The creditors had been seeking $2.5 billion, including outstanding interest payments, and Argentina hopes to persuade the remaining 85% to accept a similar write-down. The omens for a wider deal, however, are not promising. Argentina’s $82 billion sovereign default in 2001 was the largest-ever at the time. Some 93% of bondholders subsequently agreed to exchange their defaulted debt for new securities, accepting a write-down of 65%. But the original bonds had not included “collective-action clauses”, under which a restructuring could be forced on all bondholders if a certain proportion of them agreed. The remaining creditors rejected the offer, with some pursuing full payment through the courts instead. A group of them, led by Elliott Management, a hedge fund, has secured a number of victories in courts in New York, under whose law the original bonds were written. One of those rulings barred Argentina from paying interest on the restructured debt unless it also paid the holdouts in full. The court also forbade banks with operations in America from facilitating such payments. As a result, Argentina defaulted on the restructured bonds in 2014. (An attempt to get around the ruling by making payments to the restructured bondholders in Argentina, beyond the reach of New York’s courts, fizzled.) The defaults upon defaults have restricted Argentina’s access to international credit markets and hampered efforts to resuscitate its ailing economy. In December Mauricio Macri, Argentina’s new president, took office promising to strike a deal with the holdouts and return the country to economic health. It helps that a clause in the restructuring deals obliging Argentina to extend any improved deal it strikes with the holdouts to all the original bondholders has expired. After preliminary meetings in December and January, Argentine officials opened formal negotiations with Daniel Pollack, a court-appointed mediator, and a number of the holdout bondholders in New York on February 1st. The first day of meetings lasted only four hours; Argentina conceded that it was “still working” on a new offer. Mr Pollack estimates that the holdouts’ claim, including accrued interest, now amounts to 400% of the principal, a figure which equates to $9 billion. The holdouts have disdained discounted offers from Argentina in the past, and would presumably turn their noses up at 150%. But Argentina has worked hard in recent weeks to strengthen its negotiating hand. After meeting Mr Prat-Gay on January 21st in Davos, Jack Lew, America’s treasury secretary, pledged that the United States would no longer oppose lending to Argentina at the World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank. Argentina has also persuaded private banks to lend it money. On January 29th Argentina’s central bank announced that it had secured a $5 billion bridging loan from a group of international banks, including HSBC, JPMorgan Chase and Santander. That eases the immediate pressure on Argentina. But Mr Macri’s political programme still hinges on a return to international capital markets. Argentina’s fiscal deficit is an estimated 7% of GDP. The government will need $30 billion in financing this year, according to Miguel Kiguel, director of EconViews, a local consultancy. The central bank, for its part, has only $30 billion of foreign-exchange reserves. “Argentina is in a race against time,” he says. “It would be very difficult to raise that kind of money in Argentina.” Any deal with holdout creditors will have to be approved by Congress, where Mr Macri’s party is in a minority. It will take skill to sell an accord to opposition politicians who have spent years resisting a compromise with “vulture funds” like Elliott Management, which bought the debt in question at a hefty discount. During the first round of restructuring in 2005 Argentina introduced the “Ley Cerrojo” (Padlock Law) which was intended to prevent negotiations from being re-opened at a later date. It was suspended for a year to enable a second restructuring in 2010, but remains on the books. The law under which Argentina attempted to steer money to the holders of the restructured bonds could also impede the ratification of any new deal. “Congress will have to repeal them,” says Mr Kiguel. Many Argentines dislike the idea of rewarding the holdouts for their obstinacy. But Mr Macri may like the idea of a distracting feud with them even less.Caution: reimagining under way THERE is a through-the-looking-glass quality to the blue-lit tunnel that leads into the headquarters of Klarna, a Swedish online-payments firm. And there is something back-to-front about the company itself. It is a startup firm that grew up in Europe, and is now seeking to expand into America—the reverse of the usual pattern. Unlike most tech unicorns galloping to expand their market share, it already makes a profit. Even more strikingly, it plans to move from an area of financial ferment—mobile payments—into the sterile old business of retail banking. Investors are giddy about its plans, however unusual: a funding round last year valued the firm, whose name is Swedish for “getting clearer”, at $2.25 billion, up by almost a billion on the year before. Klarna’s business “is quite basic”, says Sebastian Siemiatkowski, its founder and boss. Some 65,000 online merchants have so far hired it to run their checkouts. Its main appeal, for both retailers and their customers, is the simplicity of its system. Shoppers do not have to dole out credit-card details or remember a new password. Instead, they can simply give an e-mail and a delivery address, and leave the payment to be sorted out later. (Klarna pays the retailer in the meantime, and bears the risk that shoppers will not stump up in the end—something few other payment firms do.) Customers who have previously used one Klarna-run checkout are recognised when they visit another, further reducing the need to fill out online forms. All this hugely increases the “conversion” rate—the proportion of customers who actually make a purchase after putting an item into their online “basket”. Like many fintech firms, Klarna believes that its algorithms do a better job of identifying creditworthy customers than the arthritic systems used by conventional financial firms. It relies on the e-mail and delivery addresses supplied, as well as the size and type of purchase, the device used, time of day and other variables. This not only allows it to bear the risk that customers fail to pay when Klarna bills them, but also to offer them extended payment plans, for a fee. These loans have higher margins than the cut-throat online-payment business—although the giants of the industry, such as PayPal, are experimenting with similar offerings. Klarna handled sales of roughly $10 billion in 2014 (compared with PayPal’s $235 billion), generating $300m in revenue, all in Europe. (It has not yet made public figures for last year.) It handles 40% of online payments in Sweden. In 2014 it bought a German firm, Sofort, expanding its presence there. It thinks it can continue to grow in Europe, but its main focus now is America, where it launched in September. Klarna has not been signing up American retailers as quickly as it had anticipated. But it hopes two global trends will speed its expansion. The more that online shopping moves to phones, the more pressing it is for all online traders to make their checkouts quick and easy to use, but still safe. Customers particularly detest typing in credit card numbers on their phones, especially if asked to do so in public—while riding a busy bus, say. Klarna reckons over 60% of its business today involves mobile shopping, compared with less than 10% two years ago. Some retailers, such as sellers of shoes and clothes, report an especially rapid shift to mobile. The other broad trend is for shopping across national borders. Online markets, such as Wish.com, connect bargain-hungry consumers in rich countries to producers of clothes, watches, toys or jewellery in, for example, China. Klarna works with Wish on European sales, letting customers pay for goods ordered cross-border only after getting them, which can take weeks. That reassures shoppers not ready to trust an anonymous Chinese T-shirt firm to deliver. Many sellers are appalled by the prospect of having to comply with different countries’ financial laws, say on extending credit, so they readily outsource payments. Klarna, in contrast, is a glutton for regulatory punishment. In fact, it is entering the most regulated bit of finance: retail banking. It is licensed as a bank in Sweden, which allows it to collect deposits from all over Europe. Mr Siemiatkowski sees this as a cheap source of financing, but also as a big opportunity. Just like online shoppers, he argues, bank customers are desperate for a safe-but-simple mobile interface like the one Klarna offers in payments. The firm’s 45m users provide it with a big and growing pool of potential banking customers who already have an inkling of the sort of service it can provide. “In the longer term we need to reimagine what banks really are,” he says, sounding like a typical fintech boss at last.THE harbour may be frozen, but that does not stop a ferry with a few intrepid tourists on board from making its way through the ice to Suomenlinna, a former fortress and popular sightseeing spot near Helsinki. Finns, whose country stretches from the Baltic Sea to the Arctic, are inured to hostile conditions, but their economy seems less hardy. It is stuck in an unrelenting freeze. A centre-right coalition government formed last spring is trying to break the ice, but has not yet got far. After thriving for several years both before and after joining the euro in 1999, Finland ran into trouble after the financial crisis of 2007-08. Output plunged by 8.3% in 2009. Although GDP grew in 2010 and 2011, it then declined for the following three years—and may have contracted again in 2015. Short-term data suggest that the economy will be flat in early 2016, says Jussi Mustonen, chief economist at the Confederation of Finnish Industries. Erkki Liikanen, governor of the central bank, explains that Finland has suffered an extraordinary combination of adverse shocks. The most important of these was the decline of Nokia, once Finland’s biggest company and the world’s biggest maker of mobile phones. Just as the rise of Nokia did much to propel the Finnish economy in the decade before the financial crisis—accounting for nearly a quarter of growth—so its fall in the smartphone era has contributed to subsequent weakness. Another problem was that wages carried on rising despite sagging productivity: unit labour costs are 10-15% higher than those of Finland’s trading partners. Meanwhile the workforce is shrinking as an especially pronounced post-war baby boom and subsequent bust takes its toll. The number of Finns aged 15-64 is falling by almost 0.5% a year. Markku Kotilainen of ETLA, an economic think-tank, reckons that potential growth has halved from around 3% a year before the financial crisis to less than 1.5% now. On top of all of this, exports to Russia have plunged by a third in the past year, owing to an economic slump there as well as trade sanctions. Russia now buys just 5.8% of Finland’s exports, down from 10% in 2012. The Finnish economic and social model is being challenged, says the OECD in a new survey. Faith in Finn tech Finland is well-placed to find new sources of growth. According to a report on competitiveness from the World Economic Forum, it ranks second globally for innovation. Startups are an ideology among young Finns, says Mr Kotilainen. Encouraging them is a priority of the government. Much of a €1.6 billion ($1.8 billion) initiative to promote growth over the next three years will foster the use of new technology. Overall, however, the government, which has been running a deficit of around 3% of GDP, is administering the same medicine of austerity and structural reforms that countries in southern Europe have had to swallow. The austerity programme, only partially offset by the temporary growth package, will eventually realise savings of €4 billion—around 2% of GDP—in 2019, mainly through spending cuts. Even then, further parsimony will lie ahead for a country whose public expenditure is 58% of GDP, the highest in the European Union (the average is 47%). The most important reform is an overhaul of the labour market, says Olli Rehn, the economy minister, who as a former European commissioner used to prescribe similar treatment elsewhere in the euro area. Finland’s system of national collective bargaining was once a strength, enabling wage agreements to take into account overall economic constraints, but it is now keeping wages too high. The government advocates a more flexible system, in which firms will have greater freedom to reach their own deals with workers. This should help to restore Finland’s lost competitiveness by ensuring that wage increases stay below those in the rest of the euro area and through higher productivity at individual firms. A more immediate boost should come from reforms that bring down costs by increasing working time—for example, by scrapping two national holidays and curbing public-sector leave. The government wants employers and unions to agree upon such a package, but they have failed four times. If they cannot reach a deal, the government will impose measures in the spring, warns Alexander Stubb, the finance minister. One obstacle to Finland’s revival goes largely unmentioned. Had the country retained its own currency, the long, hard adjustment that it is now seeking to achieve by lowering domestic costs could have been attained much more easily by allowing the markka to depreciate. Finland’s economic woes stand in contrast with the robust performance of its neighbour, Sweden, which kept the krona. Finland’s output is now 7.3% lower than at its previous peak—worse than in Spain or Portugal (see chart). Sweden’s, in contrast, is 8.6% higher. But there is more to the outperformance of Sweden, whose economy is twice as large and more diversified, than keeping its own currency. And lamenting the constraints of the euro is not much help to the Finnish government. If one thing has been learnt during the euro crisis, it is that leaving the single currency would be hazardous and costly. The only path for Finland is to regain lost ground within the monetary union, however painful that may be.
