THE past two decades have left working-class voters in many countries leery of globalisation. Donald Trump, the billionaire television star who promises to slap a 45% tariff on Chinese goods if elected president of America, has partly based his candidacy on this angst. Economists tend to scoff at such brash protectionism; they argue, rightly, that trade does far more good than harm. Yet new research reveals that for many, the short-term costs and benefits are more finely balanced than textbooks assume. David Autor of MIT, David Dorn of the University of Zurich and Gordon Hanson of the University of California, San Diego, provide convincing evidence that workers in the rich world suffered much more from the rise of China than economists thought was possible. In their most recent paper*, published in January, they write that sudden exposure to foreign competition can depress wages and employment for at least a decade. Trade is beneficial in all sorts of ways. It provides consumers with goods they could not otherwise enjoy: without it only Scots would sip lovely Islay single malts. It boosts variety: Americans can shop for Volvos and Subarus in addition to Fords. Yet its biggest boon, economists since Adam Smith have argued, is that it makes countries richer. Trade creates larger markets, which allows for greater specialisation, lower costs and higher incomes. Economists have long accepted that this overall boost to prosperity might not be evenly spread. A paper published by Wolfgang Stolper and Paul Samuelson in 1941 pointed out that trade between an economy in which labour was relatively scarce (like America) and one in which labour was relatively abundant (like China) could cause wages to fall in the place that was short of workers. Yet many were sceptical that such losses would crop up much in practice. Workers in industries affected by trade, they assumed, would find new jobs in other fields. For a long time, they appeared to be right. In the decades following the second world war, rich countries mostly traded with each other, and workers prospered. Even after emerging economies began playing a larger role in global trade, in the 1980s, most research concluded that trade’s effects on workers were benign. But China’s subsequent incorporation into the global economy was of a different magnitude. From 1991 to 2013 its share of global exports of manufactured goods rocketed from 2.3% to 18.8%. For some categories of goods in America, Chinese import penetration—the share of domestic consumption met through Chinese imports—was near total. The gain to China from this opening up has been enormous. Average real income rose from 4% of the American level in 1990 to 25% today. Hundreds of millions of Chinese have moved out of poverty thanks to trade. A recent NBER working paper suggests Americans will benefit too: over the long run trade with China is projected to raise American incomes. In parts of the economy less susceptible to competition from cheap Chinese imports, the authors argue, firms profit from a larger global market and reduced supply costs, and should also gain—eventually—from the reallocation of labour away from shrinking manufacturing to more productive industries. But those benefits are only visible after decades. In the short run, the same study found, America’s gains from trade with China are minuscule. The heavy costs to those dependent on industries exposed to Chinese imports offset most of the benefits to consumers and to firms in less vulnerable industries. Economists’ assumption that workers would easily adjust to the upheaval of trade seems to have been misplaced. Manufacturing activity tends to be geographically concentrated. So the disruption caused by Chinese imports was similarly concentrated, in hubs such as America’s Midwest. The competitive blow to manufacturers rippled through regional economies, write Messrs Autor, Dorn and Hanson, battering suppliers and local service industries. Such places lacked growing industries to absorb displaced workers, and the unemployed proved reluctant (or unable) to move to more prosperous regions. Labour-market adjustment to Chinese trade was thus slower and less complete than expected. As a result, the authors found in a 2013 paper, competition from Chinese imports explains 44% of the decline in employment in manufacturing in America between 1990 and 2007. For any given industry, an increase in Chinese imports of $1,000 per worker per year led to a total reduction in annual income of about $500 per worker in the places where that industry was concentrated. The offsetting rise in government benefits was only $58 per worker. In a paper from 2014, co-written with Daron Acemoglu and Brendan Price, of MIT, and focusing on America’s “employment sag” in the 2000s, the authors calculate that Chinese import competition reduced employment across the American economy as a whole by 2.4m jobs relative to the level it otherwise would have enjoyed. The costs of Chinese trade seem to have been exacerbated by China’s large current-account surpluses: China’s imports from other countries did not grow by nearly as much as its exports to other countries. China’s trade with America was especially unbalanced. Between 1992 and 2008, trade with China accounted for 20-40% of America’s massive current-account deficit; China imported many fewer goods from America than vice versa. Sub-Pareto Trade generates enormous global gains in welfare. Generous trade-adjustment assistance, job retraining and other public spending that helps to build political support for trade are therefore sound investments. To make any of these policies work, however, economists and politicians must stop thinking of them as political goodies designed to buy off interest groups opposed to trade. They are essential to fulfilling trade’s promise to make everyone better off. OVER the course of an average winter North American wood frogs, Rana sylvatica, may freeze solid several times. They are able to get away with this by replacing most of the water in their bodies with glucose mobilised from stores in their livers. That stops ice forming in their tissues as temperatures drop. When things warm up again, the frogsicles thaw out, with no evident ill effects. What frogs do without thinking, human researchers are trying, with a great deal of thinking, to replicate. The prize is not the freezing and reanimation of entire people—that idea is somewhere between a fantasy and a fraud—but the long-term preservation of organs for transplant. According to the World Health Organisation, less than 10% of humanity’s need for transplantable organs is being met. The supply has fallen as cars have become safer and intensive-care procedures more effective, and part of what supply there is is lost for want of an instantly available recipient. Cooled, but not frozen, a donated kidney might last 12 hours. A donated heart cannot manage even that span. If organs could be frozen and then thawed without damage, all this would change. Proper organ banks could be established. No organs would be wasted. And transplants that matched a patient’s requirements precisely could be picked off the shelf as needed. The problem is that water expands when it freezes. If that water is in living tissue, it does all sorts of damage in the process. But an alliance of experts, ranging from surgeons and biochemists to mechanical engineers and food scientists, is attempting to overcome this inconvenient fact. And, after years of labour, many of them think they are on the threshold of success, and that cryopreservation will soon become a valuable technology. In from the cold Some human tissue is already cryopreserved. The trick was managed with sperm and red blood cells six decades ago and three decades ago with early-stage embryos. But these are special cases. Spermatozoa and blood corpuscles are single cells, and also have little water in them. Frozen embryos have a couple of hundred cells, but are still tiny structures. Freezing full-sized organs has proved more problematic. Mehmet Toner of Harvard Medical School is following the wood frogs’ approach. Surprising as it sounds, these amphibians survive the winter by turning their insides into glass, not ice. Though a layman may not realise it, glasses are technically liquids, not solids. The crucial difference is that when a glass cools it does not form crystals, with the sudden, tissue-damaging change in volume this entails. Wood-frog “glass” is a concentrated glucose solution. Dr Toner uses a different sugar, trehalose, as the vitrifying “cryoprotectant”. The advantage of trehalose over glucose is that it is less reactive, and thus less likely to damage tissue in high concentrations. Its disadvantage is that it is not so readily absorbed into cells. Dr Toner has overcome that, though, by decorating it with molecular titbits called acetyl groups. These act as chemical keys, granting entrance to otherwise inaccessible places. This seems to work. In June 2015 he and his colleagues showed that their acetylated trehalose could allow frozen rat cells to be revivified, just as they had hoped. Revivification brings its own dangers, though. Warming cryopreserved tissue must be done rapidly—otherwise, paradoxically, it can cause ice to form where once there was only glass. This is because the non-aqueous part of the glass melts into a proper liquid before the water does, and thus separates out. The now-pure water then crystallises, with all the destructive consequences that follow. This rapid warming must, though, be done uniformly—lest, in the words of John Bischof of the University of Minnesota, “the organ crack like an ice cube dropped into water”. Dr Bischof has hit on a novel solution to the problem. He and his colleagues propose adding tiny particles of magnetite, a form of iron oxide, to the cryoprotectant. Put the organ in a rapidly fluctuating magnetic field and the magnetite will heat up fast. If the particles are scattered uniformly through the tissue, this heating should also be uniform. And recent experiments Dr Bischof has conducted on heart valves and arteries suggest it is. Ido Braslavsky, of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, is taking a different tack. Many species of cold-resistant fish, insects and plants employ proteins that actively inhibit the formation of ice crystals, even though they do not lower water’s freezing point. Dr Braslavsky has spent a long time studying such proteins, and he has built a special microscope to do so. By attaching fluorescent tags to individual protein molecules, he can see exactly where they go and how they stymie the growth of ice crystals by attaching themselves to incipient crystals in ways that stop them extending themselves. (He applies this knowledge too, to the way ice formation influences the texture of ice-cream.) Researchers have also devoted much effort to avoiding the deep freeze altogether, by perfusing organs with a cooled cocktail of preservatives, oxygen, antioxidants and the like. In a sense this is tantamount to keeping an organ on its own dedicated life-support system. Last year Korkut Uygun of Harvard Medical School, in collaboration with Dr Toner, demonstrated that a combination of cooling and perfusion could preserve a rat liver for four days. All of these approaches, though, are quite intrusive. Kenneth Storey, of Carleton University in Canada, thinks a better tack is to try to understand and emulate the underlying molecular biology of cold-resistant creatures. He has studied in detail the changes to cell proteins and genes that go on in such organisms, including the actions of “micro-RNAs”—small molecules that can interrupt a cell’s gene-expression or protein-making machinery. In December he published a catalogue of 53 micro-RNA changes that occur in wood frogs as they freeze. Hibernating mammals, insects and even nematode worms all seem to turn off their cells in similar ways to frogs. He therefore thinks there may be an overarching molecular signal which, if it could be found, would prepare organs for the freezer. Leapfrog There are, then, many cryopreservationist ideas around—so many that some think a little co-ordination is in order. That is the purpose behind the Organ Preservation Alliance (OPA), an American charity which was set up in 2014. It has enjoyed some success. A year ago it held a hackathon—a kind of DIY-tinkering party to find novel solutions. The winner, Peter Kilbride of University College, London, devised an ingenious vitrification method that uses tiny particles of silicon dioxide—sand, in essence—in lieu of the usual, potentially toxic cryoprotectants. It is a potentially transformative idea that has already been submitted for patent. The OPA is also good at lobbying. Last year it persuaded America’s defence department, an organisation with an obvious interest in transplants, to seed seven cryopreservation-research teams with money. In January the department expanded the project with three new streams of money. The National Institutes of Health, the American government’s medical-research arm, is also paying for work on cryopreservation. Venture capitalists, charities and individual philanthropists are queuing up to add to the rising pile of cash. The XPRIZE Foundation, for example, is considering offering an award to any team that can transplant into five animals organs that have been cryopreserved for a week. The research-funding arm of the Thiel Foundation, started by Peter Thiel, who helped launch PayPal, has given a grant to Arigos Biomedical, a firm working on high-pressure vitrification. New firms abound: Tissue Testing Technologies is working on ways of warming organs uniformly; Sylvatica Biotech is perfecting recipes for cryoprotectants; X-therma is attempting to mimic cryoprotective proteins. The cryopreservation race is on, then. And the winning post is the organ bank. IT LOOKS like something out of a Gothic movie: a metre-long monster that emerges slowly through blistered human skin, its victim writhing in agony. No one is spared. It can creep out from between the toes of a child or from the belly of a pregnant woman. In the mid-1980s Dracunculus medinensis, the Guinea worm, as this horror is called, afflicted 3.5m people a year in 20 countries in Africa and Asia. But last year that number was down to just 22, all of them in Chad, Ethiopia, Mali and South Sudan. Dracunculiasis is thus poised to become the second human disease to be eradicated, after smallpox. This blessed state of affairs is thanks to a 30-year campaign led by the Carter Centre, a charity set up by Jimmy Carter, a former president of America. Mr Carter picked his target well. Most Guinea worms grow in human beings, and their only other host is the domestic dog. Both humans and dogs can be monitored closely, in ways wild animals cannot. This means, in principle, that every case of dracunculiasis can be tracked and the worm involved prevented from reproducing. The task the Carter Centre set itself was to turn this principle into reality. The worm releases its larvae as it emerges, a process that takes about ten weeks. These larvae normally become infectious only if swallowed by copepods, tiny crustaceans which live in stagnant water. If someone drinks such water, the larvae then migrate to his skin to grow, emerging about a year later. About 90% of worms emerge from the lower part of the leg. Sufferers spread the larvae when they dip their feet in water to relieve the pain. Breaking this cycle of transmission means doing two things: stopping the larvae reaching copepod-inhabited water, and stopping people ingesting infested copepods. To do so, local volunteers trained by the Carter Centre and its partners spread the message and tend the wounds of those with worms hanging out of them. They also distribute filters of cloth-like mesh for households’ drinking-water buckets, and straw-like filters equipped with a string, so that they can be worn around the neck for people to use when drinking away from home. These filters strain copepods from the water. They, as well as larvicide used for treating water sources suspected of contamination, are all donated by their manufacturers. These measures—and meticulous surveillance—have brought the Guinea worm close to extinction. Mr Carter’s star power has helped, too. He and his wife, Rosalynn, have travelled to dozens of affected villages, bringing the attention of health ministers and wealthy benefactors to an otherwise neglected disease. In 1995 Mr Carter negotiated the longest humanitarian ceasefire in history: the six-month “Guinea worm ceasefire” in Sudan, which was used to distribute filters, and also medicines and vaccines for other diseases. Mr Carter says he hopes to outlive the last Guinea worm. Though he is now 91, that is a plausible ambition. All 22 of the worms that were recorded last year have now emerged, and are dead. It is therefore likely that Mali, Ethiopia and South Sudan are now rid of the awful creature, though there needs to be a worm-free period of three years to be sure. That leaves only Chad, where an unusual development is keeping eradicators on their toes. There, disease detectives found that the worm’s nine human victims last year had ingested the larvae by eating raw fish, rather than by drinking unfiltered water. Worryingly, hundreds of dogs were infested this way, too. Measures to prevent new cases were swiftly deployed. Eradication teams have been urging people to make sure the fish they eat is fully cooked, to bury raw fish entrails (to prevent dogs from eating them) and to tether infested canines. The Carter Centre’s field workers reckon people are 70-80% compliant with the second and third measures on this list. Compliance with the first is harder to estimate, since it would mean a mass invasion of people’s kitchens. Whether these measures will be enough to break the chain of transmission remains to be seen. But those workers’ vigilance is such that any new cases, whether human or canine, are likely to be noticed quickly. With luck, it will not be long before the world’s last Guinea worm becomes a celebrity—preserved for posterity in a formalin-filled jar at the Carter Centre’s headquarters, in Atlanta.Ring my chimes IMPLANTED devices, such as heart pacemakers, are a valuable part of modern medicine’s armamentarium. Their use, however, is limited by the need to renew their batteries—and this is a particular problem for those, such as cochlear implants (which improve hearing), that are inside the wearer’s head. For obvious reasons, surgeons do not like opening heads up unless it is strictly necessary. Sometimes, therefore, the battery packs that power head implants are put in the wearer’s chest. But this means running a wire up through the patient’s neck, from the one to the other, which is scarcely satisfactory either. A way to power such implants without replacing their batteries at all would thus be welcome. And Hyuck Choo of the California Institute of Technology and his colleagues think they have one. They plan to scavenge the necessary energy from the vibrations of the vocal cords that occur when someone is talking. Dr Choo’s power plants are small sheets of lead zirconate titanate, a substance that is piezoelectric—meaning it generates electricity when it vibrates. He knew from past work that sheets of the size he chose (just under 1cm2) resonate at around 690Hz. This is close to the F in the octave above middle C, and thus well above the normal range of the human voice. Using larger sheets would lower the resonant frequency, just as long organ pipes produce lower notes than short ones. Larger sheets, though, would be less deployable inside the body. So, instead, he sought to lower a sheet’s resonant frequency without increasing its area by carving a sinusoidal shape out of it (see picture). Such a shape must inevitably be longer than its parent rectangle’s longest sides, albeit that its length is now zigzagged. A sinusoidal sheet should thus have a lower resonant frequence than its rectangular parent. It worked. When Dr Choo and his colleagues tested the carved sheets by exposing them to a range of frequencies and monitoring the amount of electricity generated, they found that the voltage spiked at between 100Hz and 120Hz (approximately the dominant frequencies of adult male voices), and also between 200Hz and 250Hz (the female voice’s dominant frequencies). And, although the amount of power produced is not huge, it seems adequate for the task proposed. As Dr Choo reported on January 26th, to the International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems in Shanghai, he and his team were able to harvest a tenth of a milliwatt per square centimetre of lead zirconate titanate from the voice of a man talking at 70 decibels, which is normal speaking volume, and three-tenths from someone shouting at 100 decibels. Implants usually require a tenth of a milliwatt or less to function, so this prototype’s performance suggests a practical device might be within reach—especially as the vibrations produced by the voice travel efficiently up through the skull, meaning the generator could be integrated into an implant, rather than having to be separate from it. Since most people are not chatterboxes, talking all the time, a practical system will still need batteries to build up charge so that the surplus can be used when needed. Intriguingly, this might even be possible when someone is asleep. Part of the sound of snoring is in the experimental device’s sweet spot. That may not be much consolation for the partners of snorers. But at least their bedmates will no longer be able to turn a deaf ear to their complaints.THE murky world of sports doping has been in the news recently, as accusations fly concerning the use, on a scale previously unacknowledged, of performance-enhancing drugs in athletics. But human beings are not the only animals doped to enhance their performance. Racehorses are similarly afflicted. Catching cheats in the world of horse-racing has, however, proved hard. Human and equestrian biology are different, and techniques developed for the one do not necessarily transfer to the other. Terence See Ming Wan, of the Hong Kong Jockey Club’s Racing Laboratory, hopes to change that. As he explains in a paper in Analytical Chemistry, he has developed a technique for spotting doped horses that should make it easier to catch cheats. These days, artificial anabolic steroids are easily detected, so athletes (male ones, anyway) are turning instead to compounds like luteinising hormone to bulk up their muscles. This hormone does not act directly. Rather, it stimulates a man’s testes to produce natural testosterone, which then does the muscle-bulking. For those doping male racehorses, though, this option is often not available, because many such horses are geldings. Instead, gelding-dopers tinker with another source of testosterone, the adrenal glands—their weapons of choice being drugs that enhance the effect of this more meagre testosterone supply. In the natural course of events, testosterone levels are regulated by an enzyme called aromatise, which converts the hormone into oestrogens. There are, however, two drugs—androstanediol and androstadienedione—that block aromatase’s action, increasing testosterone levels, and therefore muscle mass. Using androstanediol and androstadienedione is particularly desirable from the doper’s point of view because their levels become undetectable two to four days after administration. Dr Wan suspected, however, that these aromatise inhibitors might not affect just testosterone levels; they might also alter concentrations of other steroids, such as androstane, androstadien and androsterone. That would be a sign that a horse had been dosed with them. To test this, he and his colleagues ran a study that monitored 31 naturally produced steroids in the urine of 32 thoroughbred geldings over the course of nine days. Before the study started, four of the animals were deliberately doped with the two aromatise inhibitors. Dr Wan, however, did not know which four. As he and his colleagues had hoped, they were able to pick the doped horses from the others on the basis of the creatures’ steroid profiles. Seven steroids differed significantly in concentration between doped and control animals. Most important, these differences were detectable for between four and nine days after the horses had been given the inhibitors. Even though the drugs themselves were no longer present, the impressions they had left behind were—which is good news for those who believe that racecourses should also be level playing fields.The fossil on the right-hand side of this picture is not, as comparison with the modern insect on the left might suggest, a butterfly. It is a lacewing called Oregramma illecebrosa. It and its relatives, the kalligrammatids, flew in the forests of the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods between 165m and 125m years ago, dying out 69m years before the first-known butterfly fossil. They are thus, as Conrad Labandeira of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC, and his colleagues describe in the Proceedings of the Royal Society, examples of convergent evolution: the emergence in unrelated groups of similar bodies, to permit the pursuit of similar ways of life. Just as ichthyosaurs (marine reptiles contemporary with the kalligrammatids) and dolphins evolved basically the same shapes, in order to hunt fish and other sea creatures, so kalligrammatids seem to have evolved “butterfly-ness”, complete with large, scale-covered wings, eye spots to distract predators and mouth parts formed into a proboscis. They acted, Dr Labandeira thinks, as pollinators for the gymnosperm trees that preceded modern angiosperms, now the food plants of real butterflies.THE Journal of Irreproducible Results is a long-running satirical magazine, designed for the amusement of scientists. If the title were not already taken, though, it would be a good one for another, more serious publication that is being launched on February 4th. The Preclinical Reproducibility and Robustness Channel, an electronic rather than a paper journal, is dedicated to the task, found tedious by most academic researchers, of replicating and testing the experiments of others. Professional egos, the exigencies of career-building and the restricted sizes of grants and budgets all conspire against the rerunning, in universities, of old studies instead of the conducting of new ones. Commercial researchers cannot afford to be so choosy. If they pick an idea up from academia, they have to be sure that it works. Often, it doesn’t. For example, when staff at Amgen, a Californian drug company, attempted to reproduce the results of 53 high-profile cancer-research papers they found that only six lived up to their original claims. This figure is probably typical. What was not typical was that Amgen actually offered it for publication, and it was, indeed, published (in 2012, by Nature). Mostly, journal editors, like academic scientists, are more interested in new work than in the refutation of old stuff. Amgen’s submission was spectacular, because so many papers were involved at one go. This may have been what got it over the bar. If each refutation had been written up and submitted separately, the outcome would probably have been different. As for the six successful replications it included, why would anyone bother to publish work confirming what was already known? Yet knowing which previous research is and is not correct is crucial to the progress of science, and a repository of such information would be useful. Hence the Preclinical Reproducibility and Robustness Channel. Its publishers, Faculty of 1000, based in London, hope to provide an outlet for the accumulated replications gathering dust in commercial laboratories (Amgen has promised its trove to the venture), and also to stimulate academic scientists to follow suit and provide more. The problem, though, is not restricted to medicine. An analysis of 98 psychology papers, published in 2015 by 90 teams of researchers co-ordinated by Brian Nosek of the University of Virginia, managed to replicate satisfactorily the results of only 39% of the studies investigated. Again, it was the very size of this project that got it into print, as smaller studies languished. Things may now be changing. Both reproducibility and the whole openness of the scientific process are discussed much more than once they were. An entire institute dedicated to the matter, the Meta-Research Innovation Centre at Stanford, in California, opened for business in 2014. If this institute flourishes—and even more so if it is emulated—it may even become possible to make a career out of being a buster of others’ questionable efforts: a forensic scientist of science, as it were. That is by no means certain, and there will probably be few Nobel prizes in it. But mopping up messes is an honourable activity, and this week’s launch of a new outlet for the publication of duplication is part of the clean-up.Beethoven for a Later Age: The Journey of a String Quartet. By Edward Dusinberre. Faber & Faber; 262 pages; £18.99. To be published in America by University of Chicago Press in May; $30. THE string quartet is an invention of the classical age, brought to perfection by Mozart and Haydn. Goethe once defined it as “four rational people conversing with each other”, which suggests that a book on the subject might not be very exciting. But that would do an injustice to Edward Dusinberre’s memoir “Beethoven for a Later Age: The Journey of a String Quartet”. Mr Dusinberre is the lead violinist of the Takacs Quartet, one of the world’s most highly regarded string ensembles, and he has written a fascinating book about the musical life of this group of players. Interwoven with that is the story of Beethoven’s 16 string quartets, works of extraordinary power written over a quarter-century that moved the genre on from the earlier masters and are now regarded as the apogee of the chamber-music repertoire. In Beethoven’s day many of them met with incomprehension and dismay, which the short-tempered composer had to learn to accommodate. When his now famous “Grosse Fuge”, originally the last movement of one of his late quartets, was shredded by critics, Beethoven grudgingly wrote a new ending. At a performance of another quartet he got his musicians to play the whole thing twice over, hoping that the audience might gain a better insight into the music the second time. And when a player complained in the composer’s hearing that the quartets were “not music” at all, he replied: “Oh, they are not for you; they are for a later age.” A century later, Igor Stravinsky still judged the quartets “contemporary”, and thought they always would be. Another century on, Mr Dusinberre clearly feels the same way. He links each chapter in his memoir to a particular quartet, moving back and forth between the story of the composition (and the personal, social and political context it was written in) and the life of his quartet. Founded in 1975, the Takacs Quartet still retains two of its original members. Mr Dusinberre joined more than 20 years ago to replace the founding first violinist, Gabor Takacs-Nagy. Even the most recent arrivals have been around for more than ten years, so all four musicians know each other very well, both musically and personally. The book is admirably kind about every one of the players, but at times the constant enforced proximity must become claustrophobic. When the four are on tour together they generally try to keep away from each other as much as possible. When Mr Dusinberre auditioned for the part in 1993 he was only 23, almost a generation younger than the rest. He was English, everyone else was Hungarian, and he soon realised that he was being put to the test not so much for his prowess on the violin—given his training, that was taken for granted—but for his musical ideas, his personal qualities and his ability and willingness to work with colleagues. He felt green and rather nervous about playing with such a cohesive and experienced group, and also conscious that the others came from a different and somewhat more laid-back culture. But they offered him the job, or so he thought; it was only later that one of them told him that what he was taking on was not a job but a family and a life. A lot of the time the work is just hard grind. The Takacs Quartet plays about 100 concerts annually, does a lot of recording and tours for around half the year. This is hard on spouses and children (who barely get a mention). When not touring, the players practise on their own and then rehearse together for hours every day. They endlessly debate their different approaches to the music, often argue, and try out each other’s ideas even if they don’t think they are very good. Every time they play they try to do something new, which may help explain why they have been so successful. Anyone who has ever watched a good string quartet in concert will be familiar with the subtly effective way the players communicate—here a raised eyebrow, there a glance or a nearly imperceptible nod. It is almost as though they were a single instrument, not four working in harmony. And at its best, the experience of playing in a quartet can be sublime. In a performance of Beethoven’s quartet in A minor, Mr Dusinberre explains: “We were taken far out of ourselves, liberated from the confines of individual personalities as we surrendered to the music, a blissful state.” An achievement that makes all the grind worthwhile. 
