They’ve had enough of patriarchs and patronisingHomer, a father of Latin literature Beyond Greek: The Beginnings of Latin Literature. By Denis Feeney. Harvard University Press; 377 pages; $35 and £25. IN RECENT years there has been a revival of interest in the classics. Still, things are not what they were. In the 1930s Latin might consume almost half of a 12-year-old boy’s lessons at a British private school. Today, university classics courses accept students with little Latin and no Greek. It takes “a good classics undergraduate” to tell you what every child used to know, that the Minotaur was “the half-brother of Ariadne, and that he was killed by Theseus”. With over 120 pages of notes and references, Denis Feeney’s study of the beginnings of Latin literature is not designed to attract more first-year students. It is written by the professor of Latin at Princeton University for other academics. However, his bold theme and vigorous writing render “Beyond Greek” of interest to anyone intrigued by the history and literature of the classical world. With hindsight—since the Romans followed the Greeks, as even today’s schoolchildren know—it can seem obvious that the Latin works of Cicero, Virgil and Horace would succeed those of Homer, Sophocles and Aeschylus. Not so, says Mr Feeney. It was “one of the strangest…events in Mediterranean history” that the Romans began producing Greek-style tragedies, comedies and epics before developing a fresh vernacular literature of their own. After all, other powers such as Persia and Egypt, also in contact and conflict with Greece, did nothing of the sort. It probably started in 240BC when the Ludi Romani, the great annual festival, allowed a Greek play to be staged in Latin translation. The Romans were no strangers to other cultures. With their defeat of Carthage and emergence as the dominant power, they were confident and suffered no “cultural cringe”. But it was the translations, in a Latin metre, of Homer and Attic drama by Livius Andronicus, “not a natural or inevitable thing to happen”, that paved the way for later literature. They were helped by Greeks accommodating the rising power. Whereas translators today mostly convert texts into their first language, Livius was a Greek, a native speaker of the source language, and Naevius, who followed him, though born in Italy, had Greek as a childhood language. Only later did it become the norm for a Roman such as Cicero to translate into Latin. A colonising power tends to impose its language on a subject land. However, for several generations, the relative status of Greek and Latin was in flux: to Romans, “Greek” was both the vernacular of slaves and the classical Attic standard of revered literature. But by the time Ennius, considered the father of Latin poetry, died in 169BC, Latin literature “had achieved escape velocity”. Self-assured Roman elites had become happily bilingual and biliterate, and in time this helped them rule a widespread and polyglot empire. Mr Feeney contrasts the Romans with the Etruscans and the Carthaginians, neither of whom appear to have possessed a literature; and he provides interesting comparisons, for example with Japan’s borrowing of Chinese characters, first to write in Chinese and only later adapted to write Japanese. What was astonishing about Ennius’s “Annales” is that he superimposed Roman history upon that of the Greeks, “in a Homeric epic written in a language that was not Homer’s”. By now the growth of Latin literature was as certain as the expansion of Roman power.Their Promised Land: My Grandparents in Love and War. By Ian Buruma. Penguin Press; 320 pages; $26.95. To be published in Britain by Atlantic Books in March; £18.99. IAN BURUMA begins his biography of his grandparents Win and Bernard with a recollection of picture-book Christmases in the English countryside. As a child he, his parents and various aunts and uncles would descend upon their Berkshire vicarage to indulge in “a day-long feast of Edwardian gluttony”. Later the reader is told that Mr Buruma’s grandparents, and almost everyone else present, were Jewish. This tension between an Englishness embraced with an immigrant’s touching fervour, but also with the immigrant’s anxiety, is at the heart of this affectionate, well-told memoir. It is a tension most acutely felt at moments of crisis, when dual loyalties can be hard to maintain. At the end of the first world war, Win wrote to her future fiancé how pleased she was that “the two countries to which we both owe all that we have, are no longer enemies.” A distinguished historian, Mr Buruma approaches his subject with the loving eye of a grandchild and an awareness of the larger forces that shaped their lives. His sensitive portrayal of the immigrant’s divided loyalties and divided identity is timely in light of Europe’s current struggle with colliding national, religious and ethnic identities. While the Schlesingers’ story does not directly parallel today’s refugee crisis, it does shed light on the fault-lines that remain even in the most successful of cultural mergings. As Mr Buruma puts it, “a Jew in a society of mostly Gentiles, a Muslim in Europe, a black in a predominantly white country, or a homosexual, especially in places where love of your own sex is unaccepted, is forced to consider his or her place more deeply, to make up his or her own story.” The ability of these Jews to thrive in their adopted land represents something of a storybook ideal. Grandpa Bernard was the rugby-playing, Cambridge-educated son of a prosperous London stockbroker who had emigrated from Germany. Despite battles with persistent antiSemitism—described euphemistically in letters as “the old, old story”—Bernard became a successful doctor, taking time off from a busy career to serve king and country in two world wars. After marrying his childhood sweetheart, Winifred Regensburg—from an almost identical background—the two embarked on a long, happy life together, filled with more joy than loss, united in love of family and country. Win spells out her creed in a letter written to Bernard in 1940 while he was serving in the Norway campaign. “Next to you,” she declared, “I love England more than anything else in the world.” For all their fervent Britishness, they admirably refused to deny their heritage, often at great personal cost. Marking Yom Kippur, Judaism’s holiest day, Bernard told Win, “is only a matter of policy on my part in which ‘I tell the world’, as the Yank would say, that I am by birth a Jew, a Jew still and proud of it too.” He maintained this stance even in the face of prejudice that shut him out of many of London’s best hospitals. And in 1938, shortly after Kristallnacht, they rescued 12 German-Jewish children, whom Win cared for while Bernard went off to war. “Their Promised Land” is about love and loyalty, to family and to country, even when that country fails to reward that devotion as fully as it should. As Mr Buruma concludes, “For many Jews, Israel is the ultimate safe haven…This was not true for Bernard and Win…England was their safe haven, England and the Family.”When Breath Becomes Air. By Paul Kalanithi. Random House; 238 pages; $25. Bodley Head; £12.99. MANY people avoid discussing death. Doctors face it daily, reading scans blotted by tumours the way others scour market data. But years of training cannot dull the pang when, glancing at a scan and seeing a patient’s dim chances, those prospects happen to be his own. Paul Kalanithi died at 37. He had spent years training to be a neurosurgeon; his doctor first ascribed his sharp pains and dwindling frame to the demands of residency. But instead it was cancer, which had spread from his lungs to his spine and liver. Faced with such news, Kalanithi said, a person’s understanding of time changes. In his last months of life he chose to become a father. He also chose to write. His essays were published by Stanford University, where he worked, and by the New York Times. “When Breath Becomes Air” is a deeper exploration of the themes he raised, less a memoir than a reflection on life and purpose. It is an unusual little book, written by an unusual man. Kalanithi was a doctor by training and a philosopher by temperament, the type of person who, inspired by Aldous Huxley, used his university-admissions essay to argue that happiness was not the point of life. As a 20-year-old camp counsellor, he read a book called “Death and Philosophy” while using his inert body in a children’s game. At university he studied literature, “the richest material for moral reflection”, and human biology, for laying out “the most elegant rules of the brain”. This was a person obsessed by the way people find meaning. Kalanithi writes about the small events that are the meat of human experience: his wanderings through the Arizona desert as a boy, his joy at reading Thoreau and Camus, conversations with his wife and the strange sense of normality felt while dissecting a cadaver. At work he faced not intimations of mortality but the constant reality of it. He describes his mild shame when, having abandoned an ice-cream sandwich to treat a dying patient, unsuccessfully, he gingerly reclaims the melting dessert. He writes about what science can explain and “its inability to grasp the most central aspects of human life: hope, fear, love, hate, beauty, envy, honour, weakness, striving, suffering, virtue”. Most interestingly, he writes about language, about the parts of the brain that control it and its centrality to what makes us human. This is an urgent missive, the power of words revered by a man whose words were leaving him. He describes the birth of his daughter movingly—frail, he lay swaddled as his wife laboured beside him—and the soul-filling love for his new baby. This vital book is dedicated to her.IN 1968 the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London held an exhibition called “Cybernetic Serendipity”, Britain’s first show exploring connections between art and new technology. It was hugely popular and in hindsight, well timed. It coincided with two crucial developments in the relationship between art and technology: the pop-art movement, which was demolishing boundaries between high art and everyday life, and ARPANET, the computer-to-computer network which would become the internet. The internet has continued to erode established notions of what qualifies as art, and who can claim to be an artist. New categories flourish: net.art, new media art, the New Aesthetic, internet art, post-internet art. Online-only sales and exhibitions are increasingly common, as is art existing solely in digital form, bought and sold through websites such as Electric Objects (on a mission “to put digital art on a wall in every home”). Successful careers and expensive collections are built using social media, such as Instagram, the image- and video-sharing app that has users posting 80m photographs a day. “Electronic Superhighway (2016-1966)”, a new show at the Whitechapel Gallery in London, looks at how artists have responded to technology and change. The exhibition, which takes its name from a phrase coined in 1974 by Nam June Paik, a video artist, to describe the potential of telecommunication systems, is arranged in reverse chronological order. This calls particular attention to how quickly technologies become obsolete, and how art tied to those forms ages with it. The first room, which looks at the period from 2000 to 2016, is a cacophony of art made using the technologies and visual language of social media, gaming, 3D printing, computer-generated imaging, browser interfaces and smartphones. In subsequent rooms the technology becomes, like the bulky wall of analogue TV monitors that comprise Paik’s “Internet Dream” (1994), nostalgic for older visitors, and a mere historical curiosity for younger ones. Artists working with technology today are acutely aware that their work is ageing. To reflect—or deflect—the inevitable outdating of their material, some, such as Cory Arcangel or Petra Cortright, use low-tech graphics, outmoded software and retro hardware as an ironic aesthetic. Others take the internet’s visual vocabulary to extremes. They include Ryan Trecartin, who populates video and installation work with hyper-real, extravagantly costumed characters; or Camille Henrot, whose film “Grosse Fatigue” layers video clips, photographs and internet screen-grabs over one another as proliferating browser windows. Harun Farocki, a German film-maker who made “Parallel I-IV” just before he died in 2014, predicted of online culture that “Reality will soon cease to be the standard by which to judge the imperfect image. Instead, the virtual image will become the standard by which to measure the imperfections of reality.” Amalia Ulman recently provided a literal illustration of this in a social-media performance piece called “Excellences & Perfections”, using her Instagram and Facebook profiles to create a fake approval-seeking persona, and to stage her body having hoax plastic surgery. Douglas Coupland’s portraits (of which one is shown above) respond to the automatic face-recognition technology used by security services and Facebook. Geometric shapes in primary colours over their features highlight how, to a computer, a face is just a series of abstractable properties. “Every large online corporation (Facebook, Twitter, Amazon, eBay) is optimising you,” Jonas Lund, an artist, has said. “So why shouldn’t an artist also use the same techniques?” His work incorporates analysis of viewer behaviour itself. “VIP (Viewer Improved Painting) 2014” contains an algorithm that creates a fluctuating, abstract composition based on where the viewer looks. In effect handing over the creative prerogative, Mr Lund sardonically gives the same impression as Instagram seeks to give: everyone is an artist. Indeed, it is a problem that plagues the Whitechapel show: it is often difficult to find any sense of individual identities or even real human feeling. Breaking down barriers between technology and art can raise technology to the level of art, but it also risks working the other way round, reducing art to the banality of an algorithm.THE compass did not belong to him. But when he felt it in his trouser pocket—and with every stride of his skis over the Antarctic ice, he felt it—it powered him on. When the light was flat, crevasses lurking and nothing before him but “white darkness”, he remained aware of it, his silent companion. If team morale was low in the tent in the evenings, with socks drying at head-height and the winds hurling outside, he would pass it round. It was not much bigger than an old penny, but alive, spinning and jittering, as excited as he was to be so close to the South Pole. For it had been there before, a century earlier. Inside the lid the owner had scratched his initials: EHS, for Ernest Henry Shackleton. On his three expeditions to Antarctica, in 2008-09, 2011-12 and 2015-16, Henry Worsley went equipped with GPS, video cameras, satellite phones, solar panels, energy bars. No item was more important than the compass. It accompanied him physically only on his first trip, a centenary recreation of Shackleton’s march towards the Pole in 1908-09 which, at 88.23ºS, he had been forced to abandon for weakness and lack of food. On that journey Colonel Worsley took the compass into Shackleton’s hut, from which the trek had started, placing it back among the blankets, boots and golden-syrup tins all perfectly preserved by the dry polar air; and he later also placed it ceremonially at the South Pole, completing what Shackleton had always hoped to do. Yet there was a Shackleton compass in his head in any case. He collected anything to do with him: books, autographs, cigarette cards. At Grytviken whaling station, in South Georgia, he slept beside his grave. His family gamely encouraged him, accepting that the white continent held him fast. Other loves, such as cricket, paled beside it; even his unusual liking for sewing, which he taught to inmates of Wandsworth prison, seemed part-inspired by the “ditty bags” of needles, buttons and thread that were vital gear on polar expeditions. Stirrup of patience It was easy to pinpoint when the obsession had started: at prep school, in the library, as he read of the great explorers and stared, with amazement, at Frank Hurley’s photographs of Shackleton’s ship Endurance listing, like the ghost ship in “The Ancient Mariner”, among towering pack-ice in the Weddell Sea. That third attempt on the Pole had been abandoned, in 1916, almost before it had begun; a distant relative, Frank Worsley, had been the ship’s captain. There lay another reason for the haunting. For decades, though, he doubted that he was bold enough for the Antarctic. How could he be as decisive as Shackleton, as intrepid and optimistic? Could he, to quote his hero, “Put footstep of courage into stirrup of patience”? Throughout his long and distinguished army career, including commands in Bosnia, “special duties” in Northern Ireland and tours with the SAS in Afghanistan, he would keep comparing himself. Trapped in a café by a violent mob in Bosnia, he psyched himself up for a breakout by asking “What would Shacks do?” Meeting, unarmed, with tribal elders in Helmand to lay the trail for the British army in 2005, he would start by making them laugh at his lamentable Pushtu; Shacks had always believed in the power of laughter. In Afghanistan, camping out in wadis in desert camouflage, he was reading “The Heart of the Antarctic”. As an army officer, he was deeply impressed by Shackleton’s leading of his men. Nothing, even reaching the Pole, had meant more to him than their welfare; in return, they had trusted “the Boss” completely. It was in Shackleton’s footsteps that “General” Worsley, as his teams called him, insisted on regular hot meals on polar treks and berated himself, as well as them, for idle slips. And the same loyalty to comrades impelled him on his third journey, starting last November, to raise money for “my wounded mates”: the soldiers who had not, like him, returned whole from active duty. That journey he made alone, intending to be the first to pull a 148kg sledge for 1,100 miles right across the continent, unaccompanied and unassisted, in honour of Shackleton’s abortive bid a century before. He did not mind being solitary. On his two previous expeditions, both heading for the Pole, he had made a point of wandering off each evening to commune with the land and with ghosts. For he did see ghosts, in that extraordinary, mesmerising panorama of blue ice and white peaks: a pair of snow petrels, which he thought might be Shackleton and Scott, and a solar parhelion that might, perhaps, contain their safeguarding spirits. He imagined his hero murmuring advice beside him. The Antarctic, though, turned on him as fiercely as it had ever turned on them. Whiteouts blinded him. Storms kept him pinned in his tent. The sheer scale of the challenge began to daunt him. Day by day, his audio diary for his website stayed chirpy; but the selfies showed a face increasingly exhausted. Eventually, like Shackleton with his “astonishing decision” at 88.23ºS, he had to admit he had “shot his bolt” and, 30 miles from success, could not go on. Unlike his hero, he left it too late, and died in a Chilean hospital. In a whiteout, he radioed on Day 24, “one’s head is always bent downwards in reverence to the compass.” It might have been his epitaph. In by far the largest foreign takeover bid by a Chinese company to date, ChemChina offered $43 billion to buy Syngenta, which is based in Switzerland and is one of the world’s biggest providers of agricultural chemicals and seeds. It is the second big acquisition in the chemical industry in recent months, after the merger announcement of Dow Chemical and DuPont. Syngenta’s board recommended shareholders accept the bid from ChemChina, which is state-controlled. The deal will be scrutinised by antitrust regulators in several countries, especially America, which accounts for a quarter of Syngenta’s sales. See article.  The decline in oil prices was reflected in a gloomy set of earnings from oil companies. Chevron reported its first quarterly loss since 2002. Exxon Mobil’s annual profit fell by half, to $16.2 billion; it is slashing capital spending by 25% this year. BP posted an annual headline loss of $5.2 billion, its worst ever. See article.  Positive negative The Bank of Japan cut its benchmark interest rate below zero, to -0.1%. Japan has joined the European Central Bank, Switzerland and others by implementing a negative rate, though its policy applies only to new reserves that banks place with the BoJ. Credit Suisse reported an annual pre-tax loss of SFr2.4 billion ($2.4 billion), its first since 2008, mostly because it booked a hefty write-down in the fourth quarter related to the restructuring of its business. Pre-tax profit at the Swiss bank’s investment-banking division was down by 90%. There was more management turmoil at Luxottica, an Italian maker of eyewear and owner of the Ray-Ban and Oakley brands, as its third chief executive in 18 months resigned. Leonardo Del Vecchio, the company’s 80-year-old founder, will again reassert control by taking the CEO’s job on an interim basis. Sumner Redstone stepped down as chairman of CBS, after months of pressure from investors worried about his ability to perform his duties at the American broadcaster. For years questions have been raised about the health of the 92-year-old mogul, whose position as chairman of Viacom, a big media group, has also come into question. Alphabet, the holding company that Google created last year, reported a bumper set of annual earnings. Revenue at its internet and Android businesses climbed to $74.5 billion, pushing operating profit up to $23.4 billion. Its Other Bets projects, such as self-driving cars and smart thermostats, made a $3.6 billion loss, but that was not as steep as had been feared. Alphabet’s share price rose, briefly nudging it past Apple to become the world’s most valuable listed company. See article.  The French finance minister, Michel Sapin, dismissed suggestions that he would reach a deal with Google over paying back taxes, saying that France “does not negotiate” over money it is owed. Critics contend that the agreement Google recently struck to pay £130m ($190m) in back taxes in Britain let it off the hook. Yahoo announced a strategic review of its core internet business, acknowledging that it might examine the option of selling the unit. Yahoo is to shed a further 15% of its workforce to cut costs. It reported a quarterly net loss of $4.4 billion, mostly because it wrote down the value of some of its assets, including Tumblr, a blogging site. Sharp, a struggling Japanese maker of electronics goods, was reportedly holding takeover talks with Foxconn, a Taiwanese firm that assembles the iPhone. Foxconn is one of two suitors to have emerged: a Japanese government-backed fund is also interested in Sharp, though its bid is lower. Once lauded for its fresh ingredients, Chipotle Mexican Grill, a fast-food chain, said the publicity from an outbreak of E.coli at some outlets had hit sales in the last quarter of 2015, contributing to a 44% drop in profit. This week federal health authorities in America declared that the E.coli scare appears to be over. Ferrari’s share price slid after it issued a disappointing earnings forecast. Despite a strong order book, profits at the Italian maker of luxury cars are projected to be only slightly higher than those it made last year. Ferrari’s share price has fallen by a third on the New York Stock Exchange since its IPO there last October. An announcement of a racy new convertible might turbocharge its share price. It’s good to be the king A venture capitalist who wrote an open letter online criticising the launch event for Tesla Motors’ Model X said his order for the car has been cancelled by Elon Musk, Tesla’s founder. Mr Musk tweeted that he was surprised at the fuss over “denying service to a super-rude customer”.More KAL's cartoons
