BARACK OBAMA is far from achieving his declared aim to “degrade and ultimately destroy” Islamic State (IS), the self-styled caliphate that straddles parts of Iraq and Syria. But at least it is being rolled back in some places. Ramadi in Iraq was retaken in December. Oil installations controlled by IS have been bombed, sapping the economic and the fighting power of the jihadists. In Libya, though, the picture is more alarming: the caliphate is building a sprawling new “province” on the southern shore of the Mediterranean, just a few hundred miles from Europe. This is the new front in the war against jihadism. Unchallenged by Western forces, and exploiting the absence of a functioning state as rival national governments in Tripoli and Tobruk bicker and skirmish, IS has taken control of the city of Sirte and controls roughly 180 miles (290km) of coastline. It already counts 5,000 or so fighters, threatens not just Libya’s duelling governments but also neighbours such as Tunisia, Algeria and Egypt. It has attacked Libyan oil terminals and ports, and raided towns ever closer to Tripoli. The expansion of IS could prompt another flood of refugees from Libya to Europe, with the obvious potential of terrorist infiltration. Libya has burned through most of its foreign reserves—perversely, oil exports are paying gunmen from both the Tripoli and Tobruk alliances—and one-sixth of its 6m people are suffering from malnutrition. This year Libya is predicted to have the world’s fastest-shrinking economy. It makes little sense to squeeze IS in one battlefield only to let it grow somewhere else. Belatedly, Italy, France and Britain—and, crucially, America, too—are drawing up plans for military action. If there is one lesson from the interventions of the past, it is the importance of securing a degree of political legitimacy and working with competent forces on the ground who can seize back territory from extremists and hold it. Western forces would, ideally, be invited in by a new unity government. But UN-led talks have dragged on for months, stymied by the refusal of the Islamist-influenced government in Tripoli to accept that it lost an election in June 2014 and to make peace with the winners of that poll, who fled to Tobruk. More recently they are being held up by the refusal of both parliaments to accept the UN’s latest proposal for a unity government. More intensive diplomacy is needed to push the two sides into a deal, using whatever leverage is available. As part of that process, the West will have to support the new Libya generously with money, as well as military backing, humanitarian relief and investment to get the oil flowing again. America, which has been negligently absent from Libya since the killing of its ambassador and three others in attacks in Benghazi in 2012, needs to apply its muscle, too. The sands of time Many in the West still prefer to wait for a political deal. But there are growing dangers in allowing IS to expand. The jihadists must be contained, lest they gain control of Libya’s oil facilities, or destroy them to hasten the break-up of the country by denying it its main source of revenue. The West could first help train and stiffen the mostly ineffective 27,000-strong Petroleum Facilities Guard. Second, it could declare no-drive zones around key facilities, and bomb IS units from the air if they get too close. Third, Western air forces could go after IS arms dumps and command-and-control centres, as they have done in Syria. This need not involve large numbers of Western troops, and it might even be possible to gain UN support. None of this will defeat IS but it would buy more time to reach a political deal. Ultimately, that still offers the best chance of shutting down the caliphate’s third front.BY CONTINENTAL and even recent British standards David Cameron has long had a Eurosceptic bent. In 2013 this outlook was combined with a growing anti-EU clamour in the Conservative Party, leading him to promise a grand “new settlement” that would put Britons’ Euro-cavils to rest. Three years later, on February 2nd, after an election victory and several months spent bustling about Europe, Mr Cameron sealed a draft offer with the European Council (see article). In a speech the next day he declared it a triumph. The press and Eurosceptic MPs, on the other hand, branded it a joke (“The great delusion!” bellowed one headline). Who is right? Both, to some extent. The deal, it is true, was more of a throat-clearing exercise than a roar of reinvention. Mr Cameron did not fulfil his ambition to overturn Europractice on immigration limits, treaty changes and repatriated powers. His “emergency brake” on migration is a graduated restriction of newcomers’ benefits; the “red card” that lets national parliaments block EU decisions will have little effect, because the threshold to do so is high. Yet the prime minister has won some valuable, if mostly symbolic, concessions to the British vision of a plural, open and liberal union. Pledges to cut bureaucracy, respect currencies other than the euro and let members opt out of “ever closer union” are airy but welcome. Non-euro-zone economies can assert their interests, thanks to a mechanism that delays an agreement if they fear being strong-armed by Europe’s core. At home the deal will not change any of the minds that are already made up. But it should help Mr Cameron sway a few undecided voters ahead of the in/out referendum (which is likely to take place on June 23rd if this deal clears the European Council later this month). The first, minor reason is that it makes the union work a smidgen better for Britain. The second, larger one is that the very process of renegotiating has neatly shown the force of the pro-Europeans’ arguments. In graphics: A guide to “Brexit” from the European Union It has exposed a series of anti-EU fallacies. A giant governmental audit that Mr Cameron claimed in 2013 would identify areas where powers needed to be repatriated found the balance broadly appropriate. And if, as Eurosceptic campaigners insist, the “emergency brake” will not reduce immigration, that is because EU nationals come to Britain to work, not scrounge. The brake is unlikely to be renewed in the future because Britain will struggle to show that its migrants constitute an “emergency” (far from it: they pay more into the state than they take out in services). Meanwhile the prime minister’s European peregrinations have given the lie to tabloid bluster about almighty Eurocrats. The shape of his deal has been hammered out in Europe’s capitals with the elected leaders of other governments—just like all the most important Eurodeals. A seat at the table This highlights the unattractive alternative, of leaving the EU. The trials of renegotiating Britain’s membership would pale in comparison with those of securing a favourable Brexit. At least now the EU and most of its members are on the prime minister’s side. An out vote would reverse their incentives: the harsher the terms of Britain’s flounce, the lower the odds of other countries following it out of the door. Being outside the club would exclude Britain, like Norway and Switzerland, from the continental perma-churn of alliance-building and deal-cutting that forges decisions. Only partly by design, the Eurosceptic Mr Cameron has thus vindicated what pro-Europeans have been saying for years: some of the popular hostility to Brussels is misplaced and, even where it is not, Britain sits at more tables, sells more stuff and talks more loudly thanks to its EU membership. Time to close the deal and take that conclusion to the country.LIKE many firms with roots in Hong Kong, HSBC has traditionally consulted a feng shui master on the design of its headquarters’ buildings. The bank’s dilemma today is more serious: in which country should its headquarters be? For the past year HSBC has debated moving its domicile, which in turn determines its tax base, lead regulator and lender of last resort. One option is to stay in Britain, with its bank-bashers, latent hostility towards the City of London and ambivalence about Europe. The alternative is to move back to vibrant-but-riskier Hong Kong, where HSBC was founded 151 years ago and was based until the 1990s. It is not an easy choice, but in the end pub grub and stability trump dim sum and political uncertainty. HSBC matters. Regulators judge it to be the world’s most important bank, alongside JPMorgan Chase. A tenth of global trade passes through its systems and it has deep links with Asia. (Simon Robertson, a director of the bank, is also on the board of The Economist Group.) Its record has blemishes—most notably, weak money-laundering controls in Mexico. But it has never been bailed out; indeed, it supplied liquidity to the financial system in 2008-09. It is organised in self-reliant silos, a structure regulators now say is best practice. For Britain, the departure of its best bank would be perverse (if only it could deport Royal Bank of Scotland instead). But HSBC is fed up with Blighty. A levy charged on its global balance-sheet cost 10% of last year’s profits; rules on ring-fencing its retail arm will cost $2 billion. Both are meant to protect Britain from global banks blowing up, but they duplicate other measures aimed at the same problem—silos, capital surcharges, “bail-in” bonds and liquidity buffers. Britain says it will lower the levy. But over time Asia, which accounts for 60% of the bank’s profits, will grow faster than Britain, and so HSBC will too. The tension between HSBC’s ambitions and Britain’s suspicion of giant banks is not going away. Hong Kong is keen for the bank’s return, which would boost confidence after a torrid time for Chinese markets. HSBC’s biggest subsidiary is already based in the territory and supervised by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA), its impressive regulator. By moving, HSBC would not ease its tax bill or capital levels by much. But it would avoid the levy, butt heads with Western regulators less and be closer to its biggest markets. From a dirty old river to a fragrant harbour Time to pack the bags? One objection is that HSBC is already thriving in greater China: it does not need to be domiciled there to succeed. Nor would moving to Hong Kong insulate HSBC from a British exit from the European Union (see article). But the biggest worry is that Hong Kong is small and a territory, not a country. The HKMA has $360 billion of foreign reserves but it lacks the crisis toolkit of a central bank. It cannot print an infinite amount of money without undermining its currency peg and it lacks a credit line from America’s Federal Reserve to supply it with dollars, HSBC’s operating currency. With a balance-sheet nine times bigger than Hong Kong’s GDP, HSBC’s ultimate backstop would be mainland China’s government, whose approach to finance is as transparent as Victoria Harbour. That might deter some customers. It would also annoy America, which might not be keen on HSBC playing a big role in the dollar-clearing system, a privilege that is vital for HSBC’s business. For an Asia-centric bank to be based in London is an anomaly. But, for now, one worth keeping.SYRIA’S five-year civil war has killed hundreds of thousands of people and displaced millions more. It has sucked regional powers into a geopolitical vortex. It has inspired terrorists and fanatics, and exported violence to a historically volatile region. It has also given rise to Europe’s worst refugee crisis in recent times. The numbers are, in themselves, not overwhelming: the European Union, with a population of 500m, received 1m illegal migrants last year, slightly fewer than the number of Syrian refugees accepted by Lebanon, which has only 5m people. But the chaos of the flows and the determination of migrants to reach a handful of wealthy countries has set governments against each other and opened cracks in Europe’s piecemeal approach to asylum. No country can resolve the problem alone. But most have responded by unilaterally closing borders and tightening asylum rules, leaving migrants to endure dangerous journeys at the hands of criminal smuggling networks—which elude every attempt at disruption. An ever-growing number of border controls undermines the EU’s supposedly border-free Schengen area, hampering trade, commuting and tourism (see article). Political pressure at home may yet force Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, to close her country’s doors, setting off border closures across the continent. Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, says the end of Schengen could cause the collapse of the euro and even the single market, one of the EU’s outstanding achievements. That is an exaggeration, but it would threaten European co-operation in other areas and knock back a club already beset by crises. More broadly, the migrant crisis is fuelling the rise of right-wing populist parties across Europe. Anti-immigrant violence is growing in countries that have shouldered the largest burden: this week a German police chief spoke of a “pogrom atmosphere” after a spate of attacks on asylum centres. The Paris killings and sexual assaults by asylum-seekers in Cologne have added terrorism and cultural neuralgia to a toxic brew. Xenophobic nationalism has already set parts of eastern Europe against Germany. The resentments that it creates are a threat to the EU, too. While Europeans bicker, the migrant situation remains grave. The death rate in the Aegean Sea has soared in wintry conditions: 365 migrants crossing from Turkey to Greece died or went missing last month (see chart 1). Registered daily arrivals in the Greek islands fell to just under 2,000 in January compared with almost 7,000 last October. But Germany is taking in 3,000 migrants a day, suggesting that the true number reaching Europe is somewhat higher. When spring arrives the flows will surely return to their autumn peaks. Most proposed solutions look unfeasible, repugnant or pointless. A settlement in Syria is more remote than ever. This week the latest attempt to start peace talks were suspended without making progress. Libya, the gateway to Italy, has no functioning government. Inside Europe, the fences built by politicians like Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, merely displace the problem. Yet EU governments are bound by law to provide refuge to those fleeing war. They cannot push back migrant-laden boats from Greece (as a Belgian politician reportedly suggested). Ejecting Greece from Schengen, as some urge, would deter nobody, for it shares no land borders with other Schengen countries. Plans cooked up in Brussels, meanwhile, are too ambitious, leaving governments to squabble while the migrants pour in. A quota scheme to relocate asylum-seekers across Europe has succeeded only in reviving an east-west split in the EU. Mutual recognition of positive asylum decisions across the EU, which would give refugees the freedom of movement that ordinary citizens enjoy, is years away. Instead, the priority must be to restore a sense of order to the migrant flows. That will help overburdened countries like Germany plan for arrivals and reassure worried citizens who see no end in sight. Europe also needs to get much better at distinguishing refugees with a genuine claim for international protection from migrants fleeing hardship, a growing number of whom have started to join the highway to Europe. These immediate measures should buy time for Europeans to provide protection for those who need it, to work out how to share the asylum burden more equitably and ultimately to accept more refugees in an orderly fashion. But for that to happen, all the pieces in the puzzle need to fall into place, and in the right order. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers The work begins in Turkey, partly because it hosts 2.7m refugees, most of them Syrian, and partly because it has become a gathering ground for refugees and migrants from elsewhere. There are two parts to the European strategy. The first is a deal hastily assembled last year that rewards Turkey for reducing the migrant flows—including a pledge of €3 billion ($3.3 billion) to help refugees and visa-free access to the EU for Turks in exchange for the implementation of a plan to take back migrants. The grand bargains envisaged in the deal are probably too ambitious in the limited time Europe has; all EU governments will have to approve the visa deal, which seems unlikely. The EU dithered before finding the cash this week—and then it is only a fraction of what is needed. The agreement has had some effect: Turkish police targeting smugglers have made 3,700 arrests. But the number of migrants landing on Greek shores has not fallen by as much as the Europeans had hoped. Other elements of the deal might prove more fruitful. Turkey recently introduced a limited work-permit scheme for Syrian refugees. Freeing tens of thousands of them from the grip of the country’s vast grey economy could help keep some in place. It has also slashed the number of Syrians arriving from Jordan and Lebanon, many of whom were travelling onwards to Europe, by imposing visa requirements. Unburdening the poor Much more must be done to ensure that the burden on those countries does not become intolerable. This is the second part of Europe’s approach. Together, Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon host over 5m refugees, including 2m children. Most are poor. Under huge strain, governments are now doing their best to keep refugees out. Some 20,000 Syrians languish in the desert next to Jordan, which refuses to let most in. Lebanon has closed its borders. Conditions inside these countries are bad and getting worse, making the hazardous journey to Europe seem more appealing. Half the Syrians in Jordan say they want to leave. Up to 150,000 Syrians sailed from Lebanon to Turkey last summer, seeking to join the migrant trail to Europe. A donors’ conference in London on February 4th, as we went to press, aimed to secure nearly $9 billion of funding for the region. Britain this week pledged £1.2 billion ($1.75 billion) of new money. Cash is needed for schools and overburdened infrastructure, such as Lebanon’s strained water supply. One idea is for donors to press Jordan and Lebanon to ease restrictions on refugees seeking jobs. European countries can help by ensuring that markets are open. If refugees have reasons to stay, fewer will risk the trek to Europe. Stemming the flow across the Aegean saves lives and dents the smugglers’ profits. But the clamour to reach Europe will continue: routes are too well established, smuggling networks too strong and demand too robust. Perhaps two-thirds of Syrians reaching Greece are fleeing the country directly rather than upping sticks from Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon. Large numbers will therefore continue to land in Greece. In response the EU has tried to establish “hotspots” on the five islands where most migrants land. But only one of these processing and registration centres, on Lesbos, is fully functional. (Of the six in Italy, one is reportedly working well.) Here, migrants are screened, fingerprinted and interviewed. Interpreters test the claims of self-identified Syrians; many other Arabs claim to come from Syria to improve their chances of getting asylum. Identity cards are checked for fraud under ultraviolet lights. At the end, confirmed north Africans are taken to Athens, from where they are supposed to lodge an asylum claim or face deportation. Most others are given a document that allows them to move on to the Greek mainland independently. Most do so immediately. On other Greek islands locals have held up the establishment of hotspots, fearing the impact on tourism. The army is now responsible for opening the remaining four; officials say all will be operational by mid-March. But a spring surge could still overwhelm the hotspots, and there is plenty of anecdotal evidence of migrants evading registration or gaming the system. A bigger problem is that registering immigrants will not stop them moving on if they have no fear of being sent back. Since November officials on Greek-Macedonian border have only let through Syrians, Iraqis and Afghans, who have good grounds for asylum (see chart 2). Other countries on the route are starting to do the same. The idea is that word of stricter controls will spread, deterring some from making the journey in the first place. Sub-Saharan Africans, once a common sight in the Serbian border town of Presevo, are almost entirely gone, bar the odd Somali. North Africans are trying to get across, but must use smugglers or act alone, traipsing through woods or ripping up fences. Some are robbed or beaten. Many freely admit that they are coming to Europe for a better life. Making borders harder to cross is one thing. But Germany and the European Commission are considering sealing Macedonia’s border with Greece altogether. Nikola Poposki, Macedonia’s foreign minister, says that is not feasible, and that the priority is clamping down on illegal routes. But border closures farther up the line would leave Macedonia with no choice, if it wanted to avoid a vast build-up of migrants on its own soil. Sealing the border to asylum-seekers could create huge bottlenecks in Greece. The EU’s relocation scheme, which aims to move 66,400 asylum-seekers from Greece (and 39,600 from Italy), is supposed to tackle this problem. For Brussels bureaucrats the plan holds much promise: it turns unpredictable flows of asylum-seekers into orderly distribution and shares the burden equitably across Europe. “It is not for migrants or refugees to choose where to go,” says Dimitris Avramopoulos, the EU’s migration commissioner. But fewer than 500 asylum-seekers have been moved so far. EU countries have refused to play their part, smothering the process in red tape. The migrants who agree to move are often woefully ill-informed. One group of Eritreans, preparing to leave Rome for Sweden, remarked to journalists that they were looking forward to leaving Italy’s cold weather behind. The EU is sticking to its guns, but even the most optimistic projection will not cope with the short-term build-up in Greece should its northern border close. The government expects to have 40,000 reception places ready in a few months, but may need many more. The UNHCR and EU governments are preparing support. In exchange for Greek co-operation some in Berlin and Brussels have murmured about treating Greece’s vast public-debt pile more leniently when the issue comes up later this year. If there is an iron law of illegal migration, it is that border closures shift routes—even fewer people take them. Anticipating a sealing of Greece’s northern border, criminals in neighbouring Albania are sniffing out smuggling opportunities. Officials have observed more flows through Bosnia via Serbia. Italy fears the re-emergence of the central Mediterranean route, which is more dangerous than the Aegean crossing. More could cross into Norway or Finland via Russia. It is harder than ever to predict what sort of diversion will emerge, says Elizabeth Collett of the Migration Policy Institute Europe, a think-tank. Europe’s hardening mood appears to be inspiring many to move now, before it is too late. “You can feel the fear,” says a UNICEF worker on the Macedonian border. “They want to get through as fast as possible.” It is only that rapid flow that stopped Greece from collapsing under the weight of migrants last year. No one can be sure that this year will be better. “We may be talking about millions of people,” says a Greek official. “No matter what contingency we put in place, it will overtake us.” Too hot to handle? One way to alleviate Greece’s burden would be to hasten the return of some migrants to Turkey from Greece. “Hot returns” of migrants whose asylum bids fail, or who choose not to lodge one, are controversial. But an existing deal between Greece and Turkey to send back asylum-seekers could work if Greece declares Turkey a safe place for third-country nationals and Turkey upgrades its rules to allow them to apply for full asylum (currently only Europeans are eligible). In theory returns could take place in days; in practice it is often more complicated. The aim should be to convince nationals with little chance of protection, such as Moroccans or Pakistanis, that there is no prospect of moving on if they reach Greece. Sources say Turkey may be willing to take such people back, though not the far larger numbers of Syrians or Afghans. But deporting failed asylum-seekers once they have reached their chosen destination is hard. Some disappear; others exploit generous legal systems. In Germany three-quarters obtain temporary permission to stay after their asylum bids fail, often on dubious grounds like the absence of a passport or self-diagnosed post-traumatic stress disorder. Sweden’s recent announcement that 80,000 of its asylum-seekers were probably eligible for deportation is more a cry of despair than a plan for action. Countries are often reluctant to accept the return of their nationals, not least because they can be a useful source of remittances. No wonder just 40% of failed asylum-seekers across the EU are returned. So what will work? Not simply dumping people on planes, as Greece learned in December when most of the 39 Pakistanis it returned home were sent straight back by the authorities in Islamabad on spurious administrative grounds. Similarly, there has been a misguided focus on the bureaucratic fictions of readmission agreements cooked up by the EU with sending countries. Instead European governments must build partnerships with their developing-world counterparts that go far beyond migration policy. The success stories in Europe involve bilateral relationships with long and deep histories: Britain and Pakistan, Spain and Morocco, Italy and Tunisia. INTERACTIVE: Explore border fences between countries around the world The focus should thus be political, not legal. The Germans are thinking about how trade and aid may be used as diplomatic leverage and a source of jobs, particularly with countries that rely on remittances. Improved channels for legal labour migration would help. Governments might also club together to forge return deals with sending countries. The EU is working on a common list of “safe countries”, to which it is assumed most asylum-seekers can be returned. Last year Germany slashed claims from Kosovars and Albanians by placing their countries on its own such list. This week it did the same for Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. Let’s get resettling Rich countries should not rely on poor ones to shoulder as much of the refugee burden as they have. Once flows have started to fall, Europe could begin a much more ambitious attempt to resettle refugees directly from the region around Syria. A starting point might be 250,000 a year, with the bulk coming from Turkey. To reach this number countries may need to be less picky about who they take in. Some may want to work with Turkey directly, bypassing the UNHCR, which usually brokers resettlements. EU countries could join forces in identifying and screening candidates to save time and money. Reuniting divided families will be a priority. Countries such as Germany and Netherlands will have to be in the vanguard of resettlement; with luck, others will follow. The failed attempt to impose relocation by diktat from Brussels shows that quotas inspire only rancour. But some of the huge unused relocation numbers (from within Europe) can be shifted to the politically easier task of resettlement (from outside). Britain and France can do much better. A series of international refugee conferences this year, culminating with a summit in New York in September, will offer a chance to do more. European action might inspire rich countries like Canada and Australia to chip in. The Gulf states could add to their informal share of Syrians by formally resettling more. The presidential campaign may rule out any contributions from America before November, but after that, if there is international momentum, even a Republican president might help. The consequences of inaction look clear: tighter borders, more people-smuggling, misery for refugees. Crucially, if the numbers do not fall Germany may lose its appetite for a European solution and follow the unilateral course charted by others. Yet there is an astonishing lack of real urgency among Europe’s leaders. Only Mrs Merkel appears to think beyond the constraints of national politics. That may not change. But even self-interest demands a more pressing approach. Otherwise governments that value Schengen may find themselves locked out of it, and countries that thought themselves immune to migration may see their territory turned into refugee marching grounds. Failure to contain the crisis would be a terrible outcome for Europe as it battles to hold itself together. It would be worse still for the refugees it has a duty to care for.LONG lines of lorries once blotted the chocolate-box alpine landscape of the Brenner Pass, an important road link between southern and northern Europe. The Schengen agreement, which came into effect in 1995 and has now abolished border controls between 26 European countries, kept those lorries moving. But where trucks go, so do refugees. To stem the flow Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Norway and Sweden have temporarily reintroduced controls. Others have increased spot checks in border regions. Open borders ease the flow of exports as well as individuals. Every year people make 1.3 billion crossings of the EU’s internal borders along with 57m trucks carrying €2.8 trillion ($3.7 trillion) of goods. As well as speeding the passage of Greek olives and German dishwashers, borderless travel allows hotels in the east of Germany to have their sheets cleaned in Poland, where wages are lower, and workers in Italy to commute to Switzerland (also in Schengen though not in the EU), where wages are higher. Reintroducing controls such as checking passports and searching lorries is mostly an irritation, though the costs are mounting. A strategy unit of the French government estimates that in the short term border checks within Schengen would cost France €1 billion-2 billion a year by disrupting tourism, cross-border workers and trade. If Schengen collapses the economic consequences would be more serious, it says: curtailing the free passage of goods permanently would amount to a 3% tax on trade within Schengen. The overall effect of hampering cross-border activity would reduce output in the Schengen area by 0.8%, or €110 billion, over the next decade. Not only will money have to be found to patrol long-abandoned frontiers. Around 1.7m Europeans cross a border to get to work and in some regions as much as a third of the workforce makes this trip daily. Malmo in Sweden and Copenhagen, the Danish capital, have in effect become one big city. Border controls at the bridge that connects them add around 30 minutes each way. A nuisance could become a deterrent to cross-border employment, reducing job opportunities and the pool of labour employers can draw upon. INTERACTIVE: A guide to Europe’s migrant crisis, in numbers The greatest pain will be felt by exporters. Over a third of road-freight traffic in Schengen crosses a border. Delays are creeping up. Around Salzburg in Austria lorries now sit for up to three hours before getting into Germany. Strict EU rules dictate that such waiting times still count as hours behind the wheel for drivers, who are obliged to rest when they hit an upper limit. If waiting becomes a permanent feature DSLV, a German association of shippers, puts the direct costs at €3 billion a year for the EU as a whole, based on a one-hour delay for every lorry. Businesses likely to suffer most include those with perishable goods, such as fruit, vegetables and fish. Others will pass on costs. Suppliers will need to store extra inventory across the continent to ensure customers get deliveries on time. The German chamber of commerce says that once indirect costs, such as renting storage and the impact on transit-trade with non-EU countries, are taken into account the extra costs for Germany alone could run to €10 billion per year. Calculations of potential costs depend on what happens if Schengen disappears: will spot-checks merely increase or will countries reintroduce border posts with barriers and barbed wire? Many firms, particularly those used to sending goods to non-Schengen countries such as Britain, may adapt swiftly to stricter border checks. Far worse than the direct costs to trade, says Guntram Wolff from Bruegel, a Brussels-based think-tank, would be the signal that European integration can go into reverse.OF THE top two Republicans in Iowa, one is a universally recognisable type. Short on policy, long on ego and bombast, promising to redeem a nation he disparages through the force of his will, Donald Trump’s strongman shtick is familiar from Buenos Aires to Rome, inflected though it is by reality TV and the property business. The other, Ted Cruz, champion of the caucuses, is the scion of a particular version of America and of a peculiar era in its history; a politician who repels or baffles many of his compatriots, even as others rally to his godly standard. Superficially the senator from Texas is a classic overachiever, whose ability to surmount Himalayan obstacles—such as winning that office in his first-ever political race—bespeaks and fuels an adamantine self-confidence; the sort whose warp-speed ascent is powered by strenuous calculation and fearsome intelligence. Don Willett, a judge and long-term acquaintance, describes Mr Cruz as a “freakishly gifted” lawyer; watching him argue at the Supreme Court, during his stint as Texas’s solicitor-general, was “like watching Michael Jackson unveil the moonwalk.” Like many modern politicians, if not Mr Trump, he is uncannily disciplined. On the trail he tells the same jokes, accompanied by the same gestures and self-satisfied chuckles, reproducing chunks of his book, “A Time for Truth”, verbatim. In good lawyerly fashion, he stretches the bounds of taste and honesty rather than blatantly violating them. Yet for all these formulaic talents, in his outlook and appeal Mr Cruz is an idiosyncratic product of the convulsions that followed the financial crisis and Barack Obama’s election, and of his upbringing. Like many of his core beliefs, his evangelical faith—“To God be the glory”, began his victory speech in Iowa—came from his father Rafael, a Cuban refugee who fled to Texas, turned to drink, then found God and is now a zealous preacher. By all accounts, Mr Cruz’s Christianity is profound and sincere: Chip Roy, formerly his chief of staff, recalls visiting his condo to pick up his suit and spying a Bible and other devotional texts at his bedside. It is audible in his cadences and susurrations, his frequent references to scripture, disgust at the Supreme Court’s defilements, and injunctions to prayer: “Father God, please”, he asks supporters to murmur, “continue this spirit of revival, awaken the body of Christ.” In Iowa, some were plainly impressed. “He’s a man of faith,” purred a cheering woman at a restaurant that poked from the snow of Manchester into the milky sky. Mr Cruz would be the most insistently religious Republican nominee in decades. He would also be the most ardently devoted to the constitution, a fervour itself influenced by his creed—for him, as for the Founding Fathers, Americans’ rights are bestowed by God—and by his background. Before he fled Cuba, Rafael Cruz was tortured, which helps to explain why, for his son, freedom is always imperilled and government constantly on the verge of despotism. To hear him tell it, Obamacare is not just regrettable but tyrannical; gun controls are the high road to the gulag. That vigilance over liberty is widespread in Texas, where he spent most of his childhood (he was born in Canada, which Mr Trump says might disqualify him). He was among a group of teenagers who learned a mnemonic version of the constitution and regurgitated it at clubby lunches. Daniel Hodge, a former colleague and now the governor’s chief of staff, reckons Mr Cruz is a Texan “from his head to his boots”. His lucky pair are made of ostrich skin.  Defying Reagan Calling him a demagogue overlooks the authenticity of these convictions. Better to say that his beliefs, skilfully angled and promoted, have fortuitously chimed with the evolving mood of conservative voters, especially with the emergence of the Tea Party and the backlash against Mr Obama’s agenda and the bail-outs that followed the crash. The fights Mr Cruz picked as solicitor-general—for religious liberty, the death penalty and states’ rights, against abortion and gun control—both reflected his philosophy and set up his long-shot campaign for the Senate. (He is said to have relaxed by playing several chess games at once.) His hardline antics in Washington—most strikingly, his flamboyant effort to “defund” Obamacare, which helped to bring about a partial shutdown of the government in 2013—both served his instincts and laid the ground for a presidential run. Critics say the Obamacare stunt tarnished the Republican brand, jeopardised America’s economy, and had just one beneficiary: Mr Cruz. Yet distancing himself from his fellow Republicans is as central to his pitch as excoriating Hillary Clinton. In his book Mr Cruz quotes Ronald Reagan’s 11th commandment: “Thou shalt not speak ill of another Republican.” Despite Reagan’s status in his personal pantheon, alongside God and the constitution, he does not observe it. In 2013 he likened those who eschewed his kamikaze tactics to appeasers of Nazism; now, on the stump, he lambasts mainstream Republicans as corrupt and pusillanimous. This push to portray himself as the lone ranger of true conservatism seems to be working. “Talk doesn’t do it for me,” said a man wearing an NRA jacket at Bogie’s Steak House in Albia, where, positioned beneath a stuffed deer, Mr Cruz made his usual, casually thuggish attack on the mainstream media: “You’ve got to look at what somebody’s done.” Not surprisingly, however, it has incurred a cost. Politicians often get on better with the public than with people they actually know; to label one ambitious—especially a 45-year-old junior senator running for president—is tautological. But the antipathy inspired by Mr Cruz transcends the routine gripes. It has followed him through the litany of elite institutions in which, for all his digs at the establishment, he has spent his adult life: from Princeton, to Harvard Law School, to a clerkship on the Supreme Court and his bumptious spell on the campaign for George W. Bush in 2000. (His wife, whom he met on the campaign, is a managing director at Goldman Sachs.) He went back to Texas, later to criticise Mr Bush’s bloated conservatism, only after being passed over for jobs in the administration he felt he deserved. He became an outsider, at least rhetorically, after flopping as an insider. As both Bob Dole and Mr Trump recently put it, “Nobody likes him.” Father, son and the ghost of holiness In fact that isn’t altogether fair. David Panton, his room-mate at both Princeton and Harvard, describes him as “a loyal friend” and “extremely polite, kind and respectful”. At least some of his former colleagues like as well as admire him, speaking fondly of his wit, impersonations of characters from “Scarface” and “The Princess Bride” and generosity to underlings. In Texas Mr Hodge remembers him as “the guy who came with his wife to my mother’s 60th birthday party”. But the damning judgment does seem to hold for one influential subset of Mr Cruz’s acquaintances: his Republican colleagues in the Senate. Not one has endorsed him. As he must, Mr Cruz strives to make a virtue of this unpopularity. His strategy rests on mobilising alienated conservatives, in particular the millions of white evangelical Christians who, his team believes, can swing elections when they are galvanised to vote. Conversely his appeal to moderates is limited. He has had little to say to or about the poor, beyond his perpetual gratitude that, when his father was washing dishes for 50 cents an hour, no one was sent by the government to help him. His flagship economic policy is a regressive flat-rate income tax of 10%. Black Americans, anyone concerned about climate change (which he denies) and non-Christians should look elsewhere. Ditto homosexuals: “This shall not stand,” Mr Cruz declares of gay marriage. That grandiloquent but fuzzy pledge exemplifies his gambit: making impossible vows to disoriented voters which are all, at bottom, a promise to reverse history and revive a fairy-tale idea of America. His game-plan may itself betray a form of cognitive dissonance—because, beyond Iowa and parts of the South, those elusive evangelical legions may not exist. If the bet comes off, though, the rest of the world is in for a period of abrasive unilateralism. Mr Cruz demonstrates little more interest in foreign alliances than he does in domestic ones; the only foreign leader he namechecks approvingly is Binyamin Netanyahu. He evinces an unholy relish for “carpet-bombing” Islamic State and making the desert glow. Indeed, the violence of his language might interest a psychoanalyst. He says he would “rip to shreds” the nuclear deal with Iran; after introducing his flat tax, he would abolish the IRS, along with numerous other agencies. His insurgent approach to government mostly involves destroying things. He denounces Mr Trump as a man others in Washington can do business with, and, compared with Mr Cruz, he may well be. One of the scriptural aphorisms Mr Cruz likes to cite is: “You shall know them by their fruits.” He deploys it to support the claim that he would conduct himself in the White House as he has in the Senate. His supporters believe that. “He’ll do what he says he’s going to do,” said a woman holding a baby and wearing a Cruz football shirt at a campaign event in Centerville. If so, the fruits of a Cruz presidency would be confrontation and rancour.The winner came third DONALD TRUMP, flanked by his thoroughbred offspring and wife, showed admirable qualities in Des Moines on February 1st. Acknowledging his defeat by Ted Cruz in the Iowa caucuses, which polls had suggested he would win, the Republican front-runner congratulated “Ted and all the incredible candidates”, thanked his activists, expressed his love for Iowans and said he was “honoured” with second place. He was gracious, touching even. But humility was not what the visibly deflated crowd wanted from Mr Trump. Understanding Iowa’s caucuses Boastfulness is his schtick. Just hours before the caucuses, he delighted a crowd in Cedar Rapids with a promise that, under his presidency, Americans would get so bored of winning they would beg him to lose for a change. No wonder his supporters were downcast at his loss to Mr Cruz, by 24% to 28%—and almost to Marco Rubio, whose 23% surpassed expectations. Mr Trump’s balloon has not popped. Iowa, where 60% of Republican voters are evangelical Christians, had always seemed an awkward fit for an irreligious divorcee. But he now has to win in New Hampshire on February 9th. Campaigning there this week, he was back to his old self in no time: he accused Mr Cruz of having stolen the caucuses and demanded a rerun. Mr Trump lost in Iowa because the contest was more normal than anticipated, as politics usually is. The Republican turnout was high; first-time voters represented 45% of the total and, as expected, many backed Mr Trump. But that effect was mitigated by a big turnout of evangelicals for Mr Cruz. His assiduous effort to get them out on an icy evening made Mr Trump’s campaign look dilettantish. On the Democratic side, similarly, Bernie Sanders, a leftist outsider, hoovered up support from 20-somethings. Yet Hillary Clinton’s superior organisation rallied enough middle-aged voters to foil him—just. Mrs Clinton was adjudged the winner by a handful of votes, which represented an indignity of sorts. Her rival is a dishevelled septuagenarian with, according to the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a hole of at least $3 trillion in his health-care plans. But given that Mrs Clinton has a poor record in Iowa and little prospect of winning in New Hampshire, it was still a good result for her. America’s primary agenda: our interactive 2016 election calendar Mr Rubio’s support came mainly from members of the “somewhat conservative” Republican mainstream. Many had previously vacillated between the first-term senator and several like-minded rivals—including Jeb Bush, who won only 3% of the vote. The establishment field is even more split in New Hampshire, between John Kasich and Chris Christie, governors of Ohio and New Jersey, as well as Mr Rubio and Mr Bush. But Mr Rubio is now the favourite to consolidate it and leave New Hampshire as the establishment’s man. If Mr Trump recovers, that augurs a protracted three-horse race—because Mr Cruz is unlikely to fizzle as previous Republican winners in Iowa often have. In New Hampshire he will go easier on the preaching, make the constitution his lodestar and hope for a top-three finish. That this is a realistic ambition also suggests the extent to which the contest remains far from normal. Anti-establishment sentiment is running high; Mr Cruz, Mr Trump and Ben Carson, who are all dedicated to stirring it, took over 60% of the vote in Iowa. So there will be more rabble-rousing, perhaps especially from Mr Cruz. Before Iowa, he had launched an appeal for establishment support, arguing that he alone could stop Mr Trump. The tycoon’s wobble and Mr Rubio’s good result make that seem less plausible. Increasingly, then, Mr Cruz will try to appeal to Mr Trump’s disaffected ranks; he will argue that he alone can foil the establishment.
