AN INTERESTING sideshow in Iowa on February 1st was the demise of Ben Carson’s campaign. In the state most susceptible to his Bible-infused right-wingery, the former neurosurgeon, who in October and November surged to a double-digit lead in Iowa and briefly led the Republican field, came fourth, with 9%. Polling in New Hampshire puts him in eighth place behind Carly Fiorina, a businesswoman with a patchy record and hypertense style of oratory. He says he is not quitting; he would save himself some bother if he did. Iowans did not underrate Dr Carson. His surge was fuelled by a remarkable life story—brought up by a semi-literate single mother, he was a medical pioneer—and his reputation as a high-achieving outsider. He fell after both attributes lost their sheen. He was revealed to have embellished parts of his biography: he claimed to have been offered a non-existent “full scholarship” to West Point. He meanwhile revealed himself to be confused by foreign policy, which mattered after a terrorist attack, inspired by Islamic State, in California. Dr Carson’s ignorance of the Middle East was so marked, someone suggested that he thought the Kurds were a variety of Wisconsin cheese. His campaign is also notable for something else. That is the novel and opaque ways in which it has been burning through a war-chest of nearly $54m, mostly raised in small gifts from the doctor’s fellow devout social-conservatives. For much of the contest, it has had one of the highest “burn rates” of any campaign—by the end of December, Dr Carson had spent 88% of what he had raised. For a political greenhorn, needing to build campaign infrastructure, that is perhaps understandable; but it was striking how little of his expenditure went on hiring staff and how much on raising more money. In the third quarter of last year over half of every dollar raised went on fund-raising, chiefly through expensive, pre-digital methods such as mailshots and telephone marketing largely eschewed by Dr Carson’s rivals. It was also striking that much of the cash went to companies linked to Dr Carson’s associates. The biggest marketing contracts went to firms with ties to his senior adviser on fund-raising, Mike Murray, including contracts worth $5.6m to a company called TMA Direct of which he is chief executive. A spokesman for Dr Carson acknowledged that raising money from small contributions was expensive, but said the campaign’s contracts represented good value. Others doubt that. “It’s probably fair to say that the vendors that were used and the activities undertaken were not as qualified or efficient as in many other campaigns,” suggests Anthony Corrado, a campaign-finance expert at Brookings Institution, a think-tank. There is nothing illegal about that. Campaign-finance laws place tight restrictions on whom cash may be collected from, but not on how it can be spent. “You cannot make yourself rich from your campaign funds,” notes Paul Ryan, of the Campaign Legal Centre. “There is no law against making your friends rich.” It is harder to see what Dr Carson’s 700,000 benefactors, fans of his modest demeanour and scathing attacks on evolution and homosexuality, stand to gain. After his campaign is over, the companies that served it will likely retain access to the lists of donors they have compiled, which they may then rent to other campaigns. For their donation, in short, Dr Carson’s fans may have stored up years of begging letters and nuisance calls.And would you like ribs with your propaganda? CHANNEL-SURFING was no escape. In late January presidential campaigns bought up almost all the advertising on every television channel in Iowa, turning everything from “Sunday Night Football” to “The Big Bang Theory” into brief intermissions between rounds of political WrestleMania. On January 29th, three days before the state’s caucus, 20 hours’ worth of election propaganda saturated Iowa’s airwaves. By January 25th campaigns had spent $53m advertising there; that number will climb once figures for the contest’s final days become available. For all the talk of data-driven outreach and micro-targeted get-out-the-vote efforts, television advertising is still the staple on campaign shopping lists. Yet proof that candidates are getting a return on this investment has long been hard to find. Study after study has shown that few voters are motivated or persuaded by advertising—a finding political scientists have repeated so often that it is now known as the “minimal-effects hypothesis” (MEH). To measure the impact of advertising so far in the 2016 campaign, The Economist divided the Republican field into pairs of candidates in Iowa and New Hampshire. For each of the days in which both politicians scored above 10% in either the state or national polling averages published at RealClearPolitics (RCP), we counted how many ads, both positive and negative, had been aired in that state about each candidate during the previous week. We then compared this ratio with the two contenders’ relative positions in the state’s RCP polling average. If there were any pay-off to media spending, then candidates who appeared in lots of positive ads and few negative ones should have gained ground when compared with their rivals. Polls can be influenced by too many factors to identify the causes of their fluctuations with precision. We tried to control for the impact of news events—such as the revelation of Ted Cruz’s failure to disclose loans he received from Goldman Sachs, or Sarah Palin’s endorsement of Donald Trump—by conducting the study on the difference between each candidate’s national polling average and their polling in Iowa or New Hampshire (where the adverts aired). Even after this, however, the numbers are still affected by campaign rallies, local media coverage and a healthy dose of random variation. We found that paid TV airtime did matter, accounting for a modest 13% of the week-to-week changes in polling. In some cases it was more significant: from January 24th to 30th, TV viewers in Iowa saw 866 more positive spots and 220 fewer attack ads about Mr Rubio than they did about Mr Trump. After adjusting for their standing in national polls, the front-runner’s advantage over the Florida senator duly shrank by 5.1 percentage points. Overall, holding nationwide polls constant, we found that candidates could expect to gain a one-point edge over their rivals in the next week’s early-state polling for roughly every 200 net positive ads about them, or every 500 net negative ones about their opponents. So do these results vindicate the ad men after all? Not entirely. First, the effects of paid media tend to be short-lived: during the current Republican campaign, the impact of positive ads on polling has been 4.4 times greater during the week they aired than in the subsequent week. This suggests that candidates may do well to imitate Mr Trump and skimp on their media purchases until shortly before the election. Moreover, just because adverts seem to have some persuasive power doesn’t make them the best bang for a campaign’s buck. Political scientists have generally found that “ground game” investments, like knocking on doors and get-out-the-vote efforts, deliver a superior payoff. The victory in Iowa of Mr Cruz, who was heavily out-advertised there but was widely considered to have the best caucus-day operation in the state, shows that ruling the airwaves is not the only way to win. A summary of our methodology, along with the underlying code and data, is available here. CORRECTION: A previous version of this story mistakenly referred to a comparison of advertising totals between Marco Rubio and Donald Trump in New Hampshire. The figures were actually taken from Iowa. The article has been updated.IN THEORY it works perfectly. Rather than oblige parents to send their children to the nearest state-run or –funded school, give them a voucher to be spent at a private school of their choice. “The adoption of such arrangements”, argued Milton Friedman in 1955, “would make for more effective competition among various types of schools and for a more efficient utilisation of their resources.” As part of its recovery from Hurricane Katrina, which destroyed many schools in New Orleans, Louisiana undertook one of America’s largest school-choice schemes. According to a new paper by Atila Abdulkadiroglu of Duke University, Parag Pathak of MIT and Christopher Walters of Berkeley, it has not gone well.* Increasing school choice is a favourite policy of Republican governors and state legislatures. Since the party’s bumper election year in 2010 the number of voucher schemes has increased from 25 to 59, according to the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice. The thinking behind this is sound: the well-off already exercise school choice by moving into neighbourhoods with better schools. Why not allow poorer families to do the same? Yet the evidence from the voucher programmes that have been evaluated has been underwhelming: parents like them, but they often do little for their children’s test scores. Louisiana’s scheme, brought in by a conservative governor, added a feature that ought to delight progressives: a lottery to assign the vouchers. In 2014 12,000 students from low-income families applied for more than 6,000 vouchers to attend 126 private schools. Lotteries are loved by social scientists because the winners and losers, distinguished by chance alone, are statistically identical. That means differences in outcomes can reasonably be attributed to the programme rather than, say, differences in family circumstances. It turned out that this was a lottery to lose. The three economists found that those who received vouchers and moved to private schools had worse test scores in maths, reading, science and social studies than those who missed out. Hunting for an explanation, they wondered whether the weakest private schools had mopped up voucher pupils to fill their seats. But this hypothesis did not stand up. Schools in New Orleans have improved dramatically since Hurricane Katrina: high-school-graduation rates have risen from 55% to 73% and drop-out rates have fallen by half. But this has been a victory for central control rather than the market: bureaucrats at the state’s powerful Recovery School District have closed many schools and presided over the opening of many more. More parental school choice seems to have had little to do with it. * “School vouchers and student achievement: first-year evidence from the Louisiana Scholarship Programme” by Atila Abdulkadiroglu, Parag A. Pathak and Christopher R. Walters, NBER.Ben Tillman, lyncher on a plinth A STATUE’S fate might seem a binary issue: it is either up, like that of Cecil Rhodes, a British imperialist, at Oxford University, or down, like those of Lenin recently toppled across Ukraine, or the Confederate leaders soon to be ousted from their perches in New Orleans. The Atlanta History Centre, however, thinks there is a middle way between iconoclasm and inaction—an approach that might help to salve historiographical rows raging across the South and beyond. Since Sheffield Hale, a thoughtful former lawyer, took charge in 2012, the museum has become a lively propagator of regional history. Mr Hale himself comes from on old southern family—many of his ancestors fought for the Confederacy—and says that, in the past, he didn’t appreciate how painful tributes to slavery’s defenders could be for black Americans. He still believes the likenesses of Robert E. Lee and the rest should stay on their plinths, but not quite as they are: educational panels should be added to explain their backgrounds, with scannable codes that link to more information, such as encyclopedia entries, in the ether. Wisely, Mr Hale thinks these blurbs should focus as much on the memorials’ origins—many were demonstratively set up 100-odd years ago, serving to buttress segregation—as on their subjects, detailing when, why and by whom they were erected. Thus they would become “artefacts, not monuments”; instruments of education rather than objects of veneration, and more striking in town squares than they would be “in safe places” like museums. Mr Hale points out that relics of the segregation era have mostly disappeared; in time the indomitable generals scattered across the South could commemorate that injustice, instead of their supposed gallantry. Some historians endorse this additive approach, already used in Colorado to clarify that a legendary battle against native Americans was actually a massacre. The obvious question, though, is who writes the text? Lots of exposition accompanies the giant Confederate carving at Stone Mountain, for example: it demonises Abraham Lincoln and ignores slavery. (A plan to place a memorial to Martin Luther King on the mountaintop, another sort of compromise, has foundered.) Mr Hale says communities should negotiate their own panels, though the centre offers a template, internet links and an even-handed commentary on the war’s legacy. “The more you take out of the landscape,” he reckons, “the more you diminish it.”OF THE checks on executive power in the constitution, perhaps the least needed is the amendment limiting presidents to two terms. Americans often invest sky-high hopes in those they send to the White House, choosing someone they believe will correct the flaws of a now-despised predecessor. After their first terms, presidents seeking re-election are frequently helped by the trappings of office. But after eight years the mood sours: Americans then long for change, and for someone younger, more competent or less mired in scandal. The rules of presidential politics have never been applied to someone quite like Hillary Clinton. In the public eye for decades as a First Lady, senator, unsuccessful presidential candidate and then secretary of state, she is neither a serving world leader nor a fresh face. Mrs Clinton risks finding herself an unhappy hybrid: a candidate weighed down by all the disadvantages of incumbency, while enjoying rather few of the benefits. The Iowa caucuses on February 1st—the first electoral contest of the 2016 presidential cycle—saw Mrs Clinton held to a virtual tie by her populist rival for the Democratic nomination, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Iowa is a state that holds horrid memories for Mrs Clinton: it is where Barack Obama beat her in 2008, halting what had seemed her almost regal progress to the Democratic nomination. This year, addressing supporters in Des Moines on caucus night, Mrs Clinton voiced “a big sigh of relief” after her razor-thin win, before rushing to catch a plane for New Hampshire, scene of the next nominating contest. Iowa is not very like most of America. It is 90% white. Many of its Democrats are deep-dyed lefties huddled in college towns surrounded by conservative, God-and-guns farm country. Yet Iowa’s caucuses still offer lessons that will last, starting with the double-edged nature of Mrs Clinton’s strongest suit: her experience. In 2008 Mrs Clinton was thumped by Mr Obama in the eastern county of Poweshiek, notably in the handsome Victorian college town of Grinnell. This time Poweshiek gave her almost half its votes. That improvement was hard won. Mrs Clinton and her husband both visited. Caucus day saw volunteers fanning out from a field office to knock on supporters’ doors. A poster in the office asked volunteers why they backed their heroine. At the top, someone had neatly written: “Because she is the best qualified non-incumbent to run since George Washington.” David Leitson is the head of “Grinnellians for Hillary”, a campaign group at Grinnell College, a campus gripped by Bernie-mania. Ahead of the caucus he made three main arguments to classmates. First, that Mrs Clinton is ready to serve as president “on day one”. Second, that her plans to make college more affordable or regulate big banks overlap with the Sanders agenda but are more feasible. Lastly, that she has been “battle-tested” by years of ferocious conservative attacks—a trial that Mr Sanders would surely face as a nominee, as a self-described democratic socialist who wants to raise taxes, hugely expand the government and break up big banks. Unbidden, many Iowa Democrats describe a tussle between their heads, which tell them that pragmatic, centrist Mrs Clinton offers their best shot at beating the Republicans, and their hearts, which sing when Mr Sanders growls that America is a corrupt oligarchy. Mr Leitson sees no reason why electability cannot co-exist with excitement. Explaining his passion for the Clinton campaign, the undergraduate said: “My heart is in it because my head is in it.” He is a rarity, though: across Iowa, pollsters estimate, Mr Sanders won eight in ten caucus-goers under the age of 30. Mrs Clinton’s salvation was her support among older Iowans, who turned out in larger numbers than the young. Gender specific: Hillary Clinton and female primary voters Not all Poweshiek Democrats found striking the balance between excitement and electability so easy. Rebecca Petig, a mother of four and an elected prosecutor, was surprised to find herself undecided hours before welcoming fellow party members to her own home, which was to serve as an official caucus precinct (unsure about the etiquette of feeding voters, she thought she might offer banana bread and coffee). Ms Petig sighed that Mr Sanders describes politics “as I’d like it to be, but realistically it’s not going to be that way”. She admires Mrs Clinton’s achievements, and expects her to become the Democratic nominee. But unexpectedly, she finds that she cannot hold Mrs Clinton up as a role model for her teenage daughter. The problem is Mrs Clinton’s “baggage”, involving years of alleged scandals and charges of dishonesty. There isn’t anyone else, alas Talk of baggage was rife at the Democratic caucus in Poweshiek’s 8th precinct, held in a Grinnell elementary school. Iowa Democrats caucus in public, showing their preferences by standing in corners of the room assigned to each candidate. Seeking to lure undecided voters to their corner, Sanders supporters did not cite the specific misdeeds of which Republicans accuse Mrs Clinton (most recently involving her alleged mishandling of top-secret government e-mails). Instead Sanders backers called Mrs Clinton part of a sleazy and unequal status quo, especially as the recipient of donations and speaking fees from billionaires and “banks that bankrupted the middle class”. Mrs Clinton has “been around so long, you sort of get fatigued”, conceded Catherine Rod, a wavering voter at the caucus. She listened as a fellow Democrat urged her to cross to the Sanders corner so that “his ideas can get momentum”. But Ms Rod, a retired librarian, worried about the harm that defeat in Iowa might do to Mrs Clinton, fretting: “I don’t want to trash Hillary.” Lots of Democrats feel similarly trapped. They have only one plausible general-election candidate, Mrs Clinton, and understand why lots of Americans are unexcited by her. Assuming that she survives her latest legal woes involving classified e-mails, Mrs Clinton will be the nominee. But Iowa was an early warning. A long, grinding slog awaits.Don’t mess with my rainforest “YOU want certainty? Knock at our door and ask our permission.” Dean Sayers, chief of the Batchewana First Nation of Ojibways, a Canadian indigenous group, delivered this blunt advice to a room packed with mining executives last year. He came to the industry’s annual convention because he was tired of “the hillbilly attitudes” of developers “who want to do business in our neck of the woods”, on the north-eastern corner of Lake Superior. In 1849 Ojibways fired a cannon into a copper mine that had gone ahead without their approval. These days Canada’s aboriginal groups use public pressure, backed by legal action, to protect their lands against exploitation by outsiders. This month the government of British Columbia reached agreement with forest companies, environmental groups and 26 First Nations communities to protect from logging an area on the Pacific coast larger than Belgium—newly dubbed the Great Bear Rainforest. The deal, which allows logging and mining in areas aboriginals have agreed to, is the culmination of a long public-relations campaign (choosing the Kermode bear as its mascot was a masterstroke). It would have got nowhere without centuries of treaty-making and decades of case law to back it up. Aboriginals’ rights were outlined in a royal proclamation of 1763, when European settlers needed their help to survive, and restated in Canada’s 1982 constitution. As they became savvier, and resource companies grew more ambitious, litigation increased. The federal aboriginal affairs agency is party to 554 proceedings involving such rights (not all of which concern resource firms). That does not include disputes between aboriginal groups and firms. Projects as diverse as seismic testing for mineral deposits in Arctic waters and fracking in the west face challenges. Until 1951 such lawsuits were barred. They are expensive and can drag on for years; the outcome is never assured. The Tsilhqot’in, who filed suit in 1998 against logging on their ancestral lands in British Columbia, finally won in 2014 and now have title to 1,750 square km (1,100 square miles). But the Innu of Ekuanitshit in Quebec last year lost their bid to stop the Muskrat Falls hydropower project, which they say will affect caribou herds. Some big projects are caught in legal limbo. The Northern Gateway pipeline, which is to bring crude oil from Alberta to Canada’s west coast, has been stalled for more than a decade, largely because of opposition from First Nations groups along its route, some of them parties to the Great Bear agreement. The Pacific Northwest liquefied natural gas project, backed by Petronas, a Malaysian state-owned firm, has offered C$1 billion ($726m) in benefits over 40 years to the Lax Kw’alaams nation of northern British Columbia. That has not allayed fears that the project would destroy salmon fisheries. When such disputes are unresolved, the price can be high. The Northern Gateway pipeline would add C$300 billion to Canada’s GDP over 30 years. Aboriginals are finding ways to share gains from such projects while minimising the damage they cause. The courts “are getting closer to what we want”, says Mr Sayers. “But they are not there yet.”IT FELT like the first day of school. On February 1st freshly sworn-in legislators belonging to the National League for Democracy (NLD), the party led by Myanmar’s Nobel peace-prize winning campaigner for democracy, Aung San Suu Kyi (pictured, in pink), walked uncertainly through the parliament’s cavernous corridors in Naypyidaw, Myanmar’s capital. Some looked bewildered. Others smiled and chatted with old friends, brimming with excitement. A small kiosk selling souvenirs did brisk business as new MPs bought key rings, fridge magnets and postcards depicting their unfamiliar new workplace. It is part of a sprawling complex of official buildings built by an unelected junta to withstand a popular uprising. Now, for the first time, it is about to be controlled by an elected government. For some, getting to parliament on that opening day had involved an arduous trek. It took two of the MPs 15 days by foot, on horseback and by bus just to reach the airport nearest their village, high up in the mountains near Tibet. Others had endured greater hardship: more than 100 of the NLD’s MPs served time in prison for the crime of belonging to the party. One, Bo Bo Oo, spent 20 years in jail for supplying medicine to students who had fled to a remote area after a failed uprising in 1988. While in prison, he says, he remained convinced that one day the NLD would form a government. Tin Thit, a poet, environmental activist and ex-prisoner, said the day felt “like a dream”. With its promise to transform impoverished Myanmar after more than 50 years of control by the army, the NLD won 80% of contested seats in November. That has created high expectations—unrealistic ones, some fear. “People expect that the NLD will solve all their problems,” says Mr Bo Bo Oo. “But it will take at least ten years before we see real change.” This view is echoed by Tin Oo, a co-founder of the NLD. The 88-year-old ex-general calls parliament’s opening just “a first step” in a long struggle. Behind the throne, or on it So far, procedural issues have dominated the new parliament’s agenda: the swearing-in of new members and the election of speakers for the upper and lower houses. A bigger task looms: choosing the country’s president. The NLD’s victory gives it comfortable majorities in both houses, despite the 25% of seats reserved by law for the army. Each house selects one presidential candidate, as does the army. The winner is chosen by parliamentary vote, with the two others automatically appointed as vice-presidents. The president-elect then chooses a cabinet. The new administration will officially begin work at the end of March, when the term of the current president, Thein Sein, ends. Given the NLD’s bicameral majority, there is no doubt which party will determine who becomes president. But it is still a mystery who that person will be. It is unlikely to be Miss Suu Kyi: the constitution bars anyone with a foreign spouse or children from the job (her sons are British). But she may try to get the constitution changed in her favour. Speaking to journalists on February 3rd, she noted that parliament had until March 31st to choose a president, prompting speculation that she may even be looking for a way to get the constitution revised before then. Whoever ends up getting the job, she has been clear about who will call the shots: she will. Myanmar in graphics: An unfinished peace Miss Suu Kyi’s power will be restrained, however. Despite the NLD’s landslide, the army is still powerful. It controls the home, defence and border-affairs ministries, as well as the country’s security forces and civil service. It can thus frustrate the NLD’s attempts at reform. Revising the constitution may prove even more difficult. That would require a parliamentary supermajority exceeding 75%. The army’s reserved seats give it a veto. Its newspaper said this week that the constitutional provisions regarding the presidency should remain unchanged “for the good of the mother country”. In a national crisis, as defined by the generals, the army can still legally seize control again. Many expect that Miss Suu Kyi will try to avoid confrontation with the army, and that she will even appoint ministers who worked in the outgoing administration. She is likely to focus first on ending conflicts involving ethnic minorities living in border areas. As Khin Maung Myint, an ethnic Kachin MP from northern Myanmar, puts it: “Everything that parliament will do is worthless without peace.” 
