FIGHTER jets roar overhead, spitting out decoy flares. Helicopters clatter past, bearing commandos rappelling down ropes. Warships lurk in the waters beyond. All week the crowds on the beaches of Visakhapatnam, a coastal Indian city, have been thrilled by the dress rehearsal for the Indian navy’s great martial show: the International Fleet Review between February 4th and 8th. The extravaganza will draw ships from more than 50 countries. The last review took place 15 years ago in Mumbai, on the west coast. This time it is being held on the east side—a signal to another rising naval power in that direction: China. India wants to show that in the Indian Ocean, it is supreme. Still, for the sake of good-neighbourliness, China has agreed to participate in the review. Many will be looking out for one vessel in particular: the INS Arihant, India’s first nuclear-powered submarine armed with ballistic missiles (SSBN, in military jargon). The 6,000-tonne boat will provide India with the third leg of its nuclear “triad”—it already has land- and air-launched nukes. But in doing so, it will also risk accelerating a nuclear arms race in Asia (see chart). Arihant has been undergoing sea-trials and weapons tests. Naval chiefs had hoped formally to commission it during the review. But as The Economist went to press, it was not clear whether this would happen. The SSBN programme has suffered delays. Indian submarines have been plagued by accidents. India believes SSBNs are a vital part of its nuclear strategy, which forswears the first use of nuclear weapons. The Indian navy’s latest statement of maritime strategy, published in October, says the country’s nuclear-deterrence doctrine involves having a “credible minimum deterrent” that can deliver “massive nuclear retaliation designed to inflict unacceptable damage” in response to a nuclear strike against India. Because they can readily avoid detection, SSBNs can survive a surprise attack and thus ensure India’s ability to launch a retaliatory “second strike”. Some nuclear theorists argue that submarine-based deterrents promote peace by making the other side more frightened to attack first. But the extension of the nuclear arms race to Asia’s seas may still have worrying implications—all the more if North Korea gets in on the act. It appears determined to find a way of sticking nuclear warheads on the end of its erratic missiles (see article). China is ahead of the game. It has a fleet of four second-generation Jin-class SSBNs and is testing JL-2 missiles to install in them. These weapons have a range of 7,400km (4,600 miles)—too short, for now, to reach the American mainland from the relative safety of the South China Sea. Pakistan, for its part, is in the early stages of a lower-cost approach. This involves arming diesel-powered subs with nuclear-armed cruise missiles with a range of 700km. Interactive graphic: A complete history of the world's nuclear weapons A report for the Lowy Institute, an Australian think-tank, predicts “a long phase of initial instability” as China and India start deploying nuclear missiles on submarines without adequate training or well-developed systems for communicating with them. It says the build-up may aggravate maritime tensions, as China and India seek to dominate local waters in an effort to turn them into havens for their SSBNs. And the submarines may not even provide the security the two countries are looking for. The institute says the Chinese and Indian submarines are noisy. This makes them easier to detect. A more immediate worry to India is Pakistan’s development and deployment of smaller “tactical” nuclear weapons for use on the battlefield. These may make it more likely that any war between India and Pakistan will go nuclear. They also increase the risk of Pakistan’s weapons being used accidentally—or falling into the hands of extremists (such weapons are under the control of lower-level commanders whose professionalism and loyalty may be dubious). Pakistan says tactical nukes are needed because of an Indian doctrine known as “cold start”. Though never formally adopted, “cold start” foresees Indian units being ready to respond to Pakistani provocation (eg, a terrorist outrage) with little or no notice, by seizing parts of Pakistani territory to use as a bargaining chip. India says it will not develop battlefield nukes of its own. Instead, it will rely on the threat of massive retaliation against any use of nuclear weapons by Pakistan. Still, it may be another decade before India has a fully-fledged sea-based deterrent. Arihant’s Russian nuclear-power generator is unsuited to long patrols. Initially, the sub is due to be armed with the K-15 missile, with a range of 750km—not enough to reach big cities in northern Pakistan. Striking Chinese ones would be harder still. From the beaches of Visakhapatnam the world will witness not only India’s ambition, but also the many gaps it has yet to fill in order to achieve it.Update: At about 9.30am local time, North Korean media and the American military command announced separately that an object—satellite or missile—had been launched into space from North Korea.  IN ITS quest for nuclear weapons, North Korea is a master of braggadocio. On January 6th the dictatorship of Kim Jong Un declared that it had detonated its first-ever hydrogen bomb, and had thus “guaranteed the eternal future of the nation”. But even its more low-key announcement this week that it now intends to launch an “earth observation satellite” some time between February 8th and 25th has caused global jitters. It is the oldest trick in the nuclear book to pretend that the testing of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) is nothing but a satellite launch. A rocket that can place a large satellite into orbit can just as easily propel a nuclear warhead to the other side of the world. Japan has placed its forces on high alert. Its defence minister, Gen Nakatani, said they had orders “to shoot down any ballistic missile threat”. South Korea has warned the North that it will “pay a harsh price” if it goes ahead with the launch. America is calling even more loudly for fresh UN sanctions against the North. Even China, North Korea’s ally, said it was “extremely concerned”. Experts are unsure how much progress North Korea is making with its nuclear-weapons project. North Korea’s boasting is certainly no guide. For example, it is highly unlikely that the detonation in January involved a hydrogen bomb, which is more powerful than the atomic sort. The seismic signature of the test, in an underground complex near the border with China where earlier ones were conducted, suggested the device was similar in size to the one used in the previous test in 2013. At most, experts say, North Korea tested a “boosted-fission” device that uses an additive to achieve a bigger bang. Peninsula of provocation: A timeline of clashes between North and South Korea There are also big doubts about the missiles. North Korea’s tests of ICBM-type rockets have a patchy record—despite its claims to the contrary. In October North Korea paraded what looked like a scary ICBM: the KN-08. Some analysts believe this is designed to have a range of about 9,000km (5,600 miles), which means it could reach America’s western seaboard. Whether it works is another matter. North Korea probably does not yet have the ability to fire nuclear weapons reliably at America—though every test will bring it closer to that objective. For all the chorus of international outrage, the only country that can realistically divert Mr Kim from his ruinous nuclear quest is China: it provides North Korea with fuel and food, and is the main conduit for its financial transactions. But it is reluctant to endorse America’s demands for tougher sanctions. However much China may be embarrassed by its wayward ally, it fears the collapse of the North Korean regime more than Mr Kim’s headlong quest for nukes.Sorry RECENT days have witnessed unusual phenomena in Japan. On January 29th, for the first time in its history, the central bank adopted negative interest rates as a way of dealing with the threat of deflation. Then came the public’s equally striking response to a bribery scandal involving Akira Amari (pictured), the economy minister, who had resigned a day before the bank’s move. The government was braced for a drop in its approval ratings, but instead public support for it rose in three polls, to over 50%. Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, may be wondering at his luck. The Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), the biggest opposition party, had been preparing to make hay from Mr Amari’s departure—the fourth such scandal in Mr Abe’s cabinet. But the DPJ is still floundering following its defeat in a general election in 2012. It has yet to find a new message that appeals strongly to voters. Its campaign for an election this summer for the parliament’s upper house is not inspiring. “I do not like the DPJ,” one of the DPJ’s posters imagines a voter musing, “but I want to protect democracy.” Mr Abe’s skilful handling of the Amari affair helped to minimise the damage. After the scandal broke in the Shukan Bunshun, a conservative weekly magazine, Mr Amari appeared confident of the prime minister’s backing. He was mistaken. Money scandals have been rife in Japanese politics due partly to vague rules on reporting political donations. But the magazine’s allegations that Mr Amari’s office accepted ¥12m ($100,000), including envelopes of cash, from the representative of a construction company seeking favourable treatment from a government agency, proved too much. Within a week, he announced his resignation. In his first, disastrous term as prime minister between 2006 and 2007, Mr Abe had allowed ministerial scandals to drag on with damaging effect. Mr Amari’s exit came at an awkward time for Mr Abe as he tries to boost a stubbornly lacklustre economy (though it may get a lift thanks to the Bank of Japan’s interest-rate decision). The scandal has delayed debate in the Diet (parliament) over the government’s budget for the coming financial year, which starts on April 1st, though there is little doubt this will be approved eventually. One of Mr Abe’s boldest attempts to promote structural economic reform (there are not many of them), namely getting Japan into the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)—an ambitious 12-country free-trade agreement that includes America—may also suffer delays. Mr Amari was Japan’s chief negotiator for TPP entry. Without his guidance, it will be far harder for the government to get the terms of accession ratified by the Diet during its current session (due to end on June 1st), says Heizo Takenaka, a former economy minister. Even though farmers are to receive some ¥110 billion ($890m) to help them adapt to lower tariffs, opposition to TPP from the farm lobby is expected to be strong. Mr Amari’s successor is Nobuteru Ishihara, who leads the second-smallest faction of Mr Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party (he is the son an ultranationalist former governor of Tokyo). Backers of economic reform bemoan the younger Mr Ishihara’s relative lack of economic-policy experience and his proneness to gaffes . But apart for his enthusiasm for TPP, Mr Amari was hardly a gung-ho promoter of reform himself. And Mr Abe has his eye on other goals. Such is the opposition’s disarray that there is now even speculation that he may call a snap election for the Diet’s lower house as early as this spring. Though the economy is weak, voters tend to blame China’s slowdown rather than Mr Abe’s policies, says Koichi Nakano of Sophia University in Tokyo. Mr Abe may use his political strength not so much to push for economic reforms, but to change the constitution to make it easier for Japan to operate as a normal military power, instead of being bound by its post-war commitment to pacifism. For this he would need the support of two-thirds of legislators in both houses of the Diet (never mind that he lacks it with the public). With the help of like-minded parties, that may be thinkable if the LDP does well in both the upper-house election and a snap poll for the lower house. A strangely resilient Mr Abe may decide that now is the time to try.IT SEEMS odd for Lee Hsien Loong, Singapore’s prime minister, to tamper with the political system. His country’s style of government has many admirers. Europeans and Americans envy how efficient and clean it is. Authoritarians, not least in China, gaze in awe at the ruling People’s Action Party, in power since 1959 despite facing regular, unrigged elections. The most recent, last September, returned the PAP with some 70% of the votes. One of the world’s best-paid political leaders, Mr Lee is also one of its most successful. Why fix a machine that ain’t broke? Three simple reasons explain why Mr Lee, in a speech to Parliament last month, outlined a set of political reforms. First, this is a tinkering at the edges of the Singapore system, not an overhaul. He borrowed a metaphor from his father, Singapore’s first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew. Constitutions, he said, are like a fine old pair of shoes: “Stretch them, soften them, resole them, repair them.” They will always be better than a brand-new pair. Second, the PAP’s landslide last September means Mr Lee is proposing change from a position of strength. He cannot be accused of panic measures to shore up PAP rule, as he might have been after the previous election in 2011, when the party recorded its worst performance since independence (a mere 60% of the popular vote). And third, Mr Lee, like his father, thinks for the long term. These, he said, are not changes for the next five or ten years but for the decades to come. What he did not say is that the reforms will help the PAP extend its rule far into that misty future. All involve further refinement of the Westminster-style parliamentary system Singapore inherited from Britain. The first covers “non-constituency members of parliament” (NCMPs). These posts date back to 1984. As Mr Lee told it, the PAP, having faced no parliamentary opposition at all from 1965 to 1981, when it lost a by-election, decided to its surprise that it was good for government to have opposition voices represented. (This might also have surprised the late J.B. Jeyaretnam, that solo voice of dissent, who was hounded into bankruptcy, and was dismissed by the elder Mr Lee as a “dud”.) So the government mandated a minimum number of opposition seats—at present nine. Since the opposition never wins enough at elections, the others go to its best-performing defeated candidates. But NCMPs have not been allowed to vote on money bills, for example, or constitutional changes, or on motions of no-confidence (not that such a heresy is on the cards). Now Mr Lee proposes increasing the minimum number of opposition MPs to 12 (Parliament currently has 89 elected members), and to give NCMPs full voting rights. Yet the opposition’s reaction has been churlish. Low Thia Khiang, of its biggest group, the Workers’ Party, said NCMPs were like “duckweed” in a pond—ie, they lacked roots (in a constituency) and were merely ornamental. A greater cause for worry is that the reform may actually reduce the opposition vote. Many Singaporeans want to see the government held more fiercely to account, but are wary of the inexperienced opposition coming anywhere close to office. Indeed, the Workers’ Party campaigned last year not to form a government but to be a stronger opposition. If that outcome is guaranteed, why not vote for the government? Lee Kuan Yew's Singapore: An astonishing record The second proposed change is to so-called “group representation constituencies” (GRCs). These ostensibly ensure that the ethnic-Malay and -Indian minorities are represented. The public-housing estates where most Singaporeans live are subject to ethnic quotas, so everywhere probably has an ethnic-Chinese majority. Much of Singapore is now divided into four-, five- or six-member electoral constituencies, with parties compelled to include minority candidates on their slates. But these winner-take-all GRCs have had other uses: it is hard for small parties to find enough qualified candidates; weak PAP candidates can be swept into parliament on the coat-tails of a cabinet minister; and the distorting effect of Singapore’s first-past-the-post system is magnified, increasing the PAP’s majority. It was only in 2011 that the opposition first won a GRC. It barely clung on to it last year. Now Mr Lee wants to create more single-member constituencies and to reduce the size of GRCs; the opposition still wants them abolished. The third proposed reform is to the largely ceremonial presidency, which since 1990 has been an elected post, with important powers of veto over government appointments and the spending of its vast financial nest-egg. The idea was to introduce a check on the government. Now, however, the worry is probably about the possibility of a rogue president. In the most recent election, in 2011, in a four-horse race, the government’s favoured candidate only scraped home. The election, inevitably, had become political—a contest between the government and its critics. So Mr Lee announced the formation of a constitutional commission to review, among other things, the qualifications a presidential candidate needs—and, presumably, to tighten them. Checks and fine balances Singapore’s leaders like to attribute their country’s phenomenal economic success in part to the political system: one just contested enough to keep the government honest; but not so much that it risks losing power, meaning it can withstand populist temptations and plan for the future. Mr Lee’s proposed reforms are in that vein—making sure that the system has checks and balances, but only ones the government can control. As opposition leaders were quick to point out, they do not even touch some of the main sources of the PAP’s electoral magic: its public-housing programme; a pliant mainstream press; an election commission that is under the prime minister’s office; and a political climate, even now, where dissent seems a terrible career choice. That Singapore has thrived with so little real restraint on the government is also a tribute to the incorruptibility of the Lee family and their colleagues. Whether it can continue to thrive without them, and without more far-reaching political reform, is a gamble.IN 1997 the collapse of several large Ponzi schemes in Albania precipitated mass disorder, the overthrow of the government and the deaths of 2,000 people. The failure, in another country lacking robust financial regulation, of a huge Ponzi scheme is not going to lead to the overthrow of its president, Xi Jinping. But it could cause the government political problems. And it shows that China is as vulnerable as anywhere else to the chaos that can result from financial shenanigans. The company that failed was Ezubao, China’s largest peer-to-peer (P2P) lender (one of its now sealed-up offices is pictured). P2P websites connect borrowers and lenders without a bank’s intermediation. Founded in 2014 by Ding Ning, who, according to state media, had done well for himself manufacturing can-openers, Ezubao quickly became one of China’s best-known new financial firms. Mr Ding spent millions on an advertising blitz, ordered employees to sport luxury brands or glitzy jewellery and was interviewed on the government’s web portal about his company’s contribution to Chinese growth. But it was dodgy from the start. One executive said that “95% of investment projects on Ezubao were fake”. Another called it, accurately, a Ponzi scheme: instead of paying investors out of revenues from business projects, it was paying long-standing investors with the money deposited by new ones, meaning liabilities exceeded assets and the firm was permanently insolvent. When the police arrested its bosses on January 31st Ezubao had over 900,000 investors who had lost about 50 billion yuan ($7.6 billion) between them. No known Ponzi scheme has had so many victims. To evade scrutiny, managers had buried their account books deep underground. Police took 20 hours to dig them out with excavators. Ponzi schemes abound in China. Between 2007 and 2008 the founder of the great ant-farm scam stole $400m from investors in the supposed health benefits of the insects before he was arrested and sentenced to death. Last year in Kunming, a city in the south-west, Fanya Metals Exchange, which mostly traded rare earths, froze $6.4 billion of funds. The chairman disappeared in December (he is thought to have been arrested). Meanwhile police in Guangzhou, according to a newspaper in the southern city, are looking into what has happened to 40 billion yuan deposited with GSM, a firm that no longer exists at its registered place of business. China is probably no more prone to financial fraud than other emerging markets (in 2012 the Reserve Bank of South Africa said it had investigated 222 suspicious schemes). But its scams are larger in absolute terms—and reflect its financial system’s distortions. Chinese banking is dominated by state-owned firms that offer depositors artificially low interest rates and make most of their loans to other big state-owned enterprises. P2P lending (of the sort Ezubao pretended to offer) has rushed into the gaps, matching depositors who want higher rates of return with small firms that cannot get credit from big banks. Total P2P loans quadrupled in 2015, to 980 billion yuan, more than in America. But the business is very poorly regulated. Realising this, the authorities in December proposed a strict set of rules, including banning P2P companies from financing their own projects or guaranteeing a rate of return. But this comes very late. About a third of the 3,600 P2P sites were classed as “problematic” by the China Banking Regulatory Commission at the end of 2015. Many are doubtless proper businesses but financial information in China is not reliable enough to help investors tell pyramid schemes from ventures that are honest. Foiling the phoney pharaohs One of the big questions is whether financial fraud will have a political impact. China’s stockmarket meltdown caused ructions worldwide, but relatively few demonstrations in China itself. The opposite has been true for pyramid schemes. Investors in Fanya staged a “citizen’s arrest” of the chairman at a hotel in Shanghai and drove him to the police station. Protests about Ezubao have broken out in 34 cities and the police were told to prepare for the occupation of official buildings in Beijing. Investors think financial firms are regulated by the government, even when they are not, and blame the state accordingly. “My question is simple,” wrote “Mexican man” on Weibo, a microblogging site. “What on earth were the regulators doing?” Mr Xi might ponder that, too. “I’VE hurt the feelings of the Chinese people.” So said Peter Dahlin, a Swedish citizen, in a televised “confession” after his arrest in Beijing in January. There were several disturbing aspects about the admission, including the likelihood that it was made because of pressure exerted on Mr Dahlin, who ran a Beijing-based legal-advice group (he has since been expelled). But why would the government put those particular words into his mouth? Other countries, especially authoritarian ones, also like to express outrage about the state of their citizens’ emotions. But China is a world leader in this specialised form of righteous indignation. David Bandurski of the China Media Project at the University of Hong Kong has counted 143 instances of the phrase “hurting the feelings of the Chinese people” in the People’s Daily, the Communist Party’s mouthpiece, since 1959, when India became the first to be accused by the party of doing it—during a border dispute. Since then, Japan has upset China most often, with 51 offences, followed by America, with 35. But you do not have to be a rival or neighbour to do it: the tiny Caribbean nation of St Lucia hurt the feelings of China’s 1.3 billion people by reopening diplomatic ties with Taiwan in 2007. How many of them had heard of St Lucia is not clear. Albanian insults aimed at Mao Zedong in the 1970s; the defection of a tennis player to America in 1982; the accidental bombing of China’s embassy in Belgrade in 1999: all have caused emotional scarring. But three things are particularly offensive: being nice to Taiwan (28 occasions of bruised feelings); sympathy with the plight of Tibet (12); and failure to come to terms with the second world war (hence Japan’s multiple offences). Oddly, general complaints about China’s human-rights abuses are usually shrugged off—the People’s Daily has reported only two cases of hurt feelings relating to those. The public’s supposed outrage is a useful tool: it enables the party to put aside its principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. For example, it often complains about Japanese politicians’ visits to the Yasukuni shrine in Tokyo, where war criminals are among those honoured. But the party is rarely keen on letting people express their feelings for themselves. It regards spontaneous public outbursts as a potential threat to the party’s control, loss of which would truly hurt.FIVE years after Western air power helped remove Muammar Qaddafi, the chances of another intervention in Libya are steadily increasing. Islamic State may be retreating in Iraq and under pressure in Syria, but in Libya it is a growing menace. At a meeting in Rome on February 2nd of the international coalition against Islamic State (IS), Libya was high on the agenda. That followed talks in Paris on January 22nd in which General Joe Dunford, the chairman of America’s Joint Chiefs of Staff, agreed with his French opposite number that they were “looking to take decisive military action” against IS in Libya. It has since been confirmed that American and British special forces are already on the ground there in small numbers, making contact with local militias. Unsurprisingly, the same conditions that have made Libya such fertile territory for IS are also making it hard to plan an intervention that would have a good chance of success. The spread of IS has been helped by a 20-month-long civil war in which it has been happy to attack both sides. In the west it faces Operation Dawn, a cobbled-together alliance of Misratan, Berber, Islamist, and other militias that back the so-called National Salvation Government in Tripoli. In the east it faces Operation Dignity, an equally loose-knit coalition of militias and regular military forces that includes some former regime supporters. Operation Dignity is led by General Khalifa Haftar, who backs a rival parliament, the internationally recognised House of Representatives, which is based in the eastern city of Tobruk. It has not all been plain sailing for IS. It suffered a setback in mid-2015 when its attempt to take over the eastern town of Derna met resistance from local tribes, repelled by its brutality, and rival Islamist militias. But since absorbing the most militant members of a powerful local jihadist group, Ansar al-Sharia, it has succeeded in establishing an area of control spreading out about 100 miles (160 km) on either side of Sirte, Qaddafi’s old coastal stronghold, which sits between Tripoli and Benghazi. From Sirte, now described as the new Raqqa (IS’s capital in Syria), IS is expanding east and attacking oil installations at Sidra and Ras Lanuf. The militia-based Petroleum Facilities Guard, although hugely outnumbering the 5,000 or so IS fighters in the area (the UN estimates 3,000, which may be on the low side), appears unable or unwilling to prevent IS from doing further damage to an industry that has seen output fall to less than a quarter of the 1.6m barrels a day being pumped in 2011. The mounting concerns about IS in Libya have spurred diplomatic efforts to end the civil war through the creation of a government of “national accord”. Hopes were raised by a peace deal brokered by the UN that was signed in Morocco on December 17th by delegates from the rival parliaments. Lacking broad support, the agreement was premature. Both assemblies insisted that the signatories represented only themselves. Nevertheless, the UN appointed a presidential council, which in turn named a new government under prime minister Fayez Sarraj, a member of the Tripoli-based parliament, that is now waiting in a hotel in Tunis. The Arab spring, five years on On January 25th the parliament in Tobruk rejected the proposed government, while affirming the peace plan, if changes were made. The most important demand is for the removal of Article 8 of the agreement, a provision that would give the presidential council the right to appoint the heads of the armed forces and the security services. That would threaten the position of General Haftar, who harbours ambitions to be Libya’s next strongman. Supported by outside powers, including Egypt, General Haftar still holds much sway in the east, where his forces have cracked down on dissent. But he has a growing number of critics. Deal or no deal The UN has said that it will not reopen the deal. The parliament in Tripoli has not voted, but its prime minister, Khalifa al-Ghawi, has threatened to arrest the new government’s guards if they enter western territory. It does not help that Tripoli is also the location of the Libyan state’s only functioning institutions: the national bank, the state oil firm and the sovereign wealth fund. “The entire plan is looking pretty forlorn and anaemic,” says Frederic Wehrey of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a think-tank. Divisions within the army may ultimately undermine General Haftar in the east. He is already despised in the west, where he is seen as a scourge of the Islamists. But for now Libya is no closer to a unified command that could bring together its various combatants and ally with Western powers to fight IS. Much of the public distrusts the UN, not least because its former envoy to Libya, Bernardino León, took a job with an official think-tank in the United Arab Emirates, which supports Mr Haftar, after stepping down last year. But they have also grown tired of the fighting. Nearly half the population needs humanitarian assistance, says the UN. Over 1m Libyans are thought to be suffering from malnutrition, and 500,000 have been forced from their homes. Where does this leave the plans for a Western intervention against IS? In Rome John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, suggested that once the unity government is formed outside powers will respond to any request for military help, not least because they want to defeat IS. That assumes, however, that the international pressure on the two parliaments in Tobruk and Tripoli is close to yielding a deal that sticks. But as Claudia Grazzini of the International Crisis Group says, Article 8 is the “cornerstone” of the agreement. Tobruk’s opposition to it, she says, means that all the other guarantees contained within it, such as consensual government based on a separation of powers, “just crumble”. Meanwhile, by targeting oil and petroleum infrastructure, the jihadists of IS are trying to destroy any chance that anyone will be able to put the Libyan state back together. The central bank has burned through much of its foreign reserves paying salaries and subsidies to both sides, while the Libyan Investment Authority’s funds remain frozen. If oil production falls even further, the humanitarian disaster will only get worse. Nobody has any illusions that, on their own, Western air strikes can do more than contain IS. But Ms Grazzini says putting large foreign forces on the ground would be “unwise and risky”, and efforts to pick militias deemed worthy partners might just mean strengthening them in their battles against other local groups. Mr Wehrey agrees on the need to proceed carefully, but says that “we can’t wait” for a unity government to be “pushed over the line”. He is more hopeful that special forces on the ground can work with local militias, such as the Misratans, who have repeatedly asked for military assistance from America as “co-ordinator, broker and referee”. Air strikes, he believes, can play an enabling role and disrupt IS operations. In a situation where there are no good options, doing nothing may be the worst. Anyone seen this man? IT SOUNDS like a missing-person notice: 78-year-old man, wheelchair-bound, not seen in public for over two years. But this is a description of Algeria’s president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, whose ill health, including two strokes in recent years, has led to rumours of a palace coup. Mr Bouteflika can hardly speak and is said to communicate by letter with his ministers, who nevertheless insist that the old man is compos mentis and in charge. But several close associates of the president aren’t buying it. Having not seen Mr Bouteflika for over a year, they have demanded a meeting with him—so far to no avail. Missing person is right, they say. Algerian politics is nothing if not murky. For decades a cabal of unelected power brokers has run the show. Known as le pouvoir (the power), the shadowy clique is composed of members of the economic, political and military elite. But with Mr Bouteflika’s health in decline, there appears to be a struggle within the group over who will succeed him. The divide has manifested itself in changes to the security services ostensibly enacted by Mr Bouteflika since his re-election in 2014. Several top figures have either been pushed out or arrested, most notably General Muhammad “Toufik” Mediène, who was sidelined after leading Algeria’s intelligence service, known as the DRS, for 25 years. With a file on nearly everyone, Mr Mediène was a political kingmaker (and a brutal foe of Islamist rebels). In January the DRS was dissolved and replaced by three new directorates under the president. The moves seem aimed at clearing out independent figures, such as Mr Mediène, from le pouvoir. More power now rests with Ahmed Gaid Saleh, the army chief of staff, who is a close ally of Mr Bouteflika, and with the president’s younger brother, Said, who some say is calling the shots. But experts say Said does not have the support of the army, or the public. Algerians have grown accustomed to mystery. Few knew that Houari Boumédiène, Algeria’s second president, was even ill until he died in 1978. At the time, Mr Bouteflika was seen as a potential successor, only to be passed over by the army. Two decades later the generals finally tapped him for the job. But today’s uncertainty comes at a bad time for Algeria, which largely avoided the tumult of the Arab spring. The government has been able to buy peace at home with subsidies, social housing and big pay rises for state employees. But collapsing oil revenues make this system unsustainable. Protests over rising prices and stagnant incomes are now common. Unrest in neighbouring Libya and Tunisia, and the spectre of jihadism, have added to the anxiety. Revisions to the constitution, promised during the Arab spring and handed to parliament only last month, are meant to appease the public. They would limit presidents to two terms, reversing a move by Mr Bouteflika who, if alive, is currently serving his fourth term, and make the Berber language official. Otherwise, they mostly maintain the status quo. There was some debate over creating a post of vice-president to grease the succession process. This was rejected. By whom is unknown.
