IN MANY respects Britain’s mobile-phone market is one of the most successful in the world. About 30 operators compete for business, ensuring that prices are among the lowest for rich countries (see chart). A number of retailers offer an almost infinite variety of bundles of services, and coverage is relatively good too. All of which helps to explain why regulators in Britain and Europe are so opposed to a proposed £10.5-billion ($15.3-billion) merger between the second-largest operator, O2, owned by Spain’s Telefónica, and the fourth-largest, Three, owned by Hutchison Whampoa, based in Hong Kong. On the face of it, such a deal would continue a long-standing trend towards consolidation among mobile operators, both in Britain and other rich countries. It is a mature market, and since 2008 revenues have generally been falling. It has thus made sense for companies to merge, freeing up capital for investment in costly infrastructure and new technology, such as speedy “4G” networks. In Britain, T-Mobile and Orange merged to create the biggest operator, EE, in 2010. EE, in turn, has been taken over by BT, the former state-run monopoly, in a £12.5-billion deal that creates a behemoth covering mobile, fixed-line phones, broadband and television. But enough is enough, apparently. On February 1st Sharon White, the head of Britain’s telecoms regulator, Ofcom, laid out why she opposes the O2-Three merger. The main reason, she said, was that the removal of one of these would so diminish competition that it “could mean higher prices for consumers and businesses”. The concern is that although there are about 30 operators overall, there are only four—EE, O2, Three and Vodafone—that run and maintain the physical infrastructure for mobiles. These are known as Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) in the jargon. The other players, such as Lycamobile, are merely Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs); they rent the infrastructure from the MNOs. Virgin Mobile was created as the world’s first MVNO in 1999. Ofcom contends that the reduction of network providers from four to three will allow them to drive a harder bargain with the MVNOs, perhaps putting some out of business and driving up prices. By contrast, the BT-EE deal was acceptable because the two companies—one primarily fixed-line, one mainly mobile—complemented each other, and the new entity should not harm competition in either the mobile or fixed-line markets. Mergers of this size are automatically referred to the European competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, who shares Ms White’s worries about the O2-Three case. Ms Vestager was due to send out private “statements of objections” to the two companies this week; her office should make a final decision on the matter by April 22nd. She also shares the broader concern that consolidation from four to three network operators leads to higher prices, although there is a fierce debate about this (some say that the case of Austria, for example, which downsized so in 2012, does not bear the theory out). Ofcom’s own research in 25 countries shows that average prices were up to one-fifth lower in markets with four network operators than in those with three. On February 4th Hutchison promised to freeze prices for five years if the O2-Three merger went ahead. Another reason for preferring the four-network model is that the smallest operator of the gang usually operates as the disrupter and innovator. This has been the case with Free Mobile in France and T-Mobile in America. Three has played a similar role in Britain. It was the first to launch a 4G service at no extra cost than 3G, in 2013, as well as a “Feel at Home” service, scrapping roaming charges in 16 countries. As Sam Paltridge, a telecoms expert at the OECD, argues, in the rapidly evolving world of the “internet of things”, companies that innovate will be more important than ever. In this particular case, four’s company and three’s a crowd.Pilgrims in search of a teacher LAST year in one large London school, all 200 pupils taking their GCSE exams—standard tests sat at age 16—were entered for a qualification in religious education (RE), and emerged with results as good as in the other humanities. Yet, according to a teacher there, the school has just announced that its GCSE course in RE will be scrapped and replaced with a one-hour class every fortnight. More schools are smiting their RE lessons. Nearly 1,200 put forward no pupil for an RE qualification in 2014, five times as many as in 2010. Some cite increased pressure on the timetable from other subjects; the fact that RE does not count towards the “English Baccalaureate”, a newish measure for assessing schools, also reduces the incentive to offer it. Two reports by Ofsted, the education regulator, have criticised schools’ attitudes. The quality of the RE curriculum was rated “good” or better in fewer than two-fifths of secondary schools; teaching of Christianity was one of the weakest aspects, it said. This represents a turnaround. For centuries the church ran most education in England, with the state getting involved only in the 19th century. In 1944 the government brought church schools into the state system and began funding them. In return, RE was made compulsory. Since then, the RE syllabus has been set by local religious advisory councils. In 1988 a single national curriculum for schools was introduced, but RE, with its special status, was not included. Alone among school subjects, it is still set by those councils. This means that, in principle, there are 152 different RE syllabuses around England, though in practice many overlap. The subject is still obligatory until the age of 18, though in reality this requirement is ignored, or watered down. The change in schools’ attitudes partly reflects shifts in Britain’s demographic and religious make-up, which is unrecognisable from 1944. Fewer than half the population now calls itself Christian and almost half follows no religion, according to NatCen, a social-research outfit. RE teachers say that where pupils get the chance, they enjoy studying the subject: the number taking it for A-level at age 18 has risen by 110% since 2003, more than for any other arts, humanities or social-science subject. Some further argue that better understanding of different religions helps in the development of social cohesion and opposition to extremism. “The way religion is being dealt with in schools is not meeting the needs of our time,” says Linda Woodhead of the University of Lancaster who, with Charles Clarke, a former home secretary, has co-authored a paper proposing a “new settlement” on the teaching of religion. The government should establish a national RE syllabus or include it in the national curriculum, and drop the widely ignored requirement of a daily act of “broadly Christian” collective worship, they say. Fiona Moss of the National Association of Teachers of Religious Education believes it would be better if the study of RE remained a legal requirement, only better enforced by Ofsted. The government should also include the subject in schools’ performance measures, she says. She points out that a majority of state schools are now independent “academies”, which need not follow the national curriculum. “If they ignore [RE] when it is a law, they are not likely to change just because it is part of the national curriculum,” she says. Meanwhile, it is getting harder to find RE teachers. Last year their recruitment fell 37% short of the number required; more than half have no post A-level qualification in the subject, twice the proportion among history teachers. It is not the only subject facing such a scarcity, but the government seems keener to deal with the shortages elsewhere. Bursaries to entice graduates with masters degrees to teach physics are worth £25,000 ($36,500) a year; for RE they are worth just £4,000.The shipping forecast: gloomy THE prime minister summed up Britain’s trade dilemma when he said last year: “We’re still selling more to Hungary than to Indonesia—even though Indonesia’s population is 25 times bigger. We still do more trade with Belgium than we do with Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Vietnam combined.” At which point David Cameron got on a plane, accompanied by a delegation of businessfolk, and jetted off to South-East Asia to try to do something about this glaring imbalance. Plenty of ministers have been criss-crossing the world during the course of Mr Cameron’s governments with the same aim in mind. Mr Cameron himself has been to India three times. The government has been banqueting the likes of China’s president and India’s prime minister in London, all to improve trade. Yet for all the ministerial airmiles and silver goblets, the country’s exports have remained fairly flat, and have been getting worse since 2012, certainly compared with those of the other big rich economies in the G7. The value of Britain’s exports fell by 1.5% in 2014 from 2013—the only G7 country where exports dropped—and last year’s figures were hardly inspiring, with a 1.5% fall in the three months to November compared with a year earlier. “It has been a disappointment, especially after the devaluation of sterling in 2008-09,” says John Van Reenen, head of the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics (LSE). Sterling fell by 15% against the euro and 24% against the dollar during the 2008 financial crisis, and this did help exports in the short term. But since 2012 Britain has been struggling, even in the sectors it usually does well in. Thus the government’s hopes of recapturing some of Britain’s past trading glories and doubling exports in goods and services to £1 trillion ($1.5 trillion) by 2020 will remain exactly that. These trends also have ramifications for the argument raging over whether Britain should leave the European Union. On the positive side, at least one rebalancing has been relatively successful. Britain’s trade with the rest of the world has been ahead of its trade with the EU since 2008 (see chart). To Eurosceptics, this is evidence that Britain could flourish outside Europe. But although Britain’s exporters have been getting a foothold in the emerging markets, they have not been as successful as they might have been. With the exception of China, which takes about 5% of Britain’s exports, trade in goods and services remains pedestrian. For although nobody expected Britain, where manufacturing has shrunk to around one-tenth of GDP, to export many manufactured goods to emerging markets in the way that Germany does, the country was predicted to do much better in services such as banking, accountancy and education. This is where Britain has its main competitive advantages, such as the English language. Its trade in services with the EU has been growing at just over twice the rate of EU growth, but elsewhere the picture is less rosy. Although Britain’s services trade with emerging economies rose fast in 1998-2012, as the Centre for European Reform, a think-tank, points out, only in the case of Brazil did Britain’s exports “grow significantly faster than the economy concerned”. Thus, as Paul Hollingworth of Capital Economics, a consultancy, argues, Britain has not been gaining market share in emerging economies. Indeed, its exports of services probably slowed in 2014 compared with 2013. Partly for this reason, trade with big countries like India remains small, and minuscule in the case of populous, fast-growing (if poor and distant) Indonesia. It has become a mantra among boosters of British trade to India and other emerging markets that as they become richer so they will need more of Britain’s bankers and fewer of Germany’s machine-tools. But, warns Swati Dhingra, a trade economist at the LSE, there is little evidence to support that theory so far. India, for instance, is not much in need of British expertise in business services, in which it has already developed its own industry. There are other reasons for what the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) has called this “missed opportunity” in emerging markets, aside from the strengthening pound. Simon Walker, the head of the Institute of Directors, another big business-association, fingers the government’s lacklustre support for exporters on the ground, despite all the ministerial jet-setting. “Britain is bad at focusing on specific business opportunities and identifying market gaps, especially in less sexy areas,” he says, adding that France and Germany do this much better. Rather feebly, British exporters struggle with language and culture outside the Anglosphere, according to surveys by the BCC of its members; it argues that too many mid-sized companies, in particular, have no ambition to export. Then there is the question of red tape and access to markets. Trying to satisfy all 28 of its members means that the EU often takes years to negotiate free-trade agreements; Eurosceptics argue that if Britain were unencumbered by the lumbering EU it would more easily cut its own bilateral deals with countries and boost trade. But economists warn that Britain’s bargaining position would be so much reduced on its own that it would be hard to get any very beneficial deals. And as Ms Dhingra points out, it is Britain itself that has contributed to holding up the India-EU free-trade deal, on the issue of immigration. Exporters will get a short-term boost in the immediate future as sterling has weakened over the past weeks. But recent history suggests that in the longer term there are no shortcuts to boosting exports—it’s just more of the old slog of flogging a product that people want at the right price.ASK Sadiq Khan for a case study and he gives you seven. Having casually inquired of London’s would-be mayor whether he draws on any particular international example, Bagehot was bombarded with the municipal merits of Detroit, New York, Chicago, Houston, Paris, Berlin and Los Angeles (“The previous mayor wanted to green LA and expand the port, but Barack Obama couldn’t get it through Congress or the Senate...so he jumped in a plane and went to China to get the funding.”). For such is Mr Khan: frenetic, keen to show that he is on top of his brief and—every bit the politician—even keener to say what he thinks his interlocutor wants to hear. His selection last September as Labour’s candidate for the mayoralty and his subsequent success in the opinion polls have defied expectations. Tessa Jowell, a doyenne of the party’s liberal right (and a member of The Economist Group’s board) had appeared better equipped to win over the centrist suburbs of Britain’s left-wing capital in its election on May 5th, but fell short. Mr Khan’s campaign has since proven too thin-skinned; howling that (admittedly unfair) Conservative accusations that he is a “radical” and a “lab rat” for Labour’s leadership were respectively anti-Islam and anti-London. His bid has been weakened by Jeremy Corbyn, the party’s hard-left leader who in his victory speech last September—horror flitting across Mr Khan’s face—proclaimed: “Sadiq, we’re going to be campaigning together.” Nonetheless, it seems the MP for Tooting is comfortably ahead of Zac Goldsmith, his thoughtful but posh Tory rival—by 45% to 35%, according to a recent poll by YouGov. It helps that the hard-left Mr Corbyn is driving moderate Labour activists towards Mr Khan, even though he is on the party’s soft-left. And Labour’s candidate has worked hard to distance himself from his leader, pledging to be London’s most pro-business mayor ever and decrying Mr Corbyn’s policies on tax and finance. Mr Khan’s main strength is that he exemplifies the city he wants to run. His parents moved there from Karachi, in Pakistan. The son of a bus driver, he grew up in a council flat in south London and lived out of a bunk-bed there until he was 24. He trained as a lawyer and subsequently ended up in Gordon Brown’s cabinet (by contrast, Mr Goldsmith was gifted the editorship of the Ecologist, an environmental magazine, by his uncle). “London gave me and my family the chance to fulfil our potential,” argues Mr Khan convincingly. Firmly pro-European, comfortable with immigration and a model of liberal Islam (he backed gay marriage and fought to keep a local pub open), he encapsulates the city’s contradictions: internationalist and parochial, swaggering and insecure, original and clichéd, socialist and capitalist. Would he make a good mayor? His programme, which he launched on February 2nd, is mixed. He has promising plans to improve Londoners’ skills and to accelerate the construction of Crossrail 2, a new subterranean railway that will run from London’s south-west to its north-east. Most excitingly, he wants to expand the debilitatingly meagre scope of the city’s mayoralty, pledging to lobby for new tax-raising abilities and local health powers to rival those which Manchester will acquire, ahead of the capital, in April. On the other hand, his “pro-business” programme seems to be more about what firms can do for the mayor (building infrastructure and houses, raising wages, advising on policies) than what the mayor can do for firms (beyond vague talk of the “jobs of tomorrow” and “engines of growth”). Meanwhile his housing policy—introducing rent controls, bolstering tenants’ protections and mandating a larger proportion of “affordable” homes while refusing to countenance building on the often ugly and mostly pointless green belt—does not match the scale of the task (40% of Londoners experience damp and the average house price could reach £1m, or $1.5m, in 2030). His stance on airport expansion is similarly disappointing: London’s probable next mayor opposes new runways at Heathrow, its only hub airport. London’s turning The good news is that Mr Khan will probably abandon these commitments if he wins office. When pushed, he struggles to justify his views on either Heathrow or the green belt. Mr Goldsmith may have had a point when he called his rival’s stance on the former “as authentic as Donald Trump’s hair”. That need not be a bad thing: if this, as is often asserted, is the age of mayors, it is thus also the age of pragmatism and ideological flexibility. Youthfully energetic despite his grey streaks, punchily ambitious (he boxes to keep fit) and hyperactive, Mr Khan—who even talks too fast, slamming one word into another—may just be the real deal. “I have heard him speak a number of times and he gets better and better,” says a senior Labourite close to Ms Jowell. The best argument for him is that, by all accounts, he is a good and likeable manager, aware of his weaknesses and (as his monologue about London’s rival cities suggests) open to external ideas. Unlike Boris Johnson and Ken Livingstone, London’s previous mayors, he is a team player. Unlike Ed Miliband, the former Labour leader whose campaign to run the party he led in 2010, he can take criticism. “If there’s a good idea I’ll replicate it; I’m not precious if it’s a Labour idea, a British idea, or not,” he insists. There is one caveat. If—as seems likely—Mr Khan wins on May 5th he will need to build a team that can anchor his mayoralty and give it public-policy ballast. Andrew Adonis, the Labour peer obsessed with detail and currently leading the government’s infrastructure commission, would be an excellent choice of policy chief. With someone like that on board, Mr Khan could prove a fine mayor indeed. Read a transcript of Bagehot’s interview with Sadiq Khan: Economist.com/blogs/bagehotWHETHER in Nairobi or Albuquerque, a shopping centre is not really a shopping centre unless it has at least two anchor tenants. These can be department stores, cinemas or bookshops—anything that will fill a large space and lure customers past smaller boutiques. The idea is that a cinema-goer might pause to buy a leather jacket; and, in a lovely symbiosis, the monied youngsters who shop for clothes and sunglasses might decide to catch a film. Take a lift to the top floor of the new SM Aura shopping centre in Manila, and you will find not a cinema or a Neiman Marcus but an enormous call centre. In the Philippines, the arrangement makes perfect sense. Like shops, call centres need young, middle-class people—but as workers, not customers. This one, run by Teleperformance, a multinational based in France, expects to get about 100 walk-in job applicants a day. Yet Manila’s call centres do not just need monied youngsters. They also produce them, in huge quantities. Were there no call centres in the Philippines, there would be many fewer middle-class people, and hence fewer shopping centres. Seldom has any country been so transformed by one industry as the Philippines has by call centres. The first “businessprocess outsourcing” jobs appeared in the 1990s: the term covers tasks from answering phones to processing invoices and animating TV shows, mostly for rich-world firms and governments. This loosely defined industry now employs some 1.2m people and accounts for about 8% of the Philippines’ GDP. The country is especially strong in call centres: it has already overtaken India, even though India has about 12 times as many people (see chart). Yet the Philippines is also, probably, the end of the line. New technologies are poised to abolish many call-centre jobs and transform others. At best, jobs will be created more slowly in the Philippines and India; at worst they will vanish. And it is likely that nowhere else will be able to talk its way out of poverty as they have done. There might never be another Manila. Companies put call centres in the Philippines for three reasons, says Alfredo Ayala of the Ayala Corporation, a conglomerate, who set up one of the first ones. The country’s telecoms market had been deregulated, holding costs down. The government designated call centres, or “contact centres”, as they are formally known, an export industry and cut their taxes. And firms wanted to diversify beyond India. A fourth reason, which Filipino businessfolk discuss rather delicately, is their customers’ prejudice. Americans, in particular, simply prefer talking to Filipinos than to Indians. Filipinos often describe their accents as “neutral” or deny that they have one. This is mostly the charming human delusion that everybody except oneself talks funny; yet there is something to it, says David Rizzo of Teleperformance. When American callers hear Indian accents, they know they are talking to a call centre in India. But they cannot quite place the Filipino accent. To add to the confusion, Filipinos are experts on American culture, a legacy of military occupation in the early 20th century. American football and basketball fill the sports pages of Manila newspapers. The relative preference for Filipino accents has become so strong that large Indian outsourcing firms such as Infosys and Tata Consultancy Services have moved some of their “voice work” to Manila. Yet it creates a problem. Late morning in New York is midnight in the Philippines. So a Filipino serving the American market—as about 70% do, in business-process outsourcing as a whole—will probably have to work through the night. The night shift has become so common that some karaoke bars in Manila stay open around the clock. Jobs with more civilised hours tout the fact as though it were a novelty. “Wake up when the sun rises and sleep after it sets!” promises one advertisement. Night work is tough, say a dozen call-centre workers who have come off their shift at 7.30am, and are sipping coffee in Manila. They find it hard to sleep by day (see article) and see too little of their families. And the job makes those who do it “toxic”, says one woman. For all that Americans prefer Filipino accents to Indian ones—which these Filipinos can impersonate, amusingly if not accurately—they still suspect they are talking to foreigners, and may be angry and rude. What do Americans say? “Fuck you,” chime these polite young people, in unison. Some officials and politicians claim that call-centre workers are behind a rise in HIV infections (albeit from a low base). Workers often cram into shared flats, and their odd hours unmoor them from ordinary life. A report by the University of the Philippines in 2009 found that call-centre workers in Manila were slightly more likely than other young people to take drugs, and were much more sexually active. More than half of the men reported having had casual sex—a quarter of those with other men. Only 44% said they had used condoms on the last occasion. Women said the share was even lower. Overall, though, the call-centre explosion has been a colossal boon for Filipinos who speak good English. With so many employers to choose from, they can demand gyms, cafés and computer-games rooms, as well as higher pay. Experienced workers can often find managerial jobs. And though the night shift is hard, it is far better than being a maid in Saudi Arabia. The Philippines has long exported workers: remittances are worth around 10% of GDP. But business-process outsourcing is catching up fast. Many of the 1.2m people who found jobs in outsourcing in recent years would otherwise have gone abroad, reckons Mr Ayala. So it is no surprise that other places would like to repeat Manila’s trick. Outsourcing firms are already building call centres in provincial cities in the Philippines, where employees are less picky. And other countries, some of them in better time zones, are trying to grab a share of the business. South Africa is especially keen. But they are likely to be disappointed, because the call-centre industry is on the verge of profound change. Operator, what’s wrong? Much of the call-handling and data-processing work sent overseas is basic and repetitive, says Pat Geary of Blue Prism, a British technology firm. When somebody challenges a gas-meter reading or asks to move an old phone number to a new SIM card, many databases must be updated, often by tediously cutting and pasting from one to another. Such routine tasks can often be done better by a machine. Blue Prism makes software “robots” that carry out such repetitive tasks just as a person would do them, without requiring a change to underlying IT systems—but much faster and more cheaply. The firm has contracts with more than 100 outfits. Increasingly, Western companies prod customers to get in touch via e-mail or online chat. Software robots can often handle these inquiries. The cleverest systems, such as the one Celaton, another British firm, has built for Virgin Trains, refer the most complex questions to human operators and learn from the responses. The longer they run, the better they get. Software is also making call-centre workers more efficient. It can quickly retrieve and display customer data on their screens, reducing the need to transfer callers to other departments (where, irksomely, they will have to prove their identity yet again) or log on to a creaky IT system (“I’m sorry, our computers are down at the moment”). Software robots are only going to become faster, cleverer and cheaper. Sarah Burnett of Everest, a research firm, predicts that the most basic jobs will vanish as a result. Call-centre workers will still be needed, not for repetitive tasks, but to coax customers into buying other products and services. That is a harder job, demanding better language skills. So automation might mean fewer jobs, or at least less growth, in India and the Philippines, but more jobs in America and Europe. This might already be happening. Between 2013 and 2014 America’s share of global contact-centre employment rose slightly, from 19% to 21%, according to Everest. Outsourcing contracts that move work overseas have become rarer. Western banks are especially keen on repatriating work, says Arie Lewin of Duke University, an expert on outsourcing. That is partly because of America’s stringent but vague Dodd-Frank Act, which has made them paranoid about their suppliers’ activities. This might work well or badly for the Philippines. Perhaps software robots will wipe out the dullest jobs, freeing Filipinos for more interesting conversations. Lately, for example, qualified nurses have been in demand to advise American patients on whether their sneezes and rashes might be serious—one result of cost-cutting inspired by Obamacare. Or it is possible that computers will learn to handle almost all simple inquiries, leaving humans to deal with the most incoherent, irate customers. If that happens, Filipinos will widen their repertoire of Anglo-Saxon insults. It’s been a hard day’s night WORKING all night to answer American phone calls does not sound healthy. “You’re seated much of the time, and then you binge on junk food,” says Jose Mari Mercado, head of the main outsourcing association in the Philippines. Call-centre workers try to catch up on lost sleep during the day, but often fail, and then flop at the end of the week. New research suggests that night work is very unhealthy indeed. One study found that the longer nurses in South Korea had worked the night shift, the more likely they were to be obese. Another study, of retired car workers in China, found that shift work was associated with high blood pressure and diabetes. A French study in 2014 found that ten years of shift work was associated with cognitive decline equivalent to an extra six-and-a-half years of ageing. People who work at night suffer in two ways, says Derk-Jan Dijk of the University of Surrey. First, a new schedule throws the body’s “circadian clock”—the inbuilt mechanism that regulates waking and sleeping—out of alignment. Night workers eat when their bodies are not ready for food and try to sleep when they are not tired. That leads to the second problem: night-shift workers simply do not sleep enough. It is hard to know whether sleep disruption or exhaustion causes ill-health—or both together. A link between night work and type 2 diabetes, for example, might be because eating at the wrong times leads to more free fatty acids or because exhausted people eat more, or even because it can be hard to get wholesome food in the middle of the night. In theory, night workers could avoid health problems by completely switching to a night-time schedule. But weekends, social obligations and sunlight make that impossible for most. Mr Dijk says the only people who seem to manage it are shift workers on offshore oil rigs, who labour in windowless rooms and do not take weekends off. But they suffer from jet lag when they return home.SEEN IN SILHOUETTE from a commuter ferry bustling across the Bosporus, parts of Istanbul seem to have changed little from centuries past. Looking to the west, towards Europe, the old walled city is still capped by multiple domes and spiky minarets. But turn to the east, towards Asia, and a different picture unfolds. Standing as sentries to the narrow strait, giant gantry cranes heave containers onto waiting ships. Beyond them, along the low-slung Marmara shore, march soaring ranks of high-rise buildings. To the north, the hills on the Asian side of the Bosporus prickle with a metallic forest of communications towers. And on the highest of those hills rises a startling mirror to the old Istanbul: the giant bulbous dome and six rocket-like minarets of a colossal new mosque (pictured). When finished later this year, this will be Turkey’s biggest-ever house of prayer. The scale and symbolism of the mosque, like so much of the frenzied construction that is reshaping this city, reflect the will and vision of one man: Recep Tayyip Erdogan. After over two decades in power, from 1994 as mayor of Istanbul, from 2003 as Turkey’s prime minister and since August 2014 as president, Mr Erdogan towers over his country’s political landscape. To detractors he is a would-be sultan, implacable, cunning and reckless in his ambition. To admirers he is the embodiment of a revived national spirit, a man of the people elevated to worldly glory, a pugnacious righter of wrongs and a bold defender of the faith. Mr Erdogan has presided over some startling transformations. In two short decades his country, and most dramatically its long-neglected Anatolian hinterland, has moved from relative poverty and provincialism to relative wealth and sophistication. An inward-looking nation that exported little except labour has become a regional economic powerhouse, a tourist magnet as well as a haven for refugees, and an increasingly important global hub for energy, trade and transport. In many ways Turkey’s 78m people have never had it so good. Since the 1990s the proportion of those living below the official poverty line has declined from the teens to low single digits, and the share of the middle class has doubled to over 40%. By every measure of living standards, the gap between Turkey and fellow members of the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries, has shrunk markedly. Under the subtle but relentless Islamising influence of the Justice and Development (AK) party, co-founded and led by Mr Erdogan until he became the nation’s (theoretically non-partisan) president, the Sunni Muslim component of Turkey’s complex national identity has strengthened. The long shadow of Kemal Ataturk, the ruthless moderniser who 90 years ago built a secular republic on the ashes of the Ottoman Empire, has faded. The AK party has marched the army, long given to ejecting elected governments from power, back to its barracks. Turkey has resumed its role as turntable between east and west. When the AK party stumbled badly in parliamentary elections in June 2015, pundits were quick to herald an end to Mr Erdogan’s long winning streak. Whiffs of corruption and abuse of power had tainted his party, and terrorist acts by Islamic State (IS) and the influx of more than 2m Syrian refugees into the country had made Turks question his judgment. Who dares, wins Shorn of a parliamentary majority for the first time since 2002, the AK party should have sought a coalition partner, but instead Mr Erdogan boldly gambled on a new election on November 1st. To everyone’s astonishment his party surged back, trouncing a trio of rival parties. With 317 seats in the Grand National Assembly, Turkey’s unicameral 550-seat parliament, the party can now again legislate at will. However, its majority is insufficient to allow it to revise Turkey’s 1982 constitution on its own. That was what Mr Erdogan had been trying to achieve in the June election, in the hope of creating a presidential system that would greatly widen his ostensibly limited (but in fact extensive) powers as president. In the absence of a two-thirds majority, he must work in tandem with his hand-picked prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, who is a less divisive figure. Ahead of the November election Mr Erdogan wisely toned down rhetoric about expanding his own powers but quietly strengthened his control over the party. At a party meeting last September he engineered the replacement of 31 members (out of 50) of the party’s politburo with people personally loyal to him. One of these, his son-in law, is now also a cabinet minister; and one of the party’s new members of parliament is Mr Erdogan’s former chauffeur. Today there is no doubt about who is boss. Bureaucrats in Ankara, the capital, respond to the merest whisper from the saray (palace), the grandiose 1,000-room presidential complex, built atop a hill on the city’s outskirts at a reported cost of $615m and opened in 2014. The famously short-fused Mr Erdogan will almost certainly continue to dominate Turkish politics until the end of his term in 2019, and very possibly beyond: some say he has set his sights on 2023, the 100th anniversary of the Turkish republic. By then he would have served at the helm of the Turkish state for far longer than Ataturk himself. To his party’s pious core constituency, that is something to rejoice in. Much of the country’s urban working class, as well as those living in the stretch of central Anatolia sometimes known as Turkey’s Koran belt, share this cult-like devotion to the former food vendor and semi-professional footballer turned statesman. Other AK voters, such as small businessmen and property developers, may be warier of Mr Erdogan. They support the party mainly because of its record of economic growth and relative stability after decades of turbulence. The AK’s swift comeback between the June and November polls reflected fear of a return to political volatility as much as enthusiasm for its policies. The collapse last summer of peace talks between the government and the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK), an armed rebel group, raises the spectre of more bloodshed. The talks had made little progress but did much to calm the restless south-east, a region dominated by ethnic Kurds, who make up 15-20% of Turkey’s population nationwide. Fighting in the region in the 1980s and 1990s had left some 40,000 soldiers, rebels and civilians dead and displaced perhaps 1m Kurds from their homes. Soon after the June election, clashes between security forces and Kurdish activists, which had been suspended for two years, resumed. In the months since, heavily armed police have clamped curfews on Kurdish towns. The clashes have left well over a hundred civilians dead, in addition to scores of Turkish security men and, says the Turkish army, more than 400 alleged PKK guerrillas. At the same time Mr Erdogan faces rising economic headwinds. Between 2002 and 2007 Turkey’s GDP grew at an annual average of 6.8% and its exports tripled, but since then GDP growth has settled at around 3.5% a year and exports have remained virtually flat. Income per person, which the AK party four years ago rashly promised would rise to $25,000 a year within a decade, is stuck at around $10,000. None of this is disastrous, and Turkey’s economy is far more robust than it used to be. The trouble is that Mr Erdogan’s government has continued to behave as if the good times had kept rolling. Although the country’s chronic current-account deficit has narrowed lately, thanks to falling energy prices, Turkey relies heavily on foreign capital and is finding it increasingly difficult to attract money from abroad. Yet in recent years its government has shied away from reforms to boost the meagre domestic savings rate or promote industry, even as a consumer credit binge and heavy infrastructure spending have crowded out private investment. Rigid labour and tax rules remain a burden. Mr Erdogan himself has shaken confidence further by bullying his central bank to keep money cheap and by hitting the business interests of political rivals. Without a serious policy shift, including an effort to deal with concerns about institutional independence and the rule of law, Turkey’s economy will continue to underperform. Darker scenarios have less to do with the country’s domestic market than with geopolitics. Because of the way it straddles cultures and continents, Turkey has always held a complicated hand. In recent years the mayhem on its southern borders, coupled with renewed tension pitting its NATO and European allies against an expansionist Russia, have made its position all the more delicate. Yet Mr Erdogan’s government has failed to show much diplomatic finesse. Everyone agrees that Turkey has been immensely generous in accommodating well over 2m refugees from Syria’s civil war. It has also worked hard to resolve long-standing squabbles with neighbours such as Greece, Bulgaria, Cyprus and Armenia. But it has often appeared aloof and suspicious, failing to communicate effectively or to work with allies. The most important of these, and Turkey’s dominant trading partner, is the European Union. Fear of a continuing tidal wave of migrants has lately prompted Europe to proffer aid and a resumption of stalled talks on Turkish membership in exchange for tighter border controls. But there is little warmth in the relationship. Most European governments still see Turkey as a buffer more than a partner. And Mr Erdogan’s government has appeared more concerned to extract concessions than to adopt European norms as a good thing in their own right. The danger of isolation was sharply underlined in November when Turkish jets shot down a Russian fighter over Syria that had briefly entered its air space. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, swiftly responded with a broadside of sanctions. The Russian measures could trim up to 0.7% from Turkish GDP growth this year, according to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. With lukewarm support from its allies, Turkey has tried to calm the excitement. But given its support for militias fighting against Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, and Russia’s growing military commitment to his survival, there could well be more clashes. Turkey seems in danger of stumbling into an unplanned but potentially costly fight. It imports most of its gas from Russia, and Turkish construction firms have well over $10 billion-worth of Russian contracts on their books. Now Turkey faces a new threat. A double suicide-bombing in Ankara on October 10th last year aimed at a march by leftist trade unions and Kurdish activists killed more than 100 people. In January suicide-bombers struck again, this time in the heart of Istanbul, killing ten tourists. Both attacks were attributed to Islamic State. In a country that has long seen itself as insulated from Middle Eastern turmoil, the intrusion of violent radical Islam came as a particular shock. Worse, it partly reflected Mr Erdogan’s slowness to recognise the danger of blow-back from his own policies in Syria, where Turkey for too long indulged radical Islamists so long as they opposed the Assad regime. Rather than blame the party in power for such setbacks, worried voters in November rallied behind Mr Erdogan, backing a strong, tested government rather than risk rule by a possibly weaker coalition. It helped that the ruling party, in effect, controls Turkey’s mainstream media, which pumped up nationalism in the face of danger. Mr Erdogan had carried the 2014 presidential election with a slim majority of 52%, and his AK party, for all its success, enjoys the support of just half the Turkish public. Many of the rest remain sceptical or even bitterly opposed to him. This special report will argue that Turkey’s leaders, with their ambitions still set on mastery, are not doing nearly enough to heal such internal rifts. The Kurdish issue looms as one big danger, and so does the Turkish economy’s growing vulnerability to external shocks. Mr Erdogan’s blustering, bulldozing style, together with his party’s growing intolerance for dissent, portends trouble. What Koza Ipek supporters thought of the state takeover FOR 400 YEARS, says a founding myth common to Turkic peoples from China to the Aegean sea, forebears of the Turks were trapped in the rocky valley of Ergenekon. But one day an ingenious blacksmith learned to melt stone, and a grey she-wolf appeared to lead the tribe from its mountain fastness into the rich plains. Similarly, Kemal Ataturk has for generations been depicted in Turkish schools as a hero who after the first world war rallied a beaten people, repulsed a swarm of invaders and forged a strong new nation. In some ways the story of the rise of the Justice and Development party echoes those tales, with Recep Tayyip Erdogan presented as leading Turkey from a dark era of Kemalist faithlessness into a bright Islamic future. But now that the party has risen, the story is getting darker. Early in his career Mr Erdogan made a telling remark he was later to regret. Democracy is like a train, he said; you get off once you have reached your destination. Now many of his party’s critics fear that Turkey’s president may be getting close to that goal. It is not just that Mr Erdogan wants to rewrite the constitution to award himself executive presidential powers. The trouble is that he hardly needs them. Sometimes overtly, but often by stealth and dissimulation, the AK party has spread its tentacles across Turkish society. The courts, the police, the intelligence services, the mosques, the public education and health systems and the media are all, in one way or another, subject to the party’s overweening influence. The judiciary makes an instructive example. Turkish courts and state prosecutors have never enjoyed a sparkling reputation for neutrality. Mr Erdogan’s own spell in jail in the 1990s, for the “crime” of reciting a poem, represents one of the milder perversions of justice that prevailed before the AK party’s rise. Most Turks cheered as the party undertook a series of reforms, billed as raising Turkish justice to European standards. These changes concerned both the shape and the size of judicial bodies. In the name of democratising a board that oversees judicial appointments, the AK party expanded its membership, and in the fine print also increased its own powers to select those members. A subsequent move to expand the number of state prosecutors, with the ostensibly laudable aim of speeding up the creaky justice system, enabled the party to appoint thousands more loyalists. The result is a judicial apparatus that, except for the highest courts, increasingly dances to the AK party’s tune. One example is the use of legislation that penalises insults to the head of state. Turkey’s criminal code has contained such a law since 1926, but it was rarely applied before Mr Erdogan was elected president in August 2014. Opposition MPs say that since then state prosecutors have investigated more than 1,500 people for insulting the president, a crime that can carry a sentence of more than four years. In the first ten months of 2015 nearly 100 people were held in custody on such charges, including cartoonists and journalists, but also teenage boys who had defaced campaign posters or posted Facebook messages. A woman in Izmir was recently sentenced to 11 months in prison for a rude hand gesture directed at Mr Erdogan. An illuminating case of a different kind is that of Sevan Nisanyan, a 59-year-old linguist and author of an etymology of modern Turkish. Mr Nisanyan is also known for his work to restore a semi-derelict village near Turkey’s Aegean coast, a rare example of careful conservation in a region better known for rampant tourist development. Since January 2014 he has been in prison, sentenced to an astonishing 16 years for various minor infractions of building codes, in a country where illegal construction is commonplace; even Mr Erdogan’s new presidential palace violates zoning laws. Mr Nisanyan is of Armenian extraction, as well as being an outspoken atheist and a critic of the AK party. Education is another field in which the party’s ideological bent is increasingly evident. As mayor of Istanbul, Mr Erdogan once said he would like every state school to become an imam hatip, a vocational high school with an emphasis on religious training. When such schools first opened in the 1950s, the idea was to supply mosques with preachers. When the AK party took power, they accounted for barely 2% of Turkey’s students. Following a series of reforms, that proportion has risen fivefold, to more than 1m students. Some 1,500 non-religious schools have been converted to imam hatips. Thanks to a well-endowed charity run by Mr Erdogan’s son, these schools are often better equipped than ordinary state ones. Some parents now find they have no choice. Keep your mouth shut The most glaring example of the AK party’s creeping annexation of the public sphere, however, are Turkey’s media. By putting pressure on private owners and making vigorous use of laws against incitement, defamation and the spread of “terrorist propaganda”, the party has come to exercise control over all but a handful of broadcasters and news publishers. “I don’t remember any time when it was like this,” says Erol Onderoglu of Reporters Without Borders, a watchdog group. “Hundreds of journalists have been fired or arrested in the past five years, and we expect more every day.” In recent months the assault on press freedom has involved not just threats and spurious judicial procedures but outright violence. In September mobs attacked the offices of Hurriyet, one of Turkey’s few remaining independent newspapers, after Mr Erdogan criticised its editors on national television. Soon afterwards thugs, several of whom were later found to be AK party members, beat up a popular television presenter, Ahmet Hakan, in front of his Istanbul home, breaking his nose and several ribs. In December Mr Hakan found himself threatened with an investigation for “propagating terrorism” after a guest on his programme said it was a mistake to dismiss the PKK as a terrorist organisation. A particularly dramatic case of state interference in the press involved the takeover by the government, days before the November election, of Koza Ipek Holding, an industrial group. One of Koza Ipek’s television stations, already confined to the internet after Turkish satellite carriers were asked to drop its broadcasts, showed live footage of law enforcers invading its Istanbul headquarters before abruptly going off air. So far 74 of Koza Ipek’s employees have lost their jobs. Since the takeover the group’s flagship newspaper has typically featured a large picture of Mr Erdogan above the fold. Figures released by an opposition representative on the board that monitors the state broadcasting service show that the AK party enjoyed overwhelming dominance of air time during the election campaign. Mr Erdogan personally got 29 hours of coverage in the first 25 days of October and the AK party 30 hours. By contrast, the Peoples’ Democratic party, or HDP, was given a grand total of just 18 minutes on air. Even so, it attracted 5.1m votes. Turkey’s private channels are little better. As the biggest street protests in Turkey’s history erupted in Istanbul in the summer of 2013, the country’s most popular news channel, CNN Turk, ran a documentary on penguins. Like the parent companies of other media outlets, its owner, Dogan Holding, feared government retribution. According to one media expert in Istanbul, the takeover of Koza Ipek has left just three news channels out of Turkey’s top 40 that are critical of the AK party. Reporters Without Borders now ranks Turkey 149th out of 180 countries on its World Freedom Index, just three places above Russia and 51 down on 2005. Turkey’s increasingly beleaguered liberals debate among themselves just when the AK party reached a turning point. Some point to 2007, when the army ineptly tried to stop the party from installing its own man (then Abdullah Gul) as president, prompting the AK party to adopt a harder line. Others say the Arab Spring of 2011, which saw the emergence of powerful like-minded Islamist movements in Tunisia and Egypt, may have emboldened the party. And some suggest May 2013, when the violent police response to a campaign against plans for a shopping mall in Istanbul’s Gezi park sparked drawn-out protests across the country. This coincided with the overthrow in Egypt of Muhammad Morsi, whose Muslim Brotherhood government the AK party had loudly cheered. Mr Erdogan’s furious response to the Gezi protests, say critics, reflected paranoia about a plot to undermine Islamist regimes. He repeatedly blamed the protests on a nebulous “interest-rate lobby,” supposedly bent on weakening the Turkish economy. Other AK party officials hinted at a global Jewish conspiracy. The Gezi protests petered out by the end of that summer, but prosecutions of troublemakers continued. In October last year 244 people received jail sentences of up to 14 months for their part in the protest movement. They included four doctors accused of “polluting” a mosque. The court ignored testimony that they had entered the mosque at the invitation of its imam, using the sanctuary to treat injured people. The most commonly cited tipping point in both the AK party’s and Mr Erdogan’s stance, however, is December 2013, when financial police arrested 47 members of an alleged corruption ring, including businessmen, state officials and the sons of several AK party cabinet ministers. Recordings of embarrassing personal calls, including some apparently with Mr Erdogan—who has denied their authenticity—soon appeared on the internet. They painted a picture of nepotism and influence-peddling, much of it involving lucrative construction contracts handed to party favourites. Dozens of officials were forced to resign. The motive for the arrests and the leaks was not hard to find. For several years trouble had been brewing between the AK party and Hizmet, a shadowy religious-nationalist movement founded by Fethullah Gulen. a charismatic prayer leader who preaches a mild, Sufism-inspired and public-service-oriented form of Islam. Mr Gulen has lived in self-imposed exile in America since the 1990s, but his influence in Turkey, created over decades, has remained strong. In the AK party’s early years Hizmet was a powerful ally. Its media outlets boosted the Islamist cause, and graduates from its universities provided a useful pool of white-collar talent for the AK party. Not unlike the Freemasons, the movement had followers throughout Turkey’s government, but particularly in the police and the judiciary. After the AK party’s election victory in 2002 they were seen as key to the dismantling of Turkey’s “deep state”, and particularly to the show trials of military officers. The leaking of tapes that damaged the reputation of secular rivals to the AK party was also linked to Hizmet. The Gulenists may have been prompted to air the AK party’s dirty laundry by Mr Erdogan’s decision in late 2013 to close hundreds of Gulen-affiliated schools. Whatever the reason, the AK party’s response has been ferocious, amounting to a witch hunt against Hizmet supporters and sympathisers. Since January 2014 some 6,000 police officers have been transferred or fired on suspicion of ties to the group. Waves of arrests have targeted journalists, lawyers and academics, among others. The enemy within In December 2014 Mr Gulen, who is 74, was officially declared the head of a terrorist organisation bent on establishing a “parallel state”. That has allowed prosecutors to charge alleged associates, including newspaper editors, with terrorism offences. The government also reversed earlier convictions that had been secured with the Gulenists’ help. Nearly all military officers who had been subjected to show trials were released. Some of the charges of attempted Gulenist infiltration may well be justified. Yet most Turks other than core supporters of the AK also feel that the allegations of corruption against the ruling party cannot be dismissed out of hand. To many, Mr Erdogan’s furious persecution of this “enemy within” is a way of deflecting attention from the AK party’s own plans for capturing the state. “They are not just crushing what exists,” says Mr Onderoglu of Reporters Without Borders. “They are building new media, a new civil society and a new deep state.”WHEN THE AK party was founded in 2001, few would have predicted its success. Just four years earlier the army had intervened, for the fourth time since 1960, to depose an elected government, on this occasion an Islamist-led coalition. The Islamists were then banned, but the squabbling secularists that succeeded them proved ineffective and corrupt. The economy was in tatters. At its birth the AK party represented a mixed bag of interests. Its supporters ranged from hard-core Islamists to members of more traditional religious fraternities, Islamist modernisers, socially conservative businessmen and even secular reformists and Kurds. Some of its founders had made their name in local politics; in 1994 Mr Erdogan was elected mayor of Istanbul, where he was seen as energetic and effective. He gained extra glory among Islamists in 1998 by being briefly imprisoned for “inciting hatred based on religious differences”, having publicly recited a nationalist poem. The party’s surprise triumph in national elections in 2002 owed much to Mr Erdogan’s formidable powers of oratory and organisation, but also something to luck. Its 34.3% share of the vote translated into a whopping two-thirds of all parliamentary seats, ironically because Turkey’s generals, intent on keeping Islamists and Kurds out of the legislature, had set the threshold for any party to enter parliament at a steep 10% of the national vote. Of 16 quarrelling secular parties, only one, the Republican People’s party (CHP), founded by Ataturk himself, won any seats, leaving the AK party with little opposition. It also benefited from economic reforms introduced in 2001, which caused short-term pain but produced long-term gains for which it took the credit. With both the economy and politics stable for the first time in years, Mr Erdogan seized the opportunity to push Turkey’s bid to join the European Union. His overture to the West assuaged fears that the AK party harboured an unstated Islamising agenda. The 2001 terrorist attacks on America also helped persuade the West that the democratically elected, mild-mannered and pro-business AK party was worth supporting. Leftists in Turkey were seduced by Mr Erdogan’s populist rhetoric and his ambitious social agenda that quickly produced better housing, health care and education. Conservatives liked the AK party’s economic policy, which promoted growth but kept taxes low. Traditionalist Turks were pleased that women could now wear headscarves. Voters of many political stripes also cheered as the party took on the country’s “deep state”, the matrix of military, security, judicial and even criminal bodies that had for decades exerted control behind a veneer of democracy. Through a series of massive trials, the influence of these unaccountable agents was slowly punctured. “We all honestly wished them well,” says a Turkish professor of the AK party’s early years. “It was a quietly revolutionary movement, a corrective to so many years of bullying.” Many of his secular friends were soon voting for and even joining the party. Over the past decade the AK party has notched up some remarkable electoral victories. In the 2007 general election its share of the vote rose to 47% and in 2011 to 49%. In 2007 the party’s candidate, Abdullah Gul, won a parliamentary vote to become president. Following two referendums to approve constitutional changes, Mr Erdogan succeeded him as directly elected president in 2014. And after the brief hiccup of the parliamentary election last June, the AK party surged back in November with 49.5% of the vote. Political analysts put the party’s core constituency of pious Muslims and Islamist ideologues at 20-30% of the electorate. A similar-sized but less committed group is made up of conservative nationalists and businesspeople. The AK party has shown great skill at keeping both groups happy. Yet as it becomes more powerful, it is relying less on charm and persuasion and more on threats and rewards. That is making even some party stalwarts uncomfortable.“THE PEOPLE HAVE voted for stability,” proclaimed President Erdogan after his party’s electoral landslide in November. The markets applauded, too. Istanbul’s stock index jumped and the Turkish lira rose against the dollar, both reversing long slides. Year-end indicators showed an upward trend in GDP growth, from a rate of around 3% to nearer 4%. But business euphoria quickly faded. Stability certainly beats chaos or months of coalition haggling, the markets seemed to say, but if stability means “more of the same”, we are not so sure. That may seem a churlish reaction. Turkey has made great economic strides in the past 15 years. It has become a trusted supplier of high-quality consumer goods and is now Europe’s biggest manufacturer of television sets and light commercial vehicles. Its capital goods pass muster in Germany for their precision. Turkey is also the world’s eighth-biggest food producer and sixth-most-popular tourist destination. Forty-three of the top 250 international construction firms are Turkish. Moreover, Turkish business has often proved nimble. Ten years ago the country’s textile industry was foundering, priced out by East Asia, but it has since discovered a lucrative niche supplying higher-quality goods to Europe on shorter time scales. As prospects in the Middle East have dimmed, Turkish contractors have switched to markets such as Russia and Africa. The AK party is justly proud of having presided over plunging inflation, shrinking sovereign debt and a jump in exports (by a whopping 325% in the ten years to 2012). However, most of those things were achieved a while back. Between 2002 and 2007 Turkey’s economy expanded by an average of 6.8% a year, but since then it has been more volatile. Over the past decade, annual average growth has been a modest 3.5%. Income per person has barely been rising for the past four years. The same is true for exports. Average inflation has been above the central bank’s target in all but one of the past ten years. Much of the slowdown is due to the vagaries of the global business cycle. Around 60% of Turkey’s trade is with Europe, which also accounts for three-quarters of foreign direct investment in the country. The continent’s recent economic troubles are not Turkey’s fault. Nor is the mayhem in the Middle East, which a decade ago was Turkey’s fastest-growing export market. A deep recession in Russia, a big supplier of energy and tourists and a market for farm exports, has also hit growth prospects. Turkey’s recent political spat with Russia has made things worse. Other external events have been more helpful. Thanks to a sharp fall in the oil price, Turkey’s current-account deficit narrowed to around $35 billion in the 12 months to November, the lowest in over five years. Even so, the loans piled up to fund the big external deficits of the past have left the economy vulnerable. Much of Turkey’s foreign debt, notably to its companies, is in dollars, which have become more expensive to service as the lira has steadily weakened. From know-who to know-how The economy also suffers from a range of home-grown troubles. Onerous regulations make it hard for small businesses to grow bigger and more efficient. The World Economic Forum, a think-tank, ranks Turkey 131st out of 144 countries by labour-market efficiency. Most economists agree that without substantial structural reform, weak growth is here to stay. “Our new normal seems to be 3-3.5%,” says Emre Deliveli, a columnist on economic affairs. “For America or the EU that would be fine, but with our demographics we need 3.5% as a minimum just to keep unemployment flat.” Turkey is a classic case of what economists call the “middle-income trap”: the difficulty encountered when countries that have recently emerged from poverty try to move up into the club of rich countries. They may, like Turkey, have learned how to assemble cars or washing machines, boost agricultural productivity or mobilise capital and labour, but they find it harder to add value through research, design, branding and marketing. According to World Bank data, the share of high-tech goods in Turkish manufactured exports has been stuck at 2% since 2002. Martin Raiser, until recently Turkey director for the World Bank, has described the kind of shift required as a move from the “know-who” to the “know-how” economy. The key, he believes, is to develop institutions that are resilient to changing regimes and can sustain long-term growth. This is where Turkey has fallen short. Connections all too often still outweigh competence. Big privately held holding companies dominate many sectors, squeezing out smaller, more innovative firms. “We are not in a middle-income trap, we are in a reform trap,” says Zumrut Imamoglu, chief economist of TUSIAD, a think-tank funded by Turkey’s biggest private firms. She sees the AK government drifting away from a pro-growth agenda towards a programme that more narrowly serves the party’s own interests. Consumer and business confidence have taken a knock. When the Turkish economy crashed in 2001, an IMF-enforced remedial programme provided useful discipline, reinforced by hopes of EU membership. Turkey’s subsequent boom owed much to stringent controls on state spending, increased budget transparency, more independence for the central bank and moves towards more open and better-regulated markets. But once the IMF’s cure had worked and the EU became cooler about Turkish accession, the impetus for reform waned. In a recent paper two Turkish economists, Daron Acemoglu of MIT and Murat Ucer of Koc University in Istanbul, point out that although AK governments have maintained laudable fiscal discipline, in other respects their economic management has been less impressive. “The AK government that had supported the economic opening made an about-face once it became sufficiently powerful,” they write. “Gradually, the de jure and de facto control of the ruling cadre intensified, amplifying corruption and arbitrary, unpredictable decision-making.” A forthcoming book by Esra Gurakar of Okan University, "Politics of Favouritism in Public Procurement in Turkey", illustrates the point. The adoption of a law in 2001 to regulate government procurement at first improved transparency, it says. With time, however, the number of exceptions to the law grew and the share of public contracts awarded via open auction shrank. By 2011 some 44% of government contracts were being awarded by unaccountable bureaucrats. Businesses without friends in government have suffered. One of Turkey’s most successful construction conglomerates, with a fat international order book and an annual turnover of close to $6 billion, has not won a big Turkish government contract since the AK party took power. Some say this is because it is seen as too close to Western governments that have been critical of the party. Similarly, companies that own media outlets have been cut out of business in other fields if they fail to toe the line. The share price of Dogan Holding, which owns some of the few remaining independent newspapers and TV channels, fell by 16% on news of November’s election results. Firms with the right contacts, say critics of the government, have done well, winning not just direct state contracts but privileged access to deals involving state-owned land and getting early warning of regulatory and zoning changes. One example is TOKI, the state agency for affordable housing, which the AK has turned into a partner for private developers. “There is a cycle,” says Mustafa Sonmez, an economist: “I give you public land, you build, we share—it’s a great way to reward friends.” Slippage is also in evidence over the independence of Turkey’s central bank, or TCMB. The bank is generally held in high regard, but in recent years it has failed either to rein back inflation, currently around 9%, or to prevent a steady decline in the value of the Turkish lira, which has fallen by half against the dollar since 2010. Many economists and businessmen pin the blame on Mr Erdogan, who has publicly badgered the bank to keep interest rates down. On one occasion he accused its governor, Erdem Basci, of being a traitor to the nation for championing a higher rate. A recent analysis of TCMB policies by economists at the Centre for Financial Studies at the Goethe University in Frankfurt reckons that between 2010 and 2014 Turkey’s central bank on average set the official interest rate about 7 percentage points too low, judging by its own policy responses in the previous decade. It is not clear why Mr Erdogan is so concerned about interest rates. Speculation about possible motives ranges from trying to woo voters with cheaper money to religious concerns about usury. His economic advisers have often hinted at a shadowy global “interest-rate lobby” seeking to damage Turkey’s economy. Mr Basci is due to leave his job in April, perhaps with some relief. Turkish businessmen want his successor to be given more leeway to set credible policies. They reckon that the country’s politically determined loose monetary policy has been partly responsible for a surge in consumer debt, which grew from an average of about 5% of household income in 2002 to 55% in 2013. The credit binge made Turkish consumers feel rich: nominal household wealth has tripled in the past decade. But the cheap money has also steadily eroded Turkey’s savings rate. At just 12.6% of GDP in 2014, it was the lowest in any big emerging market. Artificially low interest rates have also directed investment away from industry into sectors with quicker returns, such as consumer imports and property speculation. According to the IMF, between mid-2012 and mid-2014 the proportion of bank credit earmarked for construction rose from less than 50% to over 70% of all loans. Across the country, fancy new housing estates, office complexes and shopping malls are far more in evidence than new factories. Since 2012 property prices have risen smartly, helped in part by looser rules on foreign ownership. In July 2015 the average price of a house in booming Istanbul was 20% up in real terms on a year earlier. The fall in domestic saving has also made Turkey even more dependent on foreign finance. Its foreign debt is approaching $400 billion, or about 50% of GDP. Much of this is short-term, and the vast bulk of it is private. Last July Fitch, a ratings agency, singled out Turkey as the large emerging market most vulnerable to the effects of a long-expected rise in American interest rates. The Fed’s initial move, in December, was smaller than expected, but Turkey still gets poor marks from ratings agencies. Moody’s and Fitch both put its sovereign debt at the lowest investment grade, and Standard & Poor’s rates it as junk. Foreign direct investment, which reached a peak of about $22 billion in 2007, has been on a downward trend ever since, sliding to around $12.5 billion in 2014 and probably staying at the same level last year. Foreign firms have made no major acquisitions in Turkey in recent years and have launched no big greenfield projects, notes Mr Sonmez, the economist. This is due partly to a general wariness of emerging markets, but partly also to Turkey’s perceived political volatility, a weak currency, relatively high inflation, proximity to a turbulent Middle East and questions about the rule of law. “This is a government that has a habit of changing rules after the match has started,” says a prominent economic columnist. “If a foreign company fears it cannot defend itself in court, why should it invest?” Since the AK party’s success at the polls, the signs from the new government have been only partly reassuring. It is already committed to costly election promises such as a higher minimum wage, bigger pensions and more social spending, and ministers have also spoken of boosting infrastructure investment to promote growth. A senior adviser to Mr Erdogan hints that in future the party might be less fiscally prudent than in the past, aiming to create more jobs and increase competitiveness. Outsiders such as the EU, the IMF, the World Bank and the OECD, along with Turkish economists and businesses, suggest different priorities. A tighter monetary policy would strengthen savings and reduce inflation, which would have a useful knock-on effect across the economy. Labour markets need to become more flexible and education must be geared more closely to their needs. Most importantly, sustained growth will require a change of attitude, beginning at the top. A sophisticated market economy cannot be run by offering favours for loyalty. “They used to be giving, sacrificing for the public good,” says an Istanbul news editor. “Now they are taking, using all the redistributive power of the state.”
